INTERMEDIATE NUTRITION AND METABOLISM
(CELLULAR AND MOLECULAR NUTRITION)

NTR 326, Unique #85170
Summer 2020

Office Hours: M, W 12 —1 pm or by appointment

Dr. Christopher Jolly MTWThF — 1:00-2:30 pm
Office: Painter Hall 4.36B Classroom: zoom online
Phone: 471-7290

E-mail: jolly@austin.utexas.edu

Discussion Sections: 3-4 pm TTh — zoom online

Note: All lectures will be recorded on zoom. Due to the current pandemic, attending lectures during lecture
time is not mandatory. No attendance will be taken.

COURSE OBJECTIVES:

A. Develop an appreciation for the importance of cell biology, biochemistry and molecular biology in nutrient
uptake and metabolism.

B. Understand the basic concepts and importance of metabolic regulation at the whole body, organ and
cellular level.

C. Gain an understanding of how nutrients work alone and together to regulate physiological function.

D. Gain an appreciation for the roles of various organs (liver, muscle, adipose tissue) in macronutrient
metabolism.

E. Develop the critical thinking required to apply alterations in metabolism to cell function and disease
process.

F. Start to build problem solving skills to determine mechanisms for physiologic changes and uses in
macronutrient metabolism in disease states.

G. Build upon the metabolism learned in NTR 312 to prepare the students for NTR 342.

1. Prerequisites for NTR 326

Credit* in NTR 312 or 312H for Nutrition majors.
Nutrition 312 with a grade of at least C in each.

2. Students with disabilities.

Please notify me of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-related need.
You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students’ Office, in order that the most
appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through
Services for Students with Disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students
at 471-6259 or 471-4641, https://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.Grade Determination

100%

5 Exams (4 Exams count) (25% for each exam)

NOTE: THE LOWEST OF ALL 5 EXAMS MAY BE DROPPED

Grade Reporting

Grades will be reported as:

 

 

4. Texts:

ALL LECTURES WILL BE RECORDED ON ZOOM.

LECTURE MATERIAL WILL SERVE AS EXAM QUESTIONS.

If figures/tables from other books are used, then only the information presented in class will be
used for exams.

THERE WILL BE NO MAKE-UP EXAMS. If an exam is missed, then that is your dropped
exam grade.

The material covered will be all the lecture material since the last exam.

Pay special attention to things that are highlighted or asterisked by me in lectures. These items are
more likely to be test questions.

All exams are multiple choice, open book, online.

Exam times are every Monday during class time.

Questions regarding exam grading should be made, in writing, to the instructor (Dr. Jolly). For
exam re-evaluation this must occur by the second class day following the return of the exam.

MANDATORY TEXT: Advanced Nutrition and Human Metabolism, sixth Edition,
Gropper/Smith/Groff, Thompson-Wadsworth, 2017. Reading assignments for this textbook are
given in the course outline.

The lecture material is derived from a mixture of cell biology, biochemistry and nutrition textbooks.

5. Lecture Notes

Y Handouts will be posted on Canvas.

Y Handouts serve as an outline of the key content of the class and supply many of the diagrams/figures
that we will discuss.

Vv All lectures are recorded on zoom.6. Discussion sections:

> No new material will be presented.

> Ashley Neely (the TA) leads the sections and will reinforce the lecture material.
> This is your time to gain clarification on lecture material.

> Bring your questions!

Policy on Academic Integrity:
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and / or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.

Class recordings are reserved only for students [instructor and TA(s)] in this class for educational purposes.
The recordings should not be shared outside the class in any form. Violation of this restriction could lead to
Student Misconduct proceedings.

COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE: Copying, displaying, and distributing copyrighted works without
permission infringes the owner's copyright. The University of Texas System's policy statement on Fair Use
of Copyrighted Materials can help you determine whether your use of a copyrighted work may be an
infringement. Any use of computer or duplication facilities by students, faculty, or staff for infringing use of
copyrighted works is subject to appropriate disciplinary action as well as those civil remedies and criminal
penalties provided by federal law.

Copyright law applies to the Internet, which contains a mixture of copyrighted and non-copyrighted
materials. An item does not have to display a statement of copyright to be copyrighted. It is assumed that an
item is copyrighted until otherwise determined. For more information on copyright, see the University of
Texas System Office of General Counsel web site.Date Da Topic Description
July 13 Syllabus / Intro. Course overview/Introduction

 

July 14 T | Human physiology Digestion anatomy, Chapter 1,2
July 15 W | Cell structure 1/2 Organelles and their function/structure, Chapter |
July 16 How cells respond 1 Receptors and signal transduction

F

July 17 How cells respond 2 DNA nucleotide metabolism (Gene expression) and

protein synthesis, intro to metabolism Chapter |

 

 

July 20 EXAM I pe
T

 

  

 

 

July 21 Enzyme kinetics Regulating enzyme activity
Cell transport Transport into and through cells, Chapter 1

July 22 W | Carbohydrates Glucose, starch, fiber, glycogen structure, Chapters 3,4
July 23
July27 | M | EXAM)
July 38 Amino acid and protein structure, Chapter 6
July 29 W _s| Protein Digestion/absorption, Chapter 6

Th |

 

 

 

 

 

 

July 30 | Th
Aug3 {| M | EXAMMM PT
Aug 5 W | Lipids Lipoproteins, Chapter 5
Aug 6
Aug 7 Lipids Metabolism, Chapter 5
Augl0 | M | EXAMIV
Aug 11 Water Soluble Vitamins Regulating metabolism, Chapter 9
Aug 12 W | Fat Soluble Vitamins Vitamin A, Chapter 10
Vitamin E/Antioxidants, Chapter 10

Aug 13
Aul@ | F | xAMV [SSCS

a

NO FINAL EXAM: Exam V counts in its place.