THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
ACC F380K 12 - COMPUTER AUDIT AND SYSTEM SECURITY
Summer 2020
Unique#: 71045

VERSION: 6/1/2020

 

Instructor : Huseyin Tanriverdi

Class times : Monday / Wednesday 1:30-5:30 p.m.
Class location : Zoom

Instructor’s Office : Zoom

Phone : (512) 232-9164

E-mail : Huseyin. Tanriverdi@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Hours : By appointment

Teaching assistant : Kathryn Wargo kathrynwargo@utexas.edu

 

Course objectives:

This course makes an introduction to digital risks and risk mitigation mechanisms of
organizations. Digital technologies have become a critical enabler and transformer of
business innovation, growth, and profitability across almost all sectors of the economy.
Digital technologies have also exposed organizations to risks such as cybersecurity risks,
privacy risks, ethical dilemma risks in big data and analytics applications, and biases in
machine learning and artificial intelligence algorithms. Such risks can affect the
confidentiality, integrity, availability, and appropriate use of organization’s information
assets. They can lead to financial loss, reputational loss, and increased costs of regulatory
compliance. Various laws, regulations, and industry standards require companies to institute
internal control systems to mitigate such risks. The U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) requires registrants to disclose information about their cybersecurity
risks and incidents. Emerging new technologies such as Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML), Robotic Process Automation (RPA), Blockchain,
etc. offer new productivity, profitability, and transformation opportunities. They also create
new cybersecurity and privacy risks, and new ethical, responsible design challenges. It is
important for business leaders to understand how they can institute governance and control
mechanisms to minimize such risks, maximize returns of digital technologies, and obtain
favorable risk-return outcomes. This course aims to equip students with such skills and
knowledge. The topics covered by the course include, but not limited to:

e Board of directors’ and top management team’s oversight of cyber risks, privacy risks,
and ethical risks around digital technologies and algorithms

e Enterprise risk management and enterprise IT risk management frameworks

e IT general controls, IT application controls, identity governance and access controls, IT

audit process, generally accepted IT audit standards and methodologies, and how they

relate to financial audits

Third-party risk management

Organizational cybersecurity policies

Organizational privacy policies

Identity, security, privacy, and ethical dilemma implications of emerging information

technology innovations (e.g., IoT, AI, ML, RPA, blockchain, etc.) and what they imply for

the IT audit, security, and advisory services industry

e Algorithmic biases, adversarial attacks on machine learning and artificial intelligence
algorithms, and governance and controls for mitigating such riskse Fake news, mass digital surveillance by government and private enterprises, and
manipulation of human behaviors

Course learning and delivery format:

The course uses a participant-centered, discussion-based, active learning format in which
students share control and responsibility for learning. The course is delivered through live
synchronous video sessions, using the Zoom technology. The course uses some lectures, a
lot of interactive case discussions and analyses, and some guest lectures from the industry.
Students will review the assigned readings, slide decks, and cases in advance of the class
sessions, and use the synchronous video time to apply the learning to real life cases and
clarify their questions. There will be a case discussion in each of the 10 sessions. We will
use polls actively during discussions. Students are expected to read and analyze the
assigned readings and cases in advance of class and come to class prepared to discuss the
concepts, cases, and answer poll questions. By participating in class discussions and polls,
students will control and share the responsibility for learning. The class is scheduled as a 4-
hour class from 1:30pm to 5:30pm. To avoid “Zoom fatigue,” I do not intend to use the full
4 hours on the Zoom screen. Instead, I will try to limit the Zoom time on any given class
day to two 75 minute sessions with a 15 min. break in between. In the Zoom sessions, I will
use some lecturing time to cover the most critical, difficult issues and address your
questions. I will dedicate most of the Zoom time to the discussions and applications of the
concepts in the readings to real life examples and case studies.

Course website:

Hosted on Canvas course management system: http://canvas.utexas.edu/

Login using your UT EID and select ACC F380K.12. Updates to this syllabus and other
course materials will be posted on this website. Please log on to the site before each class to
view the announcements and assigned materials.

Required cases and reading materials:
Required cases and reading materials for each session are listed in the course schedule
below and they are marked with (HP) or (Canvas):

e (HP): Harvard Business School cases and articles that we will use in this class are
available in a digital Harvard Package (HP), which can be purchased online from
Harvard Business School Publishing at https://hbsp.harvard.edu/import/730091

e (Canvas) Non-Harvard cases and readings will be posted on course website at

Canvas: http://canvas.utexas.edu/

 

 

 

Grading

Contributions to in-class discussions : 30%
Individual case write-ups : 70%
Total : 100%

 

Contributions to in-class discussions (30%). Students are expected to actively
contribute to the learning of their peers by participating in class discussions and sharing
their perspectives on issues being discussed. They are also expected to participate in Zoom
polls actively. Class attendance is required, but it earns only 20% of the in-class
participation credits. The remaining 80% of the in-class contribution credits can be earned
by making contributions to in-class discussions, polls, and breakout groups.

There is no substitute or make-up for earning in-class contribution credits. Requests to do
extra work in lieu of in-class contributions will be automatically declined. If you have to miss
the opportunity to contribute to in-class discussions in a session, please try to make up for

2it by increasing your contribution levels in the other sessions you are able to attend. Your
final in-class contribution grade will be assigned based on your participation patterns
throughout the semester.

Advanced preparation for in-class discussions is required to make substantive contributions
to in-class discussions. You are expected to read, analyze, and think about the assigned
readings, cases, and other lecture materials before coming to class. This preparation is
likely to increase your ability to make substantive contributions to in-class discussions,
polls, breakout groups, and earn participation credits.

Please consult the following note in the Harvard Package (HP) for guidance on how to
prepare for a case discussion: Ellet, W. “How to Discuss a Case” Chapter 8 of “The Case
Study Handbook: How to read, discuss, and write persuasively about cases. Harvard
Business Press,” Product#: 2450BC-PDF-ENG, Apr 17, 2007, pp. 1-12.

The following factors will contribute positively to earning in-class participation credits:
= Doing assigned readings and cases and coming to class prepared for discussing them
» Arriving before the start of class and staying until the end

=» Keeping your video ON in Zoom with appropriate virtual background

« Participating in Zoom Polls

» Listening actively to your peers, instructor, and guest speakers

» Using Zoom controls appropriately (e.g., raise digital hand) to ask questions

» Unmuting yourself to respond to questions directed to you

# Linking and synthesizing topics covered throughout the semester

«= Bringing to discussions examples and questions from your prior work experiences
» Synthesizing or reconciling issues being discussed

«= Disagreeing with others constructively

» Neither dominating the conversations nor being too quiet

» Exhibiting a good sense of humor and professional Zoom etiquette

Individual case write-ups (70%): We will discuss a total of 10 cases throughout the
semester. You are required to submit write-ups for any five of them. You are welcome to
submit a 6" case write-up to substitute the lowest case grade. The weighted average of the
top five case write-up grades will make up 70% of the final grade. Cases are weighted
equally. Case write-up questions will be posted on the assignments sections of the course
website on Canvas. Format, submission, and grading guidelines are posted on Files\Case
write-up guidelines section of Canvas. Your case analysis and write-up should address the
assigned questions posted on Canvas by utilizing course concepts covered in reading
assignments, lectures, and analyzing the facts and evidence in the case studies. The
managerial issues entailed in the cases are open ended. They can potentially be analyzed
and addressed in multiple different ways. Case write-ups are INDIVIDUAL assignments. You
should analyze the case yourself and develop your own unique answers to the write-up
questions. Submissions that indicate that the author developed the answers in
communication, cooperation, or collaboration with anyone else will be subject to the
scholastic dishonesty policies of the University referenced in the syllabus. The case write-
ups are due on Canvas by the beginning of class, i.e., 1:30pm, on the day of the case
discussion. Submissions after this deadline will not be considered. There will be no make up
for a missed write-up as we already offer a total of 10 case write-up opportunities. Before
you develop a case write-up, please do the assigned readings of the case day and reflect on
the course concepts covered to date to decide which concepts are most relevant for
developing your perspective on the case questions.Final letter grades: Weighted average of all grade components will be used in assigning
final letter grades. If the class average turns out to be below 90, letter grades will be
assigned based on a curve. The curve will not have predetermined percentages. Breaks in
grade distribution will be used in setting letter grade boundaries. If the class average turns
out to be 90 or above, the following table will be used in converting weighted grade
averages to final letter grades.

 

Grade conversion table to be used if class average is 90 or above
Letter grade
95-100
90-94
85-89
80-84
PHT

 

 

70-74
65-69
p04
55-59 +
50-54
45-49
0A

 

 

 

 

 

Format of online classes: we aim to do online classes synchronously through live video
and audio features of Zoom. Please set up Zoom and follow the guidance provided by UT /

McCombs: https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/MSBTech/Getting+Started+With+Zoom

Zoom skills: If you have not already, please learn how to use Zoom and get ready for
online classes. If you need help with Zoom, please refer to the McCombs Student
Instructional Resources Wiki. All Canvas webpages for all McCombs courses will have a link
to the McCombs Student Instructional Resource Wiki on the bottom left corner, so students
can access it from their Canvas course pages.

Preferred method of joining a class or office hours in Zoom: The preferred method of
joining a class or office hours is through video on Canvas. Students must log into their
Canvas course site and click on Zoom in the left toolbar to locate links to join the class in
Zoom.

Zoom etiquette: Here are some best practices for making sure we are working together to
create an efficient, effective, respectful, and ultimately enjoyable classroom.

e Arrive in advance. Plan to arrive in an online class at least five minutes in advance of
the class start time, i.e. by 1:25pm the latest for our class. You will need a few minutes
to register for a session, and test your audio, video, and other settings. We will start the
class at 1:30pm sharp. For security reasons, I will follow the university’s
recommendation to lock the Zoom meeting at 1:30pm sharp to prevent Zoombombing
attacks or other inappropriate use by unauthorized parties.

e Mute yourself. You will be automatically muted upon entry to a Zoom session in our
class. Keep yourself muted until you are called on or you would like to speak. This will
cut down on background noise and limit any distractions.

e Keep your camera ON. We aim to create a virtual class environment where we can see
each other live. Please keep your camera ON at all times during a class session.e Avoid messy / inappropriate background. If your room or background is messy or if
it is not appropriate for a professional meeting, use Zoom's Virtual Background feature
to introduce a professional background. Be mindful of your surroundings on camera. We
want to make sure we avoid as much distraction as possible.

e Add profile photo. Please add a professional photo of yourself for your Zoom profile
picture. This photo will be visible if you have to turn off your video.

e Avoid / minimize going in and out of class. As in a regular classroom, try not to
leave the virtual class room unless it is absolutely necessary. Going in and out of class is
disruptive to other participants. If you absolutely have to leave the online class
temporarily, please use the away feedback icon and temporarily turn your camera off.

e Digitally raise your hand to get the air. Use the digital “Raise Hand” button in the
“Participants” menu of Zoom to alert the instructor that you would like to have the air.
Speak when the instructor gives you the air. Try to keep questions and comments brief.
With a large classroom, be cognizant that there are many people to get through and
many questions to move through.

e Go slower / faster. If you feel that the class is moving too fast or too slow, use the
“go slower” / “go faster” icons on the “Participants” menu to alert the instructor.

e Video/audio quality. If the video or audio quality at your end is choppy, use the
“Chat” menu to alert the instructor about the problem. Try to temporarily turn off your
video to address the problem.

e Internet connection. Please try to use a reliable WIFI connection.

Class recording privacy: You should not record the Zoom sessions on your local
computer. To the extent that guest speakers give permission, instructor will record the
sessions and make them available on Canvas. Such class recordings are reserved only for
student use in this class for educational purposes. The recordings should not be shared
outside the class in any form. The University’s policy is to process the violations of these
restrictions as part of Student Misconduct policies.

Help from Student Emergency Services: Students who need help getting access to
technology in order to do online instruction should fill out the Student Emergency Services
form. For general inquiries, please contact Student Emergency Services.

Academic Dishonesty: I have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts
damage the reputation of the school and the degree and demean the honest efforts of the
majority of students. The minimum penalty for an act of academic dishonesty will be a zero
for that assignment or exam.

The responsibilities for both students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are
described on http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-Code-of-Ethics.aspx. As the
instructor for this course, I agree to observe all the faculty responsibilities described therein.
During Orientation, you signed the Honor Code Pledge. In doing so, you agreed to observe
all of the student responsibilities of the Honor Code. If the application of the Honor System
to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification.

Students with Disabilities: Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) is housed in the Office of the Dean of Students, located on
the fourth floor of the Student Services Building. Information on how to register,
downloadable forms, including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request
letters, and releases of information are available online athttp ://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/index.php. Please do not hesitate to contact SSD at
(512) 471-6259, VP: (512) 232-2937 or via e-mail if you have any questions.

Religious holy days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy

day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.COURSE OUTLINE

Readings marked with (Canvas) are to be posted on course website on http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Readings marked with (HP) are available in a digital course package at Harvard: https://hbsp.harvard.edu/import/730091

Topic

Readings/ Assignments

 

Introductions

Cybersecurity risks and cyber risk
oversight

Enterprise risk management:
COSO Framework

Case-1: McCombs Data Theft

(Canvas) Course syllabus

(Canvas) What boards are doing today to
better oversee cyber risk. E&Y 2019.
(Canvas) Galligan, M.E. and Rau, K. (2016).
“COSO in the Cyber Age” pp. 1-18

(Canvas) Case-1: Tanriverdi, H., Lau, S.,
Hubbard, H., Sukholutsky, D., and Liu, C.
"Data Theft at the McCombs School of
Business," The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX, 2007, pp. 2-10.

 

4 W 6/17

Enterprise cyber risk management:
NIST Cybersecurity Framework

IT controls and regulatory compliance:
e.g., Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act Section 404

Case-2: AlphaCo case

Third-Party Vendor Risks

System & Organization Controls (SOC)
By Mark Knight, Partner & Joey LoSurdo,
Partner, Holtzman Partners

(Canvas) NIST Cybersecurity Framework
V.1.1., 2018.

(Canvas) Protiviti. (2012). Guide to the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act: IT Risks and Controls.
(Canvas) Case-2: Tanriverdi, H., Harrison, J.,
Mesuria, K.S., Bertsch, J., Hsiao, P., and
Hendrawirawan, D. "AlphaCo: A Teaching
Case on Information Technology Audit and
Security," The Journal of Digital Forensics,
Security and Law (1:1) 2006, pp 35-61.
(Canvas) On the Road to SOC 2 Readiness.
Protiviti.

 

Case-3: Data Breach at Equifax

Robotic Process Automation
By Alex Phillips and Calvin Witt, Protiviti

 

(HP) Case-3: Srinivasan, S., and Pitcher, Q.
(2017). “Data Breach at Equifax.” Harvard
Business School, pp. 1-15.

(HP) Lacity, M.C., and Willcocks, L.P. (2016).
“A New Approach to Automating Services.”
MIT Sloan Management Review, SMR571-
PDF-ENG.| S# | Date | Topic Readings /Assignments

7

Risk/Return of Robotic Process
Automation

Case-4: Osara

Corporate Identity and Access
Management

By Collin Perry, Principal, Cybersecurity &
Privacy, PwC

Identity Theft

Case-5: Who is this guy?

Algorithmic bias risks

Risk/Return of AI in Human Resource
Management

Case-6: GROW360

(HP) Case-4: Kerr, W.R., Palano, J., and
Huang, B. (2019). “Osaro: Picking the best
path.” Harvard Business School, 820012-
PDF-ENG.

(Canvas) Identity and Access Management
Guide, SailPoint.

(Canvas) Ethical decision making frameworks

(also see https://www.scu.edu/ethics/ethics-

resources/ethical-decision-making/)
(HP) Case-5: Brannen, D.E., Medcalfe, S.K.,

and Cousins, R.B. (2015). “Who is this guy?”
North American Case Research Association.
(Canvas). Lee, N.T., Resnick, P., and Barton,
G. (2019). “Algorithmic bias detection and
mitigation: Best practices and policies to
reduce consumer harms.” The Brookings
Institution.

(HP) Case-6: Bernstein, E.S., McKinnon,
P.D., and Yarabe, P. “GROW: Using Artificial
Intelligence to Screen Human Intelligence.”
Harvard Business School, 418020-PDF-ENG.

 

6 W 6/24
7 M 6/29

Blockchain

 

(Canvas) Jehl, L.E., and Bartish, B. (2018).
“Blockchain ‘Smart Contracts’ - A New
Transactional Framework.” Baker & Hostetler
LLP, pp. 1-3.

(Canvas). KcKinsey. (2018). “Blockchain
beyond the hype: What is the strategic
business value.”| S# | Date | Topic Readings/ Assignments

e Case-7: RegTech at HSBC (HP) Case-7: Dey, A., Heese, J., Weber, J.
(2019). “Regtech at HSBC.” 120046-PDF-
ENG.
RegTech Universe 2020. Deloitte.
https://youtu.be/YSBPkVC5gJO
https ://www2.deloitte.com/lu/en/pages/tech
nology/articles/regtech-companies-
compliance.html

Organizational Privacy Policies (Canvas) NIST Privacy Framework V.1.0,
By Luis Castillo and Justin Turner, Protiviti 2020.
Wit Risk/Return of AI in Health Care Assistants (HP) Case-8: Schulman, K.A., Wood, S.
Case-8: Amazon Alexa and Patient Engagement (2019). “Amazon Alexa and Patient
Engagement.” SM328-PDF-ENG.

 

Organizational Cybersecurity Policies (Canvas) A Board’s Guide to the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework for Better Risk
Oversight. PwC. 2019.
M 7/6 Security versus Privacy (HP) Case-9: Jayakumar, T. and Tahora, S.
(2017). “Building a Backdoor to the iPhone:
Case-9: Apple An Ethical Dilemma.” Ivey Publishing,
W16245-PDF-ENG.
Surveillance capitalism (Canvas) Zuboff, S. 2015. "Big Other:
Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of
an Information Civilization," Journal of
10 W 7/8 Information Technology (30:1), pp. 75-89.
Case-10: Facebook (HP) Case-10: Yoffie, D.B., Fisher, D. “Fixing
Facebook: Fake News, Privacy, and Platform
Governance.” Harvard Business School Case
#: 720400-PDF-ENG.