HED 329K: CHILD & ADOLESCENT HEALTH
Unique #74080

Summer 2020
Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday 12:30 pm CST - 3:00 pm CST
We will meet virtually via Zoom on select days (see syllabus and Canvas for more information)

Instructor: Dr. Lara Latimer
Virtual/Phone Office Hours

lara.a.latimer@utexas.edu

Office Hours: Tuesday 11:00 am CST - 12:30 pm CST
Thursday 11:00 am CST - 12:30 pm CST
Or By Appointment

Required Text: Teaching Today’s Health, 10th Edition. David Anspaugh & Gene Ezell (2013).
Benjamin Cummings

We will be using the textbook this summer! It is very important that you keep up with the readings
assigned to you for this class. Although all textbook content may not be covered in lecture, you are
responsible for knowing this material for knowledge checks and multi-module quizzes.

Required Materials: Reliable Internet connection (please contact me if this is an issue for you)

Course Description: The purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to the foundations of
child and adolescent health; health education; and the biological, environmental, and behavioral
determinants of health. The course includes the application of evidence-based child and adolescent
health promotion concepts; prominent health risk behaviors established during youth that increase the
risk of morbidity and mortality; and the application of personal health and wellness information. An
ecological perspective will inform our understanding of health; information on physical, emotional,
and social aspects of health and development will be discussed. Of special interest are the examination
of health behaviors and outcomes in diverse populations, such as those characterized by gender,
race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Topics will focus on health behaviors that are associated with
morbidity and mortality (e.g., alcohol and drug use/abuse, sexual health, and nutrition).

Underlying tenets of the class include considering others’ perspectives, examining the
complexities of health behaviors and health outcomes, and exploring your own health (from a
holistic perspective) in order to better help others.

Cultural Diversity in the United States: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the
United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and
richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S.
cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.Communication: This list describes ways that we can communicate during this course.

e Piazza (a discussion board on Canvas). We will use Piazza as our primary form of
communication in this course. Piazza should be your first stop if you have a question about
course content, logistics, etc. This platform will allow you to see other’s questions/answers; it
is possible your question has already been answered there. You may also privately message me
through Piazza.

e During our live Zoom meetings (either verbally or by using the Chat function in Zoom; this is
not an option for those of you who choose to view lectures asynchronously)

e During virtual office hours (these will be held through Zoom)

Evaluation: Student grades will be based on a combination of short knowledge checks in before-class
activities, discussions, assignments, and multi-module quizzes; the quantities, exact percentages that
each of these is worth, and descriptions of each are listed below.

Type of Evaluation (quantit (% worth)
Knowledge checks (8) (10%)
Discussion board prompts (12) (30%)
Assignments (6) (30%)
Multi-module quizzes (5) (30%)
Total = 100%

Knowledge checks will include a few questions (usually ~3-5) about the before-class activities
for each module. You should review all before-class materials before attempting the quiz. You
will have up to 2 attempts for these short quizzes (Canvas will automatically record the highest
grade of the two attempts); there will be no time limit; and you may use your book, notes, and
other class materials. Collaboration with your classmates is not allowed. Knowledge check due
dates/times can be found in Canvas.

Discussion board prompts will be provided to allow you to further reflect on course content,
see peer responses, and interact with your classmates on various module topics. Discussion
prompt instructions and due dates/times can be found in Canvas.

Assignments are to allow you to personally process and synthesize module topics. Among other
things, assignments may require you to read/view/listen to something and reflect or to complete
a worksheet. You will work on these individually and submit through Canvas. Assignment
instructions and due dates/times can be found on Canvas.

Multi-module quizzes are quizzes that will cover content from several modules (or one larger
module) and will typically include ~20-40 questions. You will have one attempt to complete
each of these quizzes, there will be no time limit, and you may use your book, notes, and other
class materials. Collaboration with your classmates is not allowed. Multi-module quiz due
dates/times can be found in Canvas.Final Grades: The following scale will be used to determine your final grade:

A = 92.95% - 100% C = 72.95% - 77.94%
A- = 89.95% - 92.94% C- = 69.95% - 72.94%
B+ = 87.95% - 89.94% D+ = 67.95% - 69.94%
B = 82.95% - 87.94% D = 62.95% - 67.94%
B- = 79.95% - 82.94% D- = 59.95% - 62.94%
C+ = 77.95% - 79.94% F = 59.94% or below

Preparation for Class: Material presented in this class is more interesting and relevant when students
participate in class discussions. Moreover, advancement of our understanding of a topic occurs when
we listen to and debate information from multiple perspectives. However, to be appropriately prepared
for discussion, you must be informed, which means that you should read the assigned required Canvas
materials (e.g., textbook chapter, short audio &/or video clips, other readings) before attending class.
You may also find it helpful to look over any lecture slides posted on Canvas prior to class.
Knowledge checks will cover this before-class preparation.

Bonus Points: Over the course of the session, there may be opportunities to earn bonus points. Your
final course grade will not be factored out of more than 100%. With rare exceptions, bonus points
earned will be posted on Canvas within 48 hours of the due date. If you believe you completed an
opportunity and did not receive credit, you must notify me within 1 week of the original due date;
after that point, I will not discuss missed bonus points. It is your responsibility to make sure your
assignments are submitted properly.

Journal tool in Canvas: You will use the Journal in Canvas to explore your thoughts, feelings, and
reactions to some of our course topics. You will be given a prompt to respond to in your journal 1-2
times a week, and these responses will be private (i.e., can only be seen by you and me).

Attendance: Participation in class discussions 1s as important to learning the assigned material as all
other course work. For this reason, I expect that you attend all virtual class meetings. However,
attendance is not factored into your final grade. If you are unable to attend a class, you are responsible
for reviewing the missed content and keeping up with associated class work. I ask that you do your
best to avoid leaving class early and/or arriving late, out of respect for your classmates and me.

Respect for Ideas: Some of the issues discussed in this class may be of a sensitive nature. An
important component of this course is to explore how cultural diversity influences health behavior.
This diversity includes gender, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, religion, family structure, sexual
orientation, and geographic region. Because students vary in their background, experiences, and
opinions, it is imperative that we are respectful of fellow students’ views, opinions, and comments.
Disrespectful comments and body language will not be tolerated.

Responsibility: Please keep in mind that I have done my part by preparing ahead of time and showing
up to class. It is your responsibility to do the same. If you can’t make this happen, it is your
responsibility to see me in office hours and/or seek out classmates to help you find out what you
missed, read the text, and look over the lecture slides. If there are specific concepts discussed in
class/the textbook that you do not understand, please contact me for further explanation. Additionally,
it is your responsibility to keep track of your grades; you should check Canvas often to do this. I also

3suggest coming to office hours to review your quizzes. Please allow time for me to get points posted in
Canvas, but do not wait until the end of the semester if you believe there is a discrepancy in your grade
listed on Canvas.

Late Submissions: The due date and time for each knowledge check, discussion board, assignment,
and quiz can be accessed via Canvas; grades on any submissions after the due date and time will be
deducted by 10% for each day it is late.

Canvas: Update your Canvas settings today so that you receive all class emails and
announcements. Check the Canvas site for the syllabus, all required class material, study guides,
instructions for the paper, daily announcements, etc. You will be able to send e-mail messages to other
students through Canvas. You can also access your grades from Canvas, and you should check your
grades weekly. If you believe there is a discrepancy with your grade, you should contact me within one
week of the grade posting. Do not wait until the end of the semester. HELPFUL HINT — ACCESS
CANVAS FROM A LAPTOP OR DESKTOP COMPUTER, RATHER THAN YOUR CELL
PHONE OR TABLET, IN ORDER TO SEE ALL DETAILS FOR ASSIGNMENTS &
MODULES.

Academic Integrity: A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity 1s
highly valued and seriously regarded at UT Austin, as emphasized in the standards of conduct. You
and other students are expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor
in scholastic work" undertaken at the University. This is a very basic expectation that is further
reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments,
quizzes, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to a) acknowledge
the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts b) complete your assignments
independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing them c) follow
instructions for assignments and quizzes, and observe the standards of your academic discipline d)
avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.

Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the
Student Conduct and Academic IntegrityStudent Judicial Services Website:

https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.

Academic Accommodations: "The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY."

Please see below for our tentative schedule. You can find further information
about each module, due dates, etc. on Canvas.Date

Thursday, June 4

Tuesday, June 9

Wednesday, June 10

Thursday, June 11

Tuesday, June 16

Wednesday, June 17

Thursday, June 18

Tuesday, June 23

Wednesday, June 24

Thursday, June 25

Tuesday, June 30

Wednesday, July 1

Thursday, July 2

Tuesday, July 7

Wednesday, July 8

Thursday, July 9

TENTATIVE CLASS SCHEDULE

Topic

Introduction & Health Education

1
3

2 Health Disparities
Guest: Heran Kidane

Mental Health & Stress Reduction

Mental Health & Stress Reduction
Guests: Divine Canines

Violence & Injury Prevention
p68 Body Image & Eating Disorders
7 Substance Use & Abuse

Guest: Lisa Medina
7 Substance Use & Abuse
Guest: Darrien Skinner
Substance Use & Abuse

pe Healthy Relationships
po Sexuality Education

1 Gender & Health
Guest: Tres Hinds
1

Aging, Dying, & Death

0
Infectious Disease & STIs pe
2

1 Contraception
Guest: Katherine Protil

No new content; use this day to work on your
remaining HED 329 coursework!

Virtual Meeting

Yes