RHETORIC OF DISASTER
RHESO9K

Lauren Nelson, summer 2020 Jauren!nelson@utexas. edu

summer session I
office hours: M 1-2-30PM and T 11-30-1PM and by appt.

Warming temperatures, acidified oceans, hurricanes, tsunamis, nuclearization, the end of the world: what
makes a disaster a disaster? In this course, we will analyze various types of media to understand how
disaster is depicted rhetorically and to what extent this rhetoric interacts with class, race, geography, and
scale. Is there a difference between ‘man-made’ and ‘natural’ disasters? How are disasters represented in
news media, books, television, and film? How might understanding the qualities of disaster as well and
their rhetorical depiction in popular culture influence how we respond to them? How are disasters
differently constituted when different communities are involved? How does that affect our past, present
and future? We will explore how disaster is a foundational part of contemporary media’s rhetoric and how
disaster rhetoric is central to understanding both our increasingly globalized world and the rapidly
changing climate.

Reading list:

Mark Longaker and Jeffrey Walker, Rhetorical Analysis: A Brief Guide for Writers, 2011 (Pearson, 1*
edition) and the UNC Chapel Hill Writing Resources Handbook.

The remainder of thematic readings will be available for download from the class’s secure Canvas site. In
addition, students will be required to screen a handful of films and documentaries as part of the course

‘readings.’ The majority of these films are available for free from various streaming services or are available

for a small price ($2-3).

Writing assignments, short and long:

(Below is a very brief overview of the assignments. Please see the Canvas assignment module for details and due

dates.)

Canvas discussion posts responding to a specific prompt, due every week at Sunday midnight.

Rhetorical analysis I: 3-4 page rhetorical analysis on the introduction to Nixon’s Slow Violence.Rhetorical analysis II and peer-review: 4-5 page rhetorical analysis on a text of your choice from the
syllabus and informed by independent research. Mandatory peer-review that will help you and your
peers think about how to revise work from this assignment into the final paper.

Final paper: 10-12 page independent research paper that is driven by an argumentative thesis and
independent research. I strongly encourage you to think about this assignment as a revision and
extension of the second rhetorical analysis paper.

Method of assessment:

This course will use contract grading for assessment. For each assignment, you will be provided with a
detailed checklist that outlines how to receive a full passing and ‘default’ grade, which I will set at a “B.”
You will also be provided with detailed instructions as to how to exceed the ‘default’ “B” and earn an “A.”
This means that earning an “A” will primarily be related to the rigor and length of each of your major
assignment, although attendance and participation may also affect your final grade in this course. As long
as you meet the requirements for each assignment, you can expect to pass. Failure to meet these
expectations will result in an “incomplete” and a mandatory revision of the assignment until it is up to the
course standards. The objective of this grading style is to eliminate the guesswork and systemic
discrimination that often accompanies conventional grading systems. Your work will be evaluated on the
basis of its individual merits, rather than against a static rubric. You will also be provided with detailed
comments on every assignment—large and small—in order to improve your understanding of course
material and writing skills generally speaking.

The prompts for each of the major unit assignments will contain additional requirements that you must
complete in order for their assignment to be counted as ‘above and beyond work.’ Essentially, I will build
two tiers into each major assignment prompt and you will be able to decide whether they want to
undertake the challenge of writing towards the higher tier—in a sense, you “sign up” for the grade you
want to earn. A higher tier would potentially entail a combination of (1) longer word count (2) additional
research or alternative research (3) mixed-genre or multi-modal component (4) more rigorous
critical/theoretical analysis (S) a comparative component (i.e. a comparative rhetorical analysis of two
objects). Each assignment that you complete will thus be placed in one of three categories: reject
(absolutely does not fulfill the requirements of the prompt), accept (the default grade), and excellent
(above and beyond the default). In the case of an inadequate assignment, students will be asked to re-do
the assignment to meet the requirements. Following the ethos of this grading model, you assignments will
not receive a discreet and quantifiable grade. As a result, do not consult Canvas to check your grade in this
class. I will keep separate records that are more conducive to this grading style, and you need only email me to
check your status.

Furthermore, although an “A” track student is expected to have impeccable in-class participation, the
difference between a default “B” and an “A” grade will not hinge on a qualitative judgment of attentiveness
and participation.For a student to merit below the default “B” grade, that student must have serious issues with in-class
participation and demeanor, more than 3 missing minor assignments, consistently late assignments,
and/or the inability to complete assignments in a satisfactorily and within the parameters of each prompt.

Below is a loose outline of an A, B, C, and F grade:

A: Full participation in all class activities and all peer-reviews, no missing assignments (including
discussion posts), at least two major assignments must fulfill the high-tier requirements.

B: Full participation in all class activities and all peer-reviews, no missing major assignments, all
major assignments must be accepted as satisfactory, and no more than two discussion posts can
be missed.

C: Students may pass the class and receive lower than a B grade if they miss more than two minor
assignments (Canvas posts), and/or miss more than two due dates. In the event of any of these
missed requirements, the student’s grade will drop down one-third of a letter grade. In other
words, missing three classes and three Canvas posts would bring the grade down two “steps,” and
the student would be at a C+.

A failing grade would result from a student going down five or more “steps” to the D or F range.

Course schedule:

Please note: this is a reading schedule for the course, and as such all texts must be read before you write your
discussion post for each week listed below.

6/4 -6/7 (INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE): Read the syllabus before our first discussion meeting,
and please bring questions to class.

6/8 - 6/14 (DEFINITIONS): Longaker and Walker, “Chapter 2: Kairos and the Rhetorical Situation”
from Rhetorical Analysis, pages 7-17; Robert Nixon, “Introduction” from Slow Violence and the
Environmentalism of the Poor. Rhetorical analysis I due midnight 6/14.

6/15 - 6/21 (TEMPORALITIES): Longaker and Walker, “Chapter 3: Argumentation,” pages 44-70; Ruth
Levy Guyer, "Radioactivity and Rights: Clashes at Bikini Atoll"; Kyle Whyte, “Indigenous Climate Change
Studies.”

6/22 - 6/28 (CAUSATION & CORRELATION): Longaker and Walker, “Chapter 4: Structure,” pages
102-123; watch/play Brenda Longfellow, Offshore; watch Spike Lee, When the Levees Broke, episodes 1
and 4. Rhetorical analysis II due midnight 6/28.

6/29 -7/S (DISASTER CAPITALISM): Longaker and Walker, “Chapter S: Style,” pages 136-156; Naomi
Klein, "Introduction: Blank is Beautiful" from The Shock Doctrine; Ethan Varian, "While California FiresRage, the Rich Hire Private Firefighters"; and listen (podcast): “Warning system down: California’s
deadliest fires” from Reveal (note that there is a full-length article version of the podcast linked under “DIG
DEEPER’ if you would prefer to read the story). Peer reviews of Rhetorical analysis II due 7/5.

7/5 - 7/9 (APOCALYPSE): Longaker and Walker, “Chapter 6: Ideology,” pages 185-200; watch Bong
Joon-ho, Snowpiercer; Gregers Andersen and Esben Nielsen, "Biopolitics in the Anthropocene: On the
Invention of Future Biopolitics in Snowpiercer, Elysium, and Interstellar," 615-623. (You can stop after the
section on Snowpiercer, or continue if you're interested in the rest of the argument.) Final paper due
midnight 7/17.Departmental policies

WRITING FLAG (AII classes excluding RHE 306) This course carries the Writing Flag. You will
write regularly during the semester, completing both short and long writing projects. Furthermore, you
will, and receive feedback from your instructor and your peers. Based on this feedback, you will have
the opportunity to revise one or more assignments. A substantial portion of your grade to comes from
your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.

ATTENDANCE POLICY Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses.
Any questions or appeals concerning this policy must be made directly to the department Associate
Chair. You are expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing,
and to participate in all in-class editing, revising, and discussion sessions. Should you miss the
equivalent of five TTH or MW class sessions or seven MWE sessions this semester, excused or not,
you will fail the course. If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you
should contact your instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let him or her know. You
will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or other
required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the
instructor, in writing, well in advance of the absence, so that alternative arrangements can be made to
complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this reason, provide your instructor with
the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University specifies very few other excused absences
(e.g., jury duty). When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from
a classmate.

SCHOLASTIC HONESTY Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic
dishonesty, will result in a major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all
drafts and assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of
Students and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University. So, take care to read and understand the Statement
on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found online at
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/rhetoric/RHE%20306/plagiarismcollusion.php. If you have any doubts
about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the assignment.

STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or $12-
410-6644 (video phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations. More information is available online at
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/instructional-tips-for-working-with-students-with-disabilities/.

TITLE IX AND SENATE BILL 212 Beginning January 1, 2020, Texas Senate Bill 212 requires all
employees of Texas universities, including faculty, report any information to the Title IX Office
regarding sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence and stalking that is disclosed to them.
Texas law requires that all employees who witness or receive any information of this type
(including, but not limited to, writing assignments, class discussions, or one-on-one conversations)
must be reported. If you would like to speak with someone who can provide support or remedies
without making an official report to the university, please email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. Formore information about reporting options and resources, visit http://www.titleix.utexas.edu/,
contact the Title IX Office via email at titleix@austin.utexas.edu, or call 512-471-0419.

Although graduate teaching and research assistants are not subject to Texas Senate Bill 212, they
are still mandatory reporters under Federal Title IX laws and are required to report a wide range of
behaviors we refer to as sexual misconduct, including the types of sexual misconduct covered under
Texas Senate Bill 212. The Title IX office has developed supportive ways to respond to a survivor
and compiled campus resources to support survivors.

DEPARTMENT CLIMATE At the Department of Rhetoric and Writing, we are unambiguous in our
commitment to fostering a diverse, inclusive, and respectful professional and educational climate. For
more information on our climate commitments, see the complete climate statement at https://
liberalarts.utexas.edu/rhetoric/about/mission.php. If you have any questions or climate-related
concerns, please contact the chair of the climate advisory committee: Professor Scott Graham
(ssg@utexas.edu).

EMAIL ACCOUNTS Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor
will use this medium to communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT
email account and to check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to
http://utmail.utexas.edu/.

EMERGENCY INFORMATION Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus
are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and
building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Information regarding emergency
evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.

Other important Emergency Information You can find more information about planning for
emergencies on the Emergency Preparedness site at
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/

Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050 Use this resource to help fellow UT members about
whom you have concerns. You can learn more about the Behavior Concerns Advice Line on their site at
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php

Questions about these policies Questions about these policies should be addressed
to:

Department of Rhetoric &
Writing The University of Texas
at Austin Parlin Hall, Room 3
rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu (512)
471-6109