Instructor:
E-mail:

Office hours:

Required Material:

Optional Text:

Course Objectives:

Principles of Aural Rehabilitation

CSD 373, Summer IT 2020
Online

Sangeeta Kamdar
Sangeeta.kamdar@utexas.edu

Email office hours will be held every Tuesday/Wednesday
from 2-3pm.

Outside of email office hours, the instructor will also be
available via email throughout the week and will respond to
all inquiries within 24 hours

Virtual office hours will be by appointment only. Please
contact the instructor to arrange a virtual office hour
meeting.

Class lecture notes and pre-recorded video lectures will be
posted to Canvas. http://canvas.utexas.edu/

 

Please register for Adobe Connect here to access the online
lectures: https://ad-tools-p01.austin.utexas.edu/adoberegistration/

 

“Introduction to Audiologic Rehabilitation.” Ronald
Schow and Michael Nerbonne, (editors), 2007, Boston:
Pearson.

Students will learn principles of amplification, including
hearing aid components, personal and group amplification
systems, troubleshooting techniques, cochlear implants,
assistive listening devices and soundfield acoustics.
Students will learn how to apply these principles in the
implementation of various intervention methods to best
benefit individuals diagnosed with varying degrees of
hearing loss.

In addition, students will also learn how to assess the
degree to which hearing impairment impacts individuals.
Students will learn how hearing impairment affects the
daily lives of people with hearing impairment and their
significant others. Students will be trained how to designCourse Description:

Notes & Handouts:

Examinations:

and convey various intervention methods to minimize the
effect of hearing impairment. Students will be introduced to
vestibular rehabilitation and pharmacology of hearing.

CSD 373 will be using a format that involves web-class
discussions, web-class lab experiences, and regular
examinations. Students are responsible for materials
presented during class meetings and on Canvas. Students
are expected to attend class sessions and examinations.

This is an upper division class. It is expected that students
will have working knowledge of audiogram interpretation
and types and degrees of hearing loss.

Pre-recorded lectures will be available on Adobe Connect
via a link posted on Canvas. Other handouts, readings,
articles, lab assignments and supplemental readings will be
posted on Canvas.

Note: Lectures and reading material will coincide with each
other.

There will be 3 formal examinations in the course and a
final examination. Exams will be of multiple choice and
short answer. Questions on the exams will be taken from
the readings posted to canvas, on-line lectures and material
discussed in class.

Grades for each test and each assignment will be posted on
Canvas. All students are responsible for checking their
own grades within 3 days of the posting. If there is a
discrepancy between the posted grade and the anticipated
grade, students must contact the instructor within the 3-day
period. Any grade inquiry after this point in time will not
be investigated.

All students will be required to take the final examination, which will be comprehensive.

Exam schedule:

Exam I

7/23

Exam II 7/30
Exam III 8/6

Final

8/13Students will have a 24 hour window of time within which to take each exam. However,
once the exam is opened, it must be completed within ONE-HOUR of opening. Exams
begin at 10:30am and close at 10:30am, the following day, no exceptions.

For the final exam, students will have a 24-hour window of time within which to take the
final exam. However, once the exam is opened, it must be completed within THREE-
HOUR of opening. The final exam will open at 10:30am and close at 10:30am, the
following day, no exceptions.

*Exam dates are subject to change at the discretion of the instructor. The exam date

may be earlier or later than posted. *

Alternate times for tests/final examination will NOT be provided.

Labs: There will be 3 written lab experiences. The intention of
the labs is to provide practical experiences so the student
can become familiar with amplification devices, their
characteristics and their use, and assessment/management

tools for aural rehabilitation.

Lab 1: Opens 7/17 -- Due 7/24

Lab 2: Opens 7/24 -- Due 7/31

Lab 3: Opens 7/31 -- Due 8/14

Labs will be accessed and submitted through Canvas. Late assignments will not be
accepted without prior arrangement between the instructor and student.

Grades: Final Grades will be determined in the following manner:
Examinations (3) @ 15% (45%)
Labs (3) @10% (30%)
Final examination (25%)

ACADEMIC CONDUCT

The University expects all students to obey the law, to show respect for other members of
the university community, to perform contractual obligations, to maintain absolute
integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work, and to observe
standards of conduct appropriate for a community of scholars. Section 11-801 of the
Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities. Students should acquaintthemselves with the official policies and procedures regarding scholastic dishonesty.
This can be accessed from the Student Judicial Services web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu.

 

Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD):

Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who required academic
accommodations should contact the Office of the Dean of Students, Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD) at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.

It is the responsibility of the student to alert the instructor to any special needs or
accommodations as early as possible in the semester.

 

 

Academic Integrity: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students,
and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism,
unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is
not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same
written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By
accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for
the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php

For further information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site.

Plagiarism: Plagiarism includes knowingly “representing, by paraphrase or direct
quotation, the published or unpublished work of another person as one’s own in any
academic exercise or activity without full and clear acknowledgment. It also includes the
unacknowledged use of materials prepare by another person or agency engaged in the
selling of term papers or other academic materials.” The penalties for plagiarism are
severe. They include warning or reprimand, grade adjustment, probation, suspension,
expulsion, withholding of transcripts, denial or revocation of degrees and referral to
psychological counseling. In this class, plagiarism will result in failure on that particular
project. For a detailed description of UT Student Honor Code and a tutorial on how to
avoid plagiarism please visit

http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php

Religious Holy Days Observance Policy:

The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a
student from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whoseabsence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall
be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
excused within a reasonable time after the absence.

A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the
absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within
a reasonable time after the absence.

ASHA Knowledge and Skills Acquisition (KASA) Competencies:

At the successful completion of this course, the student should have the knowledge to
meet or partially meet a number of the ASHA KASA standards for Audiology. A list of
the standards addressed by this course follows:

Standard IV-B Foundations of Practice, Bl- B21.
Standard IV-C Prevention and Identification C4-C5
Standard IV-D Evaluation.D2-3, 10-14.

Standard IV-E Treatment. E2-E15

A more complete description of the competencies can be found at
http://www.asha.org/about/membership-
certification/certification/aud_ standards new.htm