AK CURED

IC ARRIERSDI AI

 

Rhetoric 309K: Rhetoric of Illness (82120)

Summer 2020
Online Course

Instructor: Brie Winnega
Email: briewin @utexas.edu

Office Hours: M 2-3, T 1-3, and by appointment
Canvas Instant Chat and Zoom

Course Description:

In the midst of the recent Covid-19 outbreak this spring, one reporter from The Guardian asks,
“Now [that] the WHO has declared Covid-19 a pandemic, what will it mean for the way the
outbreak is treated and prepared for?” (Davey 2020). Another reporter writing for The New
Yorker argues that President Trump’s March 11 speech about the “foreign virus” carried an
exceptionally nationalistic tone, exemplifying his inadequate response to the disease (Glasser
2020). As many of these news reports indicate, our rhetoric often has important effects on the
way our society responds to public health emergencies. In the case of a pandemic, rhetoric can
impact the means through which whole governments initiate policy changes. At the individual
level, 1t can impact how we advocate for a loved one who is sick, how we give instructions about
care needs, and how we tell our own stories.

This course will explore some of the ways people talk about illness. Students will be asked to
discuss and unpack the meaning and significance of words such as “cure,” “diagnosis,”
“disease,” and “immunity.” As a class, we will engage with a variety of genres ranging from
personal narratives, to healthcare pamphlets, to news reports and social media — all with an eye
toward what type of rhetoric is deployed and what it is intended to accomplish.

Since this is a research-based and writing-intensive course, students will be asked to identify and
research over the duration of the semester a topic of interest related to rhetoric of illness. They
will draft and revise numerous writing assignments related to their topic, critically analyzing how
rhetoric is deployed in their choice of cultural artifacts related to the course theme. Finally, theywill use what they have learned to invent their own arguments around cultural constructions of
illness.

Given the status of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic, the theme for this semester’s Rhetoric of
Illness course will be contagious disease. Readings will invite students to grapple with cultural
and emotional reactions to contagion, political and institutional responses to viral outbreaks, and
the relationship between infectious disease and gender, race, disability, sexuality, and more.
Students are asked to pursue a research project within this theme; exceptions may be made at the
instructor’s discretion.

Textbooks:

e Everything’s an Argument. 8" ed. Andrea A. Lunsford, John J. Ruszkiewicz, Keith
Walters. ISBN: 9781319056278. (Required)

e UNC Writing Center Resources (https://writingcenter.unc.edu/tips-and-tools/)

e Other readings available on class Canvas site

Course Overview:

Unit 1 Researching Illness: The focus of this unit is to help students choose a research topic and
articulate a focused research question. Students will use this first part of the course to build a
foundational understanding of the conversation around their topic, culminating in the creation of
a literature review. Assigned readings in this unit are intended to introduce students to a variety
of approaches they might take to the course theme.

Unit 2 Analyzing Illness: The focus of this unit is to help students build essential skills for
analyzing texts. Students will use this unit of the course to analyze the methods of argumentation
that arise in texts pertaining to their research topic. Assigned readings in this unit are intended to
help students encounter and evaluate common types of rhetorical strategies used in conversations
about illness and contagion.

Unit 3 Arguing Illness: The focus of this unit is to help students identify an intervention into the
conversation around their research topic and compose persuasive artifacts of their own. Students
will use this final part of the course to explore possibilities for their arguments and strategize
their intervention. Assigned readings in this unit are intended to model possible types of
arguments with which students might engage.

Course Goals:

e Become familiar with contemporary tensions and debates around illness, with an
emphasis on contagious disease

e Explore how constructions of race, gender, sexuality, and disability intersect with
discourses around illnesse Develop an understanding of various types of language and rhetorical strategies are
deployed in arguments about illness

e Identify a focused research project within contemporary conversations about illness and
formulate an intervention

e Conduct extensive research using UT library databases and online search engines

@ Write college-level, analytical essays and craft revisions based on peer review and
instructor feedback

Assignments:
(Detailed descriptions for each of the following can be found on the course Canvas site.)

e Paper 1: Literature Review (15%)
e Paper 2: Analysis Essay (20%)

o Paper 2 Peer Review (5%)
o Paper 2 Peer Review Response (5%)
e Paper 3: Argumentative Essay (20%)
o Completed Rough Draft (5%)
o Paper 3 Peer Review (5%)
o Paper 3 Peer Review Response (5%)
e Minor Writing Assignments (10%)
o Research Summary, Mini Analysis 1, Mini Analysis 2, and Paper 3 Pitch
e Participation (10%)
o Posts to class discussion board for every other class day
o Two comments minimum on discussion thread for days when no discussion post
is due
o Presence in weekly synchronous Zoom meetings (or, in the event of an absence, a
make-up reading response)
o Optional peer review for Paper 1 (lit review)

Grades:

Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness, all
numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For example, a B- will be
inclusive of all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University does not recognize the grade
of A+.

e A=94-100 e B-=80-83 e D+=67-69
e# A-=90-95 e Ct=/7-79 « D=64-66
# Bt=87-89 e C=/4-76 * D-=60-63
e B=684-86 e C=/0-73 e F=0-59

Resources:University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu (Open for online consultations via
Google Hangouts)

Sanger Learning Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc (Currently offering virtual tutoring via
phone and Zoom)

UT Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu (Includes online chat feature, research guides)
Department of Rhetoric and Writing: http://www.drw.utexas.edu

Digital Writing & Research Lab: http://www.dwrl.utexas.edu

University Health Services: http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu (Currently offering telehealth
appointments. COVID-19 testing also available)

Counseling and Mental Health Centre: http://cmhc.utexas.edu (Currently offering
telehealth appointments only. Crisis line available 24/7 at: 512-471-2255)

Services for Students with Disabilities: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/ (Currently
operating remotely)

Class Policies: Adapted for online course structure

Participation: Students are asked to compose online discussion posts for every other
class day. On days when no discussion post is due, students will instead leave at least
two comments on the discussion board from the previous class day. Full participation
credit in the class will also include attending weekly synchronous Zoom meetings
with the instructor and a small group of classmates. In the event of an absence,
students are invited to earn back the credit with a make-up reading response (detailed
instructions available on course Canvas site).

Late Work: While I strongly recommend that you complete all major assignments on
time to the best of your ability, I understand that following one’s schedule doesn’t
always go according to plan. Students may submit late work with the understanding
that late assignments will be penalized by 5% for each calendar day they are late.
Assignments that are graded for completion (including online discussion posts) are
not eligible for late submission.

Accessibility: I am committed to making all course materials as accessible as
possible, and to working with you if there are aspects of this course that can be made
more conducive to your learning. Students for whom accommodations will help
their participation or assignments should schedule a Zoom meeting with me as
soon as possible to discuss. I recognize that not all disabilities are documented with
SSD and remain committed to accommodating all disabilities and learning styles as
best I can. Please note that I cannot offer accommodations retroactively, and students
are required to give me substantial notice if they need accommodations for
assignments (particularly if requesting an extension).

Community Agreements: There will be zero tolerance for disrespect toward others.
It is never okay to laugh at, belittle, or harass a colleague because of their opinion orpoint of view. Always think about how your comments will support our learning
as a group. However, students are welcome to respectfully challenge others’ beliefs
or ideas. Challenging colleagues to explain their arguments in a thoughtful manner is
key to creating an engaging learning community.

Furthermore, everyone in our class has the right to be addressed in accordance with
their personal identity. The university provides me with a class roster containing each
student’s legal name. I will gladly address you by the name and gender pronoun
with which you identify. Please let me know your preferred name and pronouns
early in the semester (which you may do by email if you prefer), so your peers and I
can address you appropriately.

 

 

 

Schedule:
EAA = Everything’s an Argument textbook
Week | Date | Topic(s) Assignments | Readings Due
Due
1 Thurs, | Introduction to Zoom
June 4 | the class Meeting Poll
Fri, Health and First day e EAACh1
June 5 | Mis/Information: | survey e “Blocking information on COVID-19 can
a Finding an fuel the spread of misinformation”
® Argument e Assignment descriptions for research
= summary and literature review
2 e Canvas file: Sample research projects
cS
G OPTIONAL:
3g e “Editorial: End the secrecy on virus
Si deaths at nursing homes”
= e “Coronavirus deniers’ say they can
- prove the pandemic is an elaborate
hoax”
e Coronavirus Conspiracy flier [pdf]
2 “In this EAA Ch 20

together”: On Immunity pp. 3-28 [pdf]
Synthesizing

Information/

What is a lit

review?

Feminist Research EAA Ch 21

 

Approaches to Summary Assignment description for mini
Illness: analysis 1
Integrating Choose one of the following (others are
Sources optional):
- “How Millions of Women Became

the Most Essential Workers in
America” [pdf]Bias in Medicine:

Researching
Responsibly

- “In some states, coronavirus

measures are effectively banning
abortion”

- “(Un)fashionable Illness”

EAA Ch 18

Video: “Bias In Medicine: Last Week
Tonight with John Oliver”

“On Virality, Corona or Otherwise”

OPTIONAL:

Poem: “Pharmacy Visit”

 

Race Matters:

Evaluating
Sources

Disability and
Healthcare:
Mapping a
Conversation

Gender and
Sexuality:
Mapping a
Conversation
continued

[Rough Draft
Paper 1 Lit
Review]

Mini Analysis
1

[Optional
Paper 1 Peer
Review
Form]

EAA Ch 19

“Conspiracy Bullshit” [pdf]

Choose one of the following (others are

optional):

- “Coronavirus is not the great
equalizer — race matters”
“Opinion: Why Coronavirus Is Killing
African Americans More Than
Others” [pdf]

l

‘Opinion: The COVID-19 crisis on
First Nations: a reminder of our

inequality”

OPTIONAL:

Poem: “Inoculation” by Susan Donnelly
[pdf]
Skim EAA Ch 22 section called “MLA
Style”
Choose one of the following (others are
optional):
“It will not be pretty’: Washington
state preparing to make life-or-
death decisions”
“Who gets medical care during the
coronavirus pandemic”
Choose one of the following (others are
optional)
- “Health Care System Fails Many

Transgender Americans”
“The State of Trans Health Care”

“The LGBTQ Health Clinic That
Faced a Dark Truth About the AIDS
Crisis” [pdf]

 

 

 

IIIness as War:

Introducing

[Optional
Paper 1 Peer

EAA Ch 6
“Illness as Metaphor” pp. 57-87 [pdf]Unit 2: Analyzing Illness

Rhetorical Review
Analysis Response]

 

Assignment descriptions for mini
analysis 2 and paper 2

OPTIONAL:

“In battling coronavirus, Trump
embraces his ‘wartime’ presidency”
Poem: “In The Sanatorium”

 

Wed,
June
17

Contagion and Paper 1 Lit
Fear: Appeals to | Review
Emotion

Expertise and
Ebola: Appeals to
Ethos & Logic

Self, Non-Self,
and Other:
Rhetoric & Style

EAA Ch 2
“My Life Is More ‘Disposable’ During
This Pandemic” [pdf]

OPTIONAL:

Contagion “Introduction: Contagion,
modernity and postmodernity” [pdf]
“SARS and NY’s Chinatown: The politics
of risk and blame during an epidemic of
fear” [pdf]

EAA Ch 3

EAA Ch 4

“Public Health Experts, Expertise, and
Ebola” pp. 191-202, [pdf]

OPTIONAL:

“Diagnosis: What’s Wrong with Us”
EAA Ch 13
On Immunity pp. 118-138 [pdf]

 

Metaphors of Mini Analysis
Illness: 2

Contextual

Analysis & Bias

“AIDS and its Metaphors” sections 3, 5,
6, and 8 (pg. 24-37, 44-71, & 80-95)
[pdf]

OPTIONAL:

Poem: “Training During the Plague”

 

 

 

Picturing Illness: | Rough Draft

Visual Rhetoric Paper 2

day 1/Revising Analysis
Essay

Picturing Illness:
Visual Rhetoric
day 2/Revising

EAA Ch 14

(

‘Pathogenesis: A Visual Diary of COVID-
19”

Video: #¥YouClapForMeNow

OPTIONAL:

 

Image: “All Bodies” by Michaela Oteri

“Commentary on ‘All Bodies’: US
Perspective”

Contagious: Cultures, Carriers, and the
Outbreak Narrative pp. 33-39
(“Diseases Without Borders and the
Outbreak Narrative”) [pdf]Unit 3: Arguing Illness

 

 

Revisions/
Conferences

Revisions/
Conferences

Finding Cure:

Proposal
Arguments

Medicine &
Advocacy:
Arguing with
Rebuttal

“Don’t Call Us

Heroes”:
Definition
Arguments

Diagnosing
IIIness:

Evaluation and

Causal
Arguments

Paper 2 Peer
Review Form

Paper 2 Peer
Review
Response

Paper 2
Analysis
Essay

Pitch for
Paper 3

OPTIONAL:

“Taking Lessons From a Bloody
Masterpiece” (interactive close reading)

“The Visible Exhaustion of Doctors and
Nurses Fighting the Coronavirus”

“Eye of the Storm: A week in the life of
a paramedic fighting the COVID-19
pandemic”

*sign up for conference slot with me for
Thursday OR Friday [towards participation
score]

*sign up for conference slot with me for
Thursday OR Friday [towards participation
score]

EAA Ch 12

Assignment descriptions for Paper 3

Pitch and Paper 3

Choose one of the following (others are

optional):

- “Maybe unvaccinated people
shouldn’t be allowed to fly”
“A simple way to promote HPV
vaccination among Asian American
women”

EAA Ch5

“| Will Not Apologize for My Needs”

[pdf]

EAA Ch 9
Choose one of the following examples
of definition-based arguments (others
are optional):
“Please Don’t Call Us Heroes”
“How can HIV-Positive women be
good mothers?”

l

‘Patient zero: Why it’s such a toxic
term”
“Editorial: Whatever Abbott calls it
stay home if you can”
“Are Anti-vaxxers conscientious
objectors?” [pdf]

EAA Ch 10

EAA Ch 11

Choose one of the following (others are

optional):“How Syphilis Sneaked Up on
Americans” — Causal argument
[pdf]

“The Rank Hypocrisy of Trump’s
Ebola Tweets” — Evaluation
argument [pdf]

OPTIONAL:
Poem: “Notes from the Pain Committee
Meeting”
Workshopping EAA Ch 16 “Making Multimodal
Paper 3: Intros Arguments”
and Conclusions Choose one of the following (others are
optional)
Video: Budweiser “One Team”
Video: Uber “Thank You For Not
Riding”
Video: Coronavirus.gov PSA
“Protect Yourself”

 

Workshopping Rough Draft

Paper 3: Topic Paper 3

Sentences and

Reverse Outlining

Paper 3 *sign up for conference slot with me for

Conferences Tuesday OR Wednesday [towards
participation score]

Paper 3 Paper 3 Peer | *sign up for conference slot with me for

Conferences Review Form | Tuesday OR Wednesday [towards
participation score]

 

 

Last class day Paper 3 Peer
Review
Response
Paper 3
Argumentati
ve Essay

 

 

 

 

Department of Rhetoric ¢ Writing
RHE Course Policies Statement, 2018-19

WRITING FLAG

This course carries the Writing Flag. You will write regularly during the semester, completing both
short and long writing projects. Furthermore, you will, and receive feedback from your instructor
and your peers. Based on this feedback, you will have the opportunity to revise one or moreassignments. A substantial portion of your grade to comes from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork,
and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.

ATTENDANCE POLICY

Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses. Any questions or
appeals concerning this policy must be made directly to the department Associate Chair. You are
expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing, and to
participate in all in-class editing, revising, and discussion sessions. Should you miss the equivalent
of five TTH or MW class sessions or seven MWF sessions this semester, excused or not, you
will fail the course. If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you
should contact your instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let him or her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, well in advance of the absence, so that alternative arrangements can
be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this reason, provide your
instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University specifies very few
other excused absences (e.g., jury duty). When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting
notes and assignments from a classmate.

SCHOLASTIC HONESTY

Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University. So, take care to read and understand the
Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found online at
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/rhetoric/ RHE%20306/plagiarismcollusion.php. If you have any
doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the assignment.

STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone) as
soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More
information is available online at http://diversity.utexas.edu/ disability /instructional-tips-for-
working-with-students-with-disabilities /.

TITLE IX AND SENATE BILL 212

Beginning January 1, 2020, Texas Senate Bill 212 requires all employees of Texas universities,
including faculty, report any information to the Title [IX Office regarding sexual harassment, sexual
assault, dating violence and stalking that is disclosed to them. Texas law requires that all employees
who witness or receive any information of this type (including, but not limited to, writing
assignments, class discussions, of one-on-one conversations) must be reported. If you would like to
speak with someone who can provide support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, please email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options
and resources, visit http://www.titleix.utexas.edu/, contact the Title [IX Office via email at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu, or call 512-471-0419.Although graduate teaching and research assistants are not subject to Texas Senate Bill 212, they are
still mandatory reporters under Federal Title [X laws and are required to report a wide range of
behaviors we refer to as sexual misconduct, including the types of sexual misconduct covered under
Texas Senate Bill 212. The Title [X office has developed supportive ways to respond to a survivor
and compiled campus resources to support survivors.

DEPARTMENT CLIMATE

At the Department of Rhetoric and Writing, we are unambiguous in our commitment to fostering a
diverse, inclusive, and respectful professional and educational climate. For more information on our
climate commitments, see the complete climate statement at https://
liberalarts.utexas.edu/thetoric/about/mission.php. If you have any questions or climate-related
concerns, please contact the chair of the climate advisory committee: Professor Scott Graham

(sso@utexas.edu).

EMAIL ACCOUNTS

Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will use this medium
to communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email account and to
check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to
http://utmail.utexas.edu/.

EMERGENCY INFORMATION

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus ate required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Information regarding
emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.

Other important Emergency Information You can find more information about planning for
emergencies on the Emergency Preparedness site at http://www.utexas.edu/safe reparedness

Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050 Use this resource to help fellow UT members
about whom you have concerns. You can learn more about the Behavior Concerns Advice Line on

their site at https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bceal.php

Questions about these policies Questions about these policies should be addressed to:

Department of Rhetoric & Writing
The University of Texas at Austin
Parlin Hall, Room 3
rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu
(512) 471-6109