HIS 315L (38775)
Professor
Steven Mintz

Office Hours
T/TH 11 —11:30 am
and by appointment.

Email
smintz@utexas.edu

Course Description

Too many students spell history
b-o-r-i-n-g. They regard history
as a jumble of disconnected
facts. The word they use to
describe history is "irrelevant."

High school history too often
consists of little more than
lectures, textbooks, worksheets,
and memorization of names and
dates. In fact, history need not be
dull.

In this class, you will be a
detective, a myth buster, a
problem solver, and a forensic
scientist. You will debunk or
confirm legends and folklore.
You will investigate some of
history’s most gripping
mysteries and take part in some
of history’s biggest debates.

You will uncover the hidden
history behind front-page

headlines as well as the roots of a host
of everyday rituals and customs.

You will examine Hollywood’s version
of the past and separate fact from
fiction. You will re-fight past battles,
re-live key episodes in the past, and ask
what-might-have-been.

You will also explore the uneasy
relationship between academic history
and popular memory—those legends
and traditions that exert a much more
powerful grip on our imagination.

This class offers an innovative
perspective on U.S. history. Its
approach is global, comparative, and
multicultural, and it explores the ties
between past events and contemporary
issues.

Divided into modules that must be
completed weekly, the course includes
a wealth of sources including maps,

 

What Is in This
Syllabus

 

 

film clips, and music—that bring the
past to life and allow you to understand
the key issues and controversies of U.S.
history from a fresh perspective.

Grading is based on multiple choice
questions, short-answer exercises, and
interactive activities.Course Structure

Although we will meet twice a week, all the
instructional materials are included in online
modules accessed through Canvas. These will
serve as your readings and assessments.

Although you will work through the online
modules at the convenience of your own schedule,
there are mandatory weekly deadlines and you
should consult the schedule below.

compelling theses.

social roles evolved over time.

Course Communications

To ensure that you_ receive _ class
announcements, sign up for Canvas
notifications.

To edit your notification preferences, login to
Canvas and navigate to your “Account.”

Course Evaluation

By the end of the semester a student should be able to:

You will complete your assignments by logging
into the course on Canvas, selecting the weekly
module, and completing all activities found within
the module. You are required to have access to an
internet-enabled laptop or desktop computer. We
recommend that you use Chrome when accessing
the modules.

1
I
I
I
I
I
1. Demonstrate mastery of essential facts, chronology, and periodization. These include the sequence of !
major events and the division of history into meaningful categories. '
2.Demonstrate familiarity with historical controversies and conflicting interpretations. I
3.Explain how historians are able to reconstruct certain significant facts about the past.
4.Formulate meaningful and research-able historical questions and construct concise, sophisticated,
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

!

5.Exhibit the methodological skills characteristic of history as a discipline. These include the ability to

locate, weigh and evaluate evidence, assess arguments, and construct convincing interpretations.
6.Demonstrate historical thinking. This includes the ability to describe how institutions, customs, or

Under settings, update your email and include
other forms of contact that you check daily.

Once completed, navigate to “Notifications”
and edit appropriately.

MODULE GRADE Unlike a conventional history class, in which grades depend
on quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam, your grade in this

BREAKDOWN _ Ghass

Multiple Choice

« Short Answer (3)

“A

1/5

depends on _ your

performance on_ activities .
distributed across the weeks. Final Grade Scale

(20) You will not have a mid- | Final grades will be based on
term or final in this course

+/- letter grade system.
A = 93-100%, A-= 90-92%

You will have access to two | B+=88-89%, B= 83-87%
modules per week, which | B-=80-83%, C+=78-79%

must be completed before its | C = 73-77%, C-=70-72%
due date. Each module is worth 100 points. 60 points are from multiple | D+ = 68-69%, D = 63-67%
choice questions and 60 points from essay questions. There is a | D-=60-62%, F=0-59%

minimum character requirement for most essay questions of 1200characters including spaces. For details about how your short answer responses will be graded, see
Canvas.

Class Essentials

Read Carefully: Your modules are due on the date and time specified on the syllabus. Please be aware
that for the work to be graded, you need to submit your answers via Canvas. We will not accept late
work and we will not accept work emailed to your professor or TA. If you're having trouble, please
email gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu and cc your professor and TA. This address is staffed
during normal business hours, so please do not wait to the last minute to submit your work. We are not
responsible for technical errors related to your individual equipment (e.g. home wi-fi or laptop) and
such problems are not grounds for an extension of the due date.

To ensure that you have completed the entire module and all your work was submitted, please check
the table of contents page for your module. Completed items will display a green check mark next to
them. Always access your modules through the course homepage or the Assignments tab in Canvas.
Accessing your module through the Grade tab provides a read-only view of your work.

Extra credit opportunities: In most class sessions, you will have an opportunity to respond to
questions and earn extra credit. To respond to these questions, you must bring an internet connected
device - a smart phone, a tablet, or laptop - to class and connect to our class in Canvas.

Primary source packet: You will need to have available during class the primary source packet
located on the FAQ page. You can print it out or display it on your tablet or laptop.

Know your TA: At your earliest opportunity, go to the FAQ page and identify the name, contact
information, and office hours of your teaching assistant. Your TA is not only responsible for grading
your written work, but is a valuable resource who can help you succeed in this class by improving your
writing and study skills.

Objectionable Materials Warning

Many will find topics covered in this class to be disturbing. Topics such as, war, inequality,
and episodes of violence are aspects of U.S. history that cannot be erased. Our readings and
audio-visual sources contain depictions of explicit violence, sexual brutality, ethnic and
gender stereotyping, obscenity, profanity, offensive language, and endorse views that many
will consider immoral. Students are advised that we will touch on mature subject matter
regarding politics, economics, foreign policy, class conflict, racism, sexism, sexuality, etc.,
in U.S. history, in a scholarly and critical manner. These sources were in wide circulation in
the culture at large, and are, in the instructor's opinion, essential to understanding this
country's history.

 

Academic Integrity

Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.

The online course format allows us to monitor and detect issues involving identity
verification, collusion and plagiarism. A violation of the course policy may include (but is
not limited to) the following:

Z AZrHROVZH¢ Providing your UT EID and password to another person,

¢ Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format,

¢ Failing to properly cite ideas, data, or arguments that are not originally yours.
Please be aware that we are using a software system that automatically detects behavior that
violates course rules. As part of this effort, we will occasionally send students email
notifications when any problematic behaviors are detected. These emails are intended mainly
to remind students of the course code of conduct, and carry absolutely no implications for a
student’s grade in this course. We will only investigate cases where our system determines
that there is a considerable amount of evidence that the code of conduct is not being followed.
Regardless of the results, the faculty member, in consultation with Student Judicial Services,
will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.

Students with Disabilities

Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students. It is the student’s responsibility, to make the
instructor aware of any special accommodations or needs in a timely manner. Students with
disabilities may request appropriate accommodations from the Services for Students with
Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (audio) or 512-232-2937 (audiovisual) or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-register-with-ssd/. As soon as you have
received your letter of accommodation, please send a scanned copy to your professor.

 

Religious Holidays

The instructor complies with University policy regarding religious holidays. Students must
inform the instructor at least 14 days prior to any assignments that they will miss. Students
will be given a reasonable time to make up any items. It remains the student’s responsibility
to complete the modules in a timely fashion.

 

This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history part of the university core
curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal
responsibility, and social responsibility. This course carries a cultural diversity flag.

 

Geographical Literacy

This class will participate in a new History department initiative to improve student
geographical literacy. Geographical literacy helps us to deepen our understanding of
the complex processes of the past when we have a better grasp of time, space and
place. You will do a series of map exercises this semester that reinforce your key
conceptual issues and content knowledge, and you will access those exercises through
Canvas.

 

Assignment Schedule

Module Due Date

4: The Gilded Age July 20
5: The U.S. Becomes a World Power July 206: The Progressive Era
7; WWI

8: The 1920s

9: The 1930s

10: World War II

11: The Post WWII Era
12: The 1960s

14: The 1970s

July 27
July 27
August 3
August 3
August 10
August 10
August 15
August 15