UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
SPN F327C: Advanced Grammar & Writing in Context
Summer 2020

Instructor: Delia Méndez Montesinos
E-mail: admontesinos@austin.utexas.edu
Unique number: 82735

Meeting time: MTWThF 10:00-11:30 online
Office: BEN 3.128

Office Hours: TWThF 7:45-8:30 online

 

** This synchronous online course will be taught in Spanish, using Zoom. Students are
responsible for having reliable Internet service and a computer with a webcam. **

I. PREREQUISITE: SPN 611D, 612, or the equivalent
II. REQUIRED / RECOMMENDED (*) TEXTS: Course packet on Canvas.

Ill. COURSE OBJECTIVES:

The objective of the Spanish language program addresses the basic tenet of a liberal arts
education: the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language in
society. This objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic
internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.

The Spanish language program focuses on the development of multilingual literacies through the
analysis and use of Spanish as a second language. The program focuses on the development of
three major types of competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):

(1) linguistic competence (Spanish phonetics and phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon,
discourse, etc.)

(2) communication / interactional competence (sociocultural uses of the language,
pragmatics, cultural background and perspectives)

(3) metalinguistic competence (language as a conceptual, symbolic system)

Within the language program, SPN 327C 1s a bridge course between lower-division language
courses and upper-division courses in culture, literature, and linguistics. It is designed to:
e help you inductively master grammar points of concern to speakers of English,
e perfect your grammar skills through a variety of tasks designed to clarify grammatical
points, including reading, writing, listening, and speaking activities,
e strengthen the clarity and organization of your writing, and
e promote critical and integrative thinking skills.

IV. EXPECTATIONS:
This is an advanced language course and, as such, students are expected to:e have mastered basic grammatical concepts (agreement; verb conjugations: present, past,
future; pronouns),

e understand indicative, imperative, and subjunctive moods, and

e read and write at high-intermediate level

If you are weak in any of these skills, it is your responsibility to (a) study them independently,
using textbooks from 1‘ and 2"4- year courses, (b) consult your instructor at the beginning of the
semester to discuss your concerns, and (c) work with a tutor in order to reach the expected basic
level that is necessary for you to understand and master advanced notions.

V. METHODOLOGY:

This course, unlike lecture-style courses, is highly student centered. Following a guided
inductive approach, you will analyze selected samples of both native and non-native discourse to
gain a deeper understanding of various linguistic features and communicative functions. The
majority of in-class and at-home activities will go beyond rote memorization and will require
you to think critically about written texts, as well as grammatical forms/constructions found in
authentic discourse in order to identify patterns and draw your own conclusions. This approach is
fundamental to our program, so please keep this in mind and be prepared to play an active role in
the learning process.

VI. COURSE FLAGS

SPN 327C carries the Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.

SPN 327C also carries a Writing Flag. You will have frequent writing assignments in this course,
including both low-stakes and high-stakes assignments. You will have the opportunity to submit
drafts and rewrites, and you will receive feedback both from your instructor and your classmates.
The writing assignments constitute at least one third of your final grade in the course.

VII. ATTENDANCE POLICY:

Although this is an online class, regular class attendance is required. Late work is not accepted
nor are there make-ups for missed work. However, a student who is absent from a class for the
observance of a religious holy day or a university-sponsored activity may complete the work
missed within a reasonable time after the absence if proper notice of the planned absence has
been given at least two weeks in advance. Students who will be absent owing to a university-
sponsored activity must present a letter from the department or office sponsoring the event,
giving the student’s name, the dates of the expected absence(s), and the reason for the
absence(s). After three class hours, your grade will be dropped 1% on a scale of 100 for each
additional absence.

VII. ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATIONS:

I will be available to discuss appropriate academic accommodations that you may require as a
student with a disability. Before I can make course accommodations, you must provide
documentation from the Office of the Dean of Students-Services for Students with Disabilities.(This follows the Rehabilitation Act of 1973-Section 504 and the Americans with Disabilities
Act/ADA.)

IX. SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY:

Please note that all graded work done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing
that appears to be the work of someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or
print source) or that appears to have been written in English and then translated by an online
translation program will not be accepted and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on
the assignment. Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
university. For more information, visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.

 

X. PROBLEMS / QUESTIONS:
Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any problems, questions, or suggestions you have
relating to the class.

 

 

Course Instructor Teaching Assistant
Name: Delia Méndez Montesinos Name: Camila Torres Castro
Office: BEN 3.128 Office: BEN 5 Floor

Office hours: MTWTHhF 7:45-8:30am Office hours: MTWTh 12-1 pm
Office phone: NA Office phone: NA

 

Email: admontesinos@austin.utexas.edu Email: camilatoc@utexas.edu

XII. GRADE BREAKDOWN & GRADING SCALE:

Actividades de escritura
[Composiciom tT

There is no curve or extra credit.
The following scale will be used to determine your final grade in the course:

93-100=A 83-86.99 =B 73-76.99 =C 63-66.99 = D
90-92.99 = A- 80-82.99 = B- 70-72.99 = C- 60-62.99 = D-

 

87-89.99 = B+ 771-79.99 = C+ 67-69.99 = D+ 0-59.99 =F

 

XI. COURSE ASSESSMENTS:

Compositions: There will be three graded compositions in this course, which will be assessed
based on content, organization, and vocabulary, as well as your ability to accurately include
grammar analyzed in the course. For Compositions | and 2, you will turn in one or several
Fichas de lectura (10% of the grade), an Esquema (well-constructed outline worth 6% of the
grade), Borrador 1 (first draft for peer review), Borrador 2 (worth 60% of the grade) and a
carefully edited final draft (worth 24% of the grade). Detailed instructions will be given in class
and/or posted on Canvas. For composition 1 you will write a descriptive text; for composition 2,
a narrative text, and for composition 3, an expository text.

Composition 3: This culture-based project will include independent research, as well as an
interview with a native speaker or an alternative activity. Percentages will be similar as forCompositions 1 and 2, but there will only be one Borrador and the essay will include in-text
citations. Detailed instructions will be given in class and/or posted on Canvas. All preliminary
work will be done in groups; however, the essay will be written individually.

Actividades de escritura. You will complete several writing activities, some which may be
written using Proctorio, a remote proctoring service. These activities, which include reflections
on readings, your grammar skills and progress, and short paragraphs, will help prepare you for
longer writing assignments

Quizzes: There will be a variety of quizzes that will relate to material covered in the previous
class session(s) and/or material. Quizzes will help you assess your strengths and weaknesses and
prepare for major assignments and exams.

Participation: Although this is a grammar & composition class, you will be encouraged to
practice developing your oral Spanish skills by using the language both in the main session and
the breakout rooms in Zoom.

El calendario puede ser modificado. En Canvas, ver fechas concretas para entregar trabajos y

SPN 327C: CALENDARIO DEL CURSO

Fechas Temas Para entregar

Paginas preliminares

CAPITULO 1: Pruebas en linea

El arte a través del tiempo y de las Actividades de escritura

culturas Ficha de lectura
Esquema del ensayo descriptivo
Borradores 1 y 2

18 de 26 | CAPITULO 2: Version final (la descripcion)

de junio | Los viajes, de proposito a consecuencia | Pruebas en linea

Actividades de escritura

 

Fichas de lectura

Esquema del texto narrativo
Borradores 1 y 2

29 de CAPITULO3: Version final (el texto narrativo)
junio al | Sobre la identidad y la justicia social Pruebas en linea

9 de julio Actividades de escritura

Fichas de lectura

Esquema texto expositivo
Borrador 1

Entregar el texto expositivo antes de la
10 de la noche.