SYLLABUS
POLITICAL ECONOMY
ECO 323L First Summer 2020
Unique # 79469

Instructor: Dr. Wayne Hickenbottom

Email: hicken@austin.utexas.edu (same as through canvas)
Office Hours: Sunday 3 -4pm, Tues. 9 — 10am

Textbook

Two required textbooks

Economics of the Public Sector 4" ed. by Joseph Stiglitz and Jay Rosengard. While we
will be skipping around and editing quite a bit, we will definitely cover most or all of
Chapters 3-10, 14, and 17. Parts of other chapters will be covered as well. This
book will be used exclusively in the first part of this class and periodically in the
second.

Readings in Public Choice Economics, Jac Heckelman editor. This will be the primary
text in the second part of the class. Various chapters will be assigned. We will not
begin discussing chapters from this book in class until late June.

Overview

Let me start by explaining what this class is not:

1. This is not a class in Public Economics. While the textbook we are using is a
common textbook for that class, this class is not meant to be a watered down, writing
component version of what our department offers as ECO 321.

2. It is not a class in the government department. It is not a class about the politics of
economic issues. It is more a class of ecomomic analysis of issues in the political
arena.

3. It is not a class in Macroeconomics. Issues about government policy pertaining to
interest rates, unemployment, monetary policy, etc. will not be addressed.

We will be using microeconomic tools to study issues associated with collective
decision-making. This will include discussions of the appropriate role for government
in a market economy. After this, we will discuss the forces involved in determining and
implementing specific policies through a legislative process.

Prerequisites

Some introductory economics class at the college level. | am assuming everyone has
taken either some form of Introductory Microeconomics (ECO 304K here at UT) ora 1
semester combined Micro and Macro class (ECO 301 here at UT). However, typically
there are a number of students who have taken multiple upper level classes. Those
with the minimum pre-requisites must understand that material they may be seeing for
the first time will be review material for some of the students in the class.Obligatory university disclaimors

This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect
to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and
receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also
have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read
and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.

Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259. Get your accommodation letter to me as soon as you can
SO we Can discuss whatever arrangements you need.

Lectures and schedule

It is my hope that lectures will be recorded on Zoom at 11:30am everyday so you are
welcome to watch and participate live. The recordings will be posted and available for
viewing shortly after the lectures finish. If there is some reason that the lecture
schedule changes, I'll try to notify you in advance. The first item on the Announcement
page of Canvas will have informations about readings, content of lectures, etc.

Evaluation
Your final grade will be based on the following work:

6 homeworks - Best 5 will count 25%
Paper

Rough draft 5%

Final draft 30%
Peer Review 5%
Proposal evaluation 25%
Foe/Ally 5%
Ranking and Evaluation 5%

Note: No exams or final

Homeworks

There will be 6 HW assignments. They will be due June. 8'",10", 15" and 17", July 2"°
and 11"... HW must be turned in at 11:30am on that date. On the day HW is due, | will
start recording the lecture at the time the HW is due and will go over the HW answers
first thing. You will submit the HW through Canvas and the assignment will also close
at the time the HW is due so no late homework assignments will be accepted. | am
VERY strict on this point. For all the HW assignments, | suggest you write up theanswers using your favorite editor, then just cut and paste the work into the answer
space on Canvas. | will count the best 5 of the 6 HW’s for your grade

Paper: Specific policy analysis

Rough draft due June 19th. Final draft June 26". You will be presented a scenario of
a specific change in policy. The paper will ask you to analyse and evaluate multiple
questions and issues around this policy change. The size requirement will be
somewhere in the 7-12 page range. A portion of your grade for this paper will be based
on your rough draft. The rest will be based on the final draft. The specific assignment
and grading criteria will be distributed June 10". Grades on final drafts will be docked
10% for each day late.

Peer Review:

For the paper above, each of you will be assigned the rough draft of another student’s
paper. You will be graded on the value of the feedback you provide the student. You
will receive the rough draft you are evaluating on June 19" and the evaluation will be
due June 23". If you submit your rough draft late, you will not be able to do a peer
review and lose those points.

Assignments associated with being an Economic Consultant.

On Monday June 29", everyone will be given the outline of a proposed piece of
legislation. Then each of you will be assigned a different “client” who will have an
interest in that legislation. There will be 3 assignments associated with this
information:

1. Proposal evaluation. You will write a 5 — 10 page report to your “client” about
how different aspects of the legislation will affect them and_ your
recommendations as an “expert” about how to get the legislation passed,
defeated, and/or amended. This assignment is due July 8" at a time to be
specified later and is worth 25 points. Shortly after the designated time this is
due, you will receive an email from me with that will contain the Proposal
Evalutations of 3 other students. They will be used for the next two
assignments. If you are late submitting your Proposal Evaluation | will still grade
it for full credit, but you will not be able to do the next two assignments and lose
all of those points.

2. Foe/Ally. Still acting in your capacity as an economic advisor, you will explain to
your client whether the people/groups represented by the 3 _ Proposal
Evaluations you received will be helpful or impediments in your goals about this
legislation and how in the legislative process you will deal with that. This will be
due at a specified time on Saturday July 11".

3. Ranking and Evaluation. Now you will return to your roll as a student in this
class. Looking at the 3 Proposal Evaluations you have been sent and your own,
you will rank these 4 papers from best to worst and provide a some insights as to
how you came up with those rankings. This is also due at a specified time on
Saturday July 11".