Sociocultural Influences on Learning (Online)
ALD 327 (09490) & AFR 372D (30635)
Pictures from: Mer Young (IG: @youngmer)

The University of Texas at Austin
M/T/W/Th/F 1:00 pm to 2:30 pm

Summer 2020; Via Zoom
TT]

Instructor: Pablo Montes Office: Zoom
(pronouns: any)
Office Hours: Monday | 1a-1p Email/Phone: pmontes@utexas.edu; (608)931-1739

Teaching Assistant: Alexis Bigelow Office: Zoom
(pronouns: she/her)
Office Hours: Wed. 2:30-4:30p Email/Phone: avbigelo@utexas.edu; (301)943-7833

Course Description

How have minoritized youth been affected by education? By viewing education as both a sociohistorical
system and an institutional power, what are the educational experiences of minoritized youth? In this course, a
sociocultural, sociohistorical, and sociopolitical framework will be used to critically examine pertinent issues
that affect historically marginalized and minoritized groups. The course readings are intentionally based within
an interdisciplinary approach that is based on Indigenous Studies, Black Studies, Latinx Studies, Asian-
American Studies, Gender Studies, Queer Studies and Dis/Ability Studies. This course will not focus on
teaching educational techniques or pedagogy but rather we will explore the complex relationship between
schools and society, especially in regard to social, cultural, and economic inequities within the U.S. We will
review stories (her / his / theirstories) and consider the intricate ways in which settler colonialism, white

supremacy and whiteness, anti-blackness, race, gender and sexuality, capitalism, neoliberalism, migration andsocioeconomic class intersect and influence the educational experiences of minoritized youth. Questions of
power and privilege will be explored to further understand how they influence perceptions of teaching,
pedagogy, educational policy and curriculum. During this course everyone is invited to participate in critical
self-reflection and listen to the perspectives of the other companions in a respectful way. Please note that this
class will expect all of us to be open to dialoguing on issues of race, gender, class, privilege, and sexual
orientation. We understand that feeling a type of discomfort can happen in a course such as this and we invite

you to question and broaden underlying assumptions, perspectives, and worldviews.

Cultural Diversity (Cultural Diversity Flag)

This course carries the Cultural Diversity (or CD) flag. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase
students' knowledge of the variety and richness of cultural experiences in the United States. A substantial
portion of your grade will be based on assignments related to the practices, beliefs, and stories of at least one
minority cultural group in the United States.

Media and Technology

Given the unprecedented times of COVID-19, we will be administering this course entirely via Zoom and
CANVAS. We will have a mix of synchronous and asynchronous seminars depending on the week and content
(meaning we will not always meet via Zoom but may have work on CANVAS). All seminars require the use
of a laptop, tablet or mobile phone so that we can access the readings, share relevant information, and for
classroom learning and collaboration. If you don't have access to a laptop or tablet, or have any other questions
about this requirement, please let the instructors know immediately. The use of technology during class time is
expected to be respectful, that is, to use it only for purposes directly related to current classroom activities. In
case you have an emergency and are waiting for a call be sure to notify the instructors in advance (by email or
before class starts) that you are going to have to use your phone during class. It is considered inappropriate and
disrespectful to use any type of social media, check emails, shop online, or text during class.

General Information

Preferred pronoun and pronunciation of the name
Please advise me if you would like to be referred by a preferred name or gender pronoun to ensure that your

name is honored and pronounced correctly.

Communication & Canvas

Canvas will be used to post announcements, course documents, assignments, and supplemental materials.
Please make sure to keep an eye out for messages or announcements sent to the entire class through Canvas.
All course readings will be available through Canvas.

Academic honestyAll work that you submit must be your own. We use the APA format in this course and we suggest you visit
the website Purdue Owl website which offers guidelines on how to handle citations and avoid plagiarism.
Students who violate student rules on academic honesty will be subject to disciplinary action, including the
possibility of course disapproval and expulsion from the University. According to the Rules and Regulations of
the UT Governing System “‘academic dishonesty includes but is not limited to cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
the delivery of work or materials that are partially or completely attributable to another person, impersonation
in exams and any act or attempt designed to give an unfair advantage to a student. ” Policies against academic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced.

Q Drop Policy

If you want to withdraw from a subject after 12 days of class, you will have to run a Q-Drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which normally occurs around the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, only six Q-drops are
allowed while you are in college at any Texas public institution. For more information, see:

http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop

Adaptations for Religious Issues

Efforts will be made to reasonably honor student needs related to religious obligations or observations that
conflict with exams, assignments, or attendance at this course. At least two weeks' notice of these obligations
and / or religious observations must be given to make the necessary adjustments.

Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence, and harassment in government-funded educational institutions.
The University of Texas-Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment that is free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Offer support and resources to students and employees who have suffered harm or been involved in the

Title [X investigation.

3. Investigate and discipline violations of the porrelevant lists of the University.
Teachers and certain employees are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which
means that they are required to report Title [X violations to the Title IX Coordinator. Pablo Montes and Alexis
Bigelow are Responsible Employees and must report any incident related to Title [X that 1s communicated in
writing, or discussion in private. Before talking to us, or any teacher or employee, about a Title [X incident, be
sure to ask if the person is a responsible employee. If you want to speak to someone for support or resources
without making an official report to the university, visit the website titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.

Syllabus changesInstructors have the right to alter (add, remove, and / or modify) the program of study to meet the individual
needs of students.

Student Resources

Reasonable Accommodations for Special Needs

If any student requires certain accommodations due to special needs, please request a letter through the
Diversity and Community Engagement Division - Services for Students with Special Needs at the beginning of
the semester in order to make the necessary accommodations. The Special Needs Student Services office will
determine accommodations based on properly documented needs (512-471-

6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/). Services for Students with Disabilities

Counseling and Mental Health Center

It is common to need support when it comes to feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. Its CARE
Counselor in the Faculty of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. His office is located in the George I.
Sanchez building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE
appointment. Check-in hours are also available on Mondays and Wednesdays from 1-2PM at JES A115 and
Tuesdays and Fridays from 1-2PM at SZB 216. All services are confidential and none of your information will
be shared without your written consent.

Support Groups and Discussion Based on Identity

Writing Center

The University Writing Center offers free individual writing consultations for college students. You have the
option to Schedule Appointment if you want additional support with your writing. There is also a variety of
events, workshops and "write-ins" offered throughout the academic school year.

Assignments

I. Attendance and Participation - 15 points

Attendance and participation are key to your success in this course. You must inform us at least two weeks in
advance of your absence to be excused. Your grade will be penalized for being 10 minutes late or leaving
the class without justification 10 minutes or more before the end of the session. Two late arrivals equal one
unexcused absence and will result in a 10-point deduction of your final grade (or one letter grade). You cannot
pass the course if you miss 3 or more classes. If you know you will be late, please let me know ahead of time.
It is important that you are here and on time out of respect for our community. We also understand that
emergencies can arise, so we ask that you contact us directly about your absence if this happens (Pablo: 608-
931-1739; Alexis Bigelow: 301-943-7833). You will be asked to submit documentation (doctor's note, etc.) sothat the absence is excused. You are also expected to be fully present, read before class, and be prepared to
participate in class discussions. It is your responsibility to download the readings and have them available
before arriving to class so that you can have critical discussions with your classmates. You should not
download the readings during our class. Our seminar will consist of group discussions, pair work, and / or
small group collaboration. If you know from the beginning of the semester what day you have to miss class, let

us know in advance.

II. Group Facilitations - 15 points

Group facilitations consist of a team collaboration in which your group will plan a lesson and activity related
to the topic of the day for 20-25 minutes at the beginning of each class session. This is an opportunity for you
to analyze, discuss, and reflect on how the topic of the week is related to educational issues. You are required
to make an appointment with the course instructor to review ideas for your lesson. During this appointment,
you already need to have a description of your ideas, questions they want to discuss with their classmates, and
share with the instructors how you all have decided to divide the presentation among their group. You all can
be creative with their presentations, use different discussion and learning techniques, analyze music, art, movie
clips, discuss a podcast, connect with comments on social media or the news. These are just suggestions; you
have all the freedom to be creative. Just remember that the purpose of the presentation is not to give a
summary of the readings. The purpose of this exercise is to provide an opportunity to collaborate and co-
create a learning space where we critically think of the topics at hand. The first day of class you will choose
which topic and day you will present in a group during the semester. After your group presentation, you will
have two days to deliver a one-page reflection on your experience with your group, your fellow classmates, and
what they learned. The reflection is individual and will be delivered by Canvas.

III. Two Critical Reflections - 20 points

During the semester, you will write two critical reading reflection essays about your thoughts, ideas, questions,
and connections focusing on three readings. Each critical reading reflection essay is worth 10 points, which is
20% of your grade. Critical reading reflection essays should be NO LESS than 2 pages and NO MORE than 3
pages, double space in Times New Roman, size 12 pt. and include APA-style quotes. Your name, date, and
critical reflection number should be on the first page of your essay. Please refer to the Canvas format example
to make sure you meet the requirements. It is a requirement that you include and write about three
readings and write it from a critical perspective. You can include concepts related to the movies or
documentaries that we watch in class, but these are not part of the requirement to include the analysis of three
readings in each essay. Your critical reading reflection essay consists of the following:

1. Your critical reading reflection essay is not a summary of the readings. We want to know what you are
thinking, what your questions are, and how you are connecting broader ideas related to education.

2. Write a critical reading reflection essay from all three readings and include key arguments, themes, and
conceptual understandings. It may be that you discuss two to three topics that are similar within eachreading, or you connect the arguments that the authors make to expand the conversation. Be sure to

quote each reading.

3. Youcan include examples of your own experiences in schools or learning spaces. The following
questions are suggestions or an invitation you can consider when critically reflecting on your personal
reflection. (1) What questions do you have after reading the readings? (2) What questions were
answered when reading the readings? (3) Do these readings challenge or affirm your perspectives?
After reading the readings, what other ways of knowing and seeing the world are new or similar for
you? Explain with examples. (4) Before this course, have you learned about the topics presented in the
readings? Why or why not? (5) What impact do the ideas, arguments and themes presented have on
your own self-understanding of your identity? (6) Why is it important that teachers and people who
work with children and youth commit to learning and discussing these issues? (7) How have these

readings affected your thoughts about teaching, learning, and education?

IV. CANVAS Discussion Board - 10 points

There will be multiple times where we meet asynchronously on CANVAS. This means that you will not have
to be on Zoom that day but there will be a CANVAS discussion board that you will engage with. Each
CANVAS post is worth 2 points for a total of 10 points (meaning there are 5 CANVAS assignments). A
prompt will be posted on CANVAS (sometimes with a video, podcast, short article, etc.) in which you will
respond to directly. Your initial response will be 200-300 words. You will then respond to two of your
classmates’ posts with a response of 100-150 words. The CANVAS discussion will always close the day after
it was originally posted at 1pm. For example, if the CANVAS discussion board is open on June 20" at 1:00pm,
the discussion board will close on June 21" at 1pm. Please refer to the calendar below to see when these will be

happening.

V. Autobiographical-Educational Essay - 15 points

The Autobiographical-Educational essay will be a minimum of 3 pages and a maximum of 4 pages, double-
spaced in Times New Roman, size 12 points, and have citations in APA style if you are citing readings (citing
is not required for this essay). In this essay, you will write and reflect on your own educational experiences,
both within schools and outside of a school context. You will bring into the conversation your family
background, such as ethnic/racial heritage, 1m/migration stories, religious background, cultural practices, and /
or the work and educational history of your parents, grandparents, or family. It can also include your family's
socioeconomic class background and class-related experiences. An analysis of issues of gender, language,
migration processes, disability, and experiences in your life can also be included within this essay. It is
important to take the time to relate different aspects of your identity to your past, present, and future schooling
and educational experiences. So, we ask you to critically take into account the history of your family’s and
your educational experiences. For example: It is not enough to state that you are white (or Latinx, African
American, etc.), female (or transgender, etc.) and of middle (or working) class background — provide

critical context to your experiences and identities. (Will provide rubric on CANVAS)Questions to consider:

@ what does it mean to be a white female of middle-class background? When did you realize you were
white and how do you think that impacted your schooling experience? Were you treated different than
white boys, than people of color, than females of color? How did class impact your access to schools,
tutors, after school activities, summer programs, or international travel that aided in your educational
trajectory? How has your sexual identity and its intersection with other aspects of your identity
impacted your experience? If you were not aware of these aspects of your life and your identities, why
do you think you were not made aware of these explicitly? How might you have been learning about
these aspects of who you are implicitly? By what mediums (TV, internet, curriculum, family stories,
jokes about others, etc.) were you being shaped by about yourself and others?

Digital Creative Interruptions Project - 25 points

Pick an educational issue that concerns you (some examples include policing in schools, bilingual education,
standardized testing, community knowledges, and gentrification) and design a response. In designing a
response, consider the issue’s impacts within a particular context. While responses to these educational issues
might take a variety of forms such as community organizing and other forms of mobilizing change, in this
course you will design a creative response that is oriented towards seeking to illuminate certain issues in a
critical way. We will host a Final Project Digital RoundTable on 07/09 so that everyone is able to present for
5-minutes on their respective projects. Additionally, you will write a 300-word artist statement describing what
your project is, what format you chose, what particular issue you are presenting, and why you decided to
showcase it in the way you did. (Will provide rubric on CANVAS)

Creative Interruption Format: Your response can take any form. Some ideas include (but are not limited to):
short film, photo essay, zine, visual art-piece, short scripted play, game, website/blog, podcast, short fiction
story, children’s book, Instagram archive, detailed creative educational inquiry plan (at least 2 lessons), design
a community resource...the ideas are endless! Please send me an email about your idea for feedback before
beginning. I will also provide examples of previous projects.

Assignment Schedule

 

Due Date Assignment Total Points

Attendance and Participation (15%)

 

Attendance and Participation 15 points

Critical Reflections (20%)

06/12/20 @ 11:59 pm Critical Reflection # 1: Readings between 06/5 — 06/11 10 points06/29/20 @ 11:59 pm Critical Reflection # 2: Readings between 06/12 — 06/26 10 points
Autobiographical-Educational Essay (15%)
06/19/20 @ 11:59 pm Autobiographical-Educational Essay 15 points
CANVAS Discussion Board (10%)
CANVAS Board will be open for a full 24 hours from when
06/11; 6/17; 06/24; 06/27; 07/08 @ they open.
1:00pm NOTE: The due dates on the left reflect when they are to be 10 points
completed.
Group Facilitation (15%)
Based on set date @ 1pm Group Presentations (will choose dates on first day of class)
Two days before presenting Appointment with Instructor to review the lesson 15 point
points
Two days after presenting Individual reflection after group presentation
Creative Interruption Project (25%)
06/19 @ Spm Email instructor about Final Project idea
07/03 Final Project Workday (NO CLASS)
25 points
07/09 @lpm Final Project Roundtable. Projects Due
07/09 @5pm Artist Statement
Total Points: 100 points

 

 

Grading scale
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B +
83-86.9 points: B
80-81.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C +
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-60.9 points: D
Less than 60 points: FClass Schedule and Readings

 

Introduction
06/04

Introduction to the Course / Disrupting Single Stories

 

 

ee

Introductions
What is sociocultural learning?
Review the Syllabus

Sign up for Group Presentations

Class Expectations and Community Agreements

 

 

 

Dates Community Cultural Wealth and Funds of Knowledge
LJ Yosso, T. 2005. Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory discussion of community
06/05 cultural wealth. Race, Ethnicity, and Education, 8 (1), 69-91

06/09

Skim: Weiner, L. (2006). Challenging deficit thinking. Educational Leadership, 64(1), 42.

Moll et al., 1992. Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitative approach to connect
homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31 (2), 132-141

Tuck, E. (2009). Suspending damage: A letter to communities. Harvard Educational Review,
79 (3), 409-428.

Critical Race Theory and Curriculum Studies

 

Ladson-Billings, G. (1998). Just what is critical race theory and what's it doing in a nice field like

education?. International journal of qualitative studies in education, 11 (1), 7-24.

Au, W., Brown, AL, and Calderon, D. (2016). Chapter 1, pp. 1-17. In Reclaiming the
Multicultural Roots of US Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official Knowledge in
Education. New York: Teachers College Press.

 

 

 

Critical Race Theory, Interest Convergence, Brown vs. Board of Education

Ladson-Billings, G. (2006). From the achievement gap to the education debt: Understanding

achievement in US schools. Educational researcher, 35 (7), 3-12.J Ladson-Billings, G. (2004). Landing on the Wrong Note: The Price we paid for Brown.
Educational Researcher, 33 (7), 3-13

Black Education, Black Power, #BlackLivesMatter, and Black Abolition

Au, W., Brown, AL, and Calderon, D. (2016). Chapter 5, pp. 114-145. In Reclaiming the
Multicultural Roots of US Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official Knowledge in
Education. New York: Teachers College Press

 

Love, B. L. (2019). Introduction, pp 1-16. We want to do more than survive: Abolitionist
teaching and the pursuit of educational freedom. Beacon Press.

 

Wun, C. (2016). Against captivity: Black girls and school discipline policies in the afterlife of
slavery. Educational Policy, 30: 171-196.

Davis, AY (2016). Freedom is a constant struggle: Ferguson, Palestine, and the foundations of a
movement. Haymarket Books. (91-110)

 

Disrupting the Colonial Project of Education and Indigenous History
A CANVAS Discussion Board

LJ Au, W., Brown, AL, and Calderon, D. (2016). Chapter 2, pp. 18-45. In
06/16 Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of US Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official
Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College Press

Optional: Villenas, S. (1996). The colonizer / colonized Chicana ethnographer: Identity, marginalization,
and co-optation in the field. Harvard educational review, 66 (4), 711-732.

 

LJ Tuhiwai Smith, L. 2001. Ch. 3. Colonizing Knowledges. In Decolonizing Methodologies. (pp. 61-

78)
06/17

] Grande, S. (2015). Ch.1. Pedagogy Network: Native American social and political thought.
Rowman & Littlefield. (pp. 15-34)

 

 

10The Earth, Place, and the Environment

Bang, M., Curley, L., Kessel, A., Marin, A., Suzukovich III, ES, & Strack, G. (2014). Muskrat
theories, tobacco in the streets, and living Chicago as Indigenous land. Environmental Education
Research, 20 (1), 37-55.

Guest Speaker: Judith Landeros, PhD Student in Cultural Studies in Education, Art and
Community Pedagogue

Styres, S. (2018). Literacies of land: Decolonizing narratives, storying, and literature. In
Indigenous and Decolonizing Studies in Education (pp. 24-37). Routledge.

Skim: Simpson, L. B. (2014). Land as pedagogy: Nishnaabeg intelligence and rebellious
transformation. Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society, 3(3), 1-25.

 

 

Designed Re-Segregation, Power, and Whiteness

 

(] DiAngelo, R. (2015). White fragility: Why it’s so hard to talk to White people about racism. The
Good Men Project. 1-4

J Busch, A. (2013). Building “A City of Upper-Middle-Class Citizens” Labor Markets,
Segregation, and Growth in Austin, Texas, 1950-1973. Journal of Urban History, 39(5), 975-996.

06/22

LI Torres, R. et al. (2013). Building Austin, building justice: Immigrant construction workers,
precarious labor regimes and social citizenship. Geoforum, 45, 145-155

 

 

Gender, Sexuality, and Heteronormativity
AI CANVAS Discussion Board

LJ Garcia, L. (2009). “Now Why do you want to know about that?””: Heteronormativity, sexism,

and racism in the sexual (Mis) education of Latina youth. Gender and Society, 23: 4, 520-541

 

 

11J Moreno, S. (2019). Love as Resistance: Exploring Conceptualizations of Decolonial Love in
Settler States. Girlhood Studies, 12(3), 116-133.

 

 

Diaspora, Pan-Ethnic Latinidades, and Educational Experiences in the US

 

06/25

LJ Au, W., Brown, AL, and Calderon, D. (2016). Chapter 4, pp. 80-113. In Reclaiming the
Multicultural Roots of US Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official Knowledge in
Education. New York: Teachers College Press.

 

06/26

 

LJ Sawyer, MQ, & Paschel, TS (2007). “We didn't cross the color line, the color line crossed us”:
Blackness and Immigration in the Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, and the United States. Du
Bois Review: Social Science Research on Race, 4 (2), 303-315.

LJ Alberto, L. (2017). Coming out as Indian: On being Indigenous Latina in the US. Latino Studies,
15: 247-253

 

6/29

LJ Unrrieta Jr, L., & Calderén, D. (2019). Critical Latinx Indigeneities: Unpacking Indigeneity from
Within and Outside of Latinized Entanglements. Association of Mexican American Educators
Journal, 13 (2), 145-174.

LJ Skim: Boj Lopez, F. (2017). Mobile archives of indigeneity: Building La Comunidad Ixim
through organizing in the Maya diaspora. Latino Studies, 15: 201-218.

 

Carceral Systems and Undocumented Students

 

LJ Stovall, D. (2018). Are we ready for ‘school’ abolition?: Thoughts and practices of radical
imaginary in education. Taboo: The Journal of Culture and Education, 17(1), 6.

] Lopez, C. B. (2016). Lessons from the Educational Borderlands: Documenting the Pedagogies of

Migration of Chicana/o, Latina/o Undocumented Immigrant Students and Households. AMAE
Journal, 10(1), 80-106.

_] Guest Speaker: Griselda Madrigal, Professor at Santa Rosa Junior College

 

12The Educational Experiences of Asians and Asian-Americans in the US

 

LJ Au, W., Brown, AL, and Calderon, D. (2016). Chapter 3, pp. 46-79. In Reclaiming the
Multicultural Roots of US Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official Knowledge in
Education. New York: Teachers College Press.

 

07/02
LI Ngo, B. (2017). The Costs of "Living the Dream" for Hmong Immigrants: The Impact of
Subtractive Schooling on Family and Community, Educational Studies, 53 (5), 450-467.
07/03 _] NOCLASS! Please take the time to work on your final projects.

 

Language, Dis / ability, and Racialization

Kohli, R., & Solérzano, DG (2012). Teachers, please learn our names !: Racialmicroaggressions
and the K-12 classroom. Race Ethnicity and Education, 15 (4), 441-462.

Anzaldua, G. (1987). How to tame a wild tongue. Borderlands / La Frontera. 33-45

 

Annamma, SA, Connor, D., & Ferri, B. (2013). Dis / ability critical race studies (DisCrit):
Theorizing at the intersections of race and dis / ability. Race Ethnicity and Education, 16 (1), 1-31

 

 

Re (narrating) intimacies, healing, and our relationships

 

(] Figueroa, YC (2015). Reparation as transformation: Radical literary (re) imaginings of futurities
07/08 through decolonial love. Decolonization: Indigeneity, Education & Society, 4 (1)

 

 

13