ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

‘eet The University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business

Department of Accounting
ACC 311 -- Fundamentals of Financial Accounting

Summer 2020 Syllabus
Instructor: Jesse Chan
E-mail: Jesse.Chan@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office: See Canvas for Zoom link
Office Hours: Monday-Thursday 8:30AM-9:30AM, by appointment
Unique #: 71010
Class Time: Monday-Thursday 10:00AM-12:00PM
Class Location: See Canvas for Zoom link

Why should you take this class?

The goal of this class is to equip you with a working knowledge of the fundamental
components of financial accounting. Financial accounting enables organizations to
communicate their economic activities and transactions to outside groups. Therefore,
this class is important for anyone interested in learning how to understand or
evaluate the economic activities of organizations, not just those wishing to pursue
accounting-related careers.

Objectives of the course: To learn the following:

A. The process of preparing succinct financial statement information from a mass
of individual transaction level data

B. A working knowledge of how to read and interpret financial statements

C. How decision-makers use accounting information to make internal and external
investment decisions

Prerequisite:

The prerequisite for this course is twenty-four semester hours of (prior) college
credit. If you do not satisfy this prerequisite, you should drop ACC 311, or the
Office of the Dean of Undergraduate Programs will drop you from the course.
Instructors may not waive this prerequisite for this course.

Required Materials and Equipment:

e Textbook: Financial Accounting, 10th Edition, by Libby, Libby, and Hodge,
(ISBN: 9781260936087, McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2020).
o Note: Connect access is not required.
o You are free to purchase the print copy or the eBook. The eBook
can be purchased directly from the publisher here:ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

https://www.mheducation.com/highered/product/financial-

accounting-libby-libby/M978 1259964947 html#textbookCollapse
o You are free to purchase an older edition if you would like.

However, all solutions, textbook homework, and page numbers
correspond to the 10" edition and you will be responsible for
mapping between editions.

Accounting Cycle Supplement: Solid Footing: Building an Accounting
Foundation, 12th edition, by Dan Wiegand, (ISBN: 9780997381283, Micro
Solve Inc.). This is a textbook with accompanying software and files.
o Anelectronic version (recommended) with everything you need for
the class can be purchased here: http://solidfootingaccounting.com/

Calculator: A financial calculator is required for this course. Note that the
department does not allow graphing calculators or other calculators with text
memory during exams. A financial calculator is one that has dedicated keys for
convenience in working problems involving the time-value of money. The keys
typically are labeled N (number of periods), I/Yr (required interest rate per
period), PV (present value), PMT (payment per period), and FV (single future
payment amount). If you already have such a calculator, you do not need to buy a
new one. However, if you do not already have such a calculator, you should buy
an HP 10bII+. This calculator is recommended by both the accounting and
finance faculty of the McCombs School of Business.

Computer: A reliable computer with a web camera, microphone, and speakers is
required to access the course lectures, Canvas pages, and quizzes. Some quizzes
and examinations may use Proctorio, a remote proctoring software that is the
official solution for proctoring at the University of Texas-Austin. Proctorio has
some system requirements. Please visit https://proctorio.com/system-requirements
for details about the minimum capabilities required to use Proctorio reliably.
While this course is designed to accommodate Windows and Mac-based personal
computers, you are responsible for making sure you have the necessary tools to
successfully complete the course.

Internet Connection: Please make sure you have access to a reliable wired or
wireless internet connection.

Optional Supplemental Materials

Supplemental Textbook: The Accounting Game: Basic Accounting Fresh from
the Lemonade Stand by Darrell Mullis and Judith Orloff ISBN: 9781402211867,
Sourcebooks Inc., 2008).
o Note: New and Used copies are available from your preferred online or
retail bookseller (e.g., Amazon, Barnes & Noble, BookPeople)
o. This book presents an additional supplement to Solid Footing for
understanding the basics of the accounting cycle. We may reference someACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

information from this text during the class, but owning a copy is not
required for keeping up with the course materials.
e Supplemental Readings: Wall Street Journal, The Economist, and Financial
Times are all excellent publications that regularly publish articles about
accounting-related topics.

Course Policies

As college students, you should naturally have incentives to learn and excel in this class.
Future classes will build on the knowledge you develop here, and thus the benefits of
investing substantial time and energy in this course will pay large dividends in your
future upper level Business courses. The most important rule in this class is that you
should never distract your classmates or disrupt their opportunity to learn in this class.

Accounting 311 is a fast-paced class where each chapter builds on prior material.
Attendance and participation are therefore paramount to fully understanding the topic and
success in the course. Of course, life happens—if you arrive late for class, please
minimize your disruptions and join the Zoom meeting with your audio muted. If you
cannot attend a scheduled lecture or breakout session, lecture recordings (but not
breakout sessions) will be available after class. However, there will be no opportunities to
make up any missed quizzes. Our course grader will monitor attendance. However,
please direct all course questions to me and not the course grader.

In addition, I will post the recordings of all lecture sessions to Canvas so you can always
review previous lectures and content.

Course Format
The format of this course is organized around the following model:
1. Students read the new material before class to develop an initial understanding of

the content
2. The instructor discusses the new material during the class videos

3. The students practice by completing the related in-class examples

4. The instructor and students review the solution to the examples during the class
videos.

5. Students and the instructor review challenging topics during the breakout sessions
(Weeks 2 and beyond).

Following the first day of class, pleas ensure that: 1) you can view the class site on
Canvas, 2) the email account you use is correctly recorded in the UT-Austin registrar
system, and 3) that you have been able to successfully complete the Proctorio sample
quiz to ensure the remote proctoring tool can run smoothly on your device.

In case you are unable to access the Canvas site, let me know so I can provide you access.
Given the fast-paced nature of the course and the short length, you should check your
email and Canvas accounts at least once per day. I will send any outside-of-classACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

announcements (e.g., corrections or clarifications of in-class topics, syllabus changes) via
Canvas and post the information as a Canvas announcement. I will try to post / message
any announcements or new materials by 5:00pm every day.

I have organized this class differently from a traditional, in-person class. The
tentative plan for the course is for all materials prior to the first exam to be a ‘live’
format. A ‘live’ format is closest in nature to an in-person class. We will meet during our
scheduled meeting time in our Zoom meeting room and I will present the material ‘live’
in real-time, pausing for questions from the audience and to work through example
problems. Expect to be present during the entire 2-hour period of class during this first
week. The course grader, who will be present during class and act as a moderator for
questions, may take attendance for our records.

After the first exam, the format of the course will change. The format after the first exam
relies on the following model:

e After the first week, students will sign up for a breakout group for each session.
Each breakout group has a designated meeting time during class hours. These
breakout groups vary in duration from 30 minutes to | hour based on day and
content.

e Iwill post pre-recorded videos of the topics.

o I will post videos for the next day by 10:00am Central Daylight Time the
day before the date listed on the schedule.

o For example, I will post the content planned for June 16 no later than
June 15 at 10:00am.

e As students, I expect you to view the videos, which are approximately 60-90
minutes in length, before attending the breakout group.

o For example, I expect you to have viewed the video content for June 16
before we meet for breakout groups on June 16.

e During the breakout sessions, we will use this time to review especially
confusing concepts for the smaller group, helping each other understand the new
material. Note the course grader may continue to take attendance.

e On quiz days, we will still meet in our breakout groups. All students will take
the quiz at the same time during the scheduled class time, with exact times
announced later.

e On exam days, we will not meet in our breakout groups and all students will take
the exam during the scheduled class time.

Supplemental materials available on Canvas

=" Certain Homework Solutions

= Lecture notes (I will post electronic copies to Canvas before class so you can
follow along and add your own notes during class or when you view the course
videos)

= Sample 311 Midterm ExamsACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

Homework

To supplement the assigned readings, there are two types of homework in the course,
Solid Footing homework and textbook homework.

Solid Footing Homework

During the first two weeks of the course, you will be learning about the accounting cycle,
the process with which companies capture transaction data, record them, summarize them
and transform them into financial statements that conform to Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP). It is essential that every student develop a solid
understanding and ability to do accounting cycle tasks because these accomplishments
are the foundation for learning the remaining content of the course. Accordingly, the
department faculty adopted Solid Footing, a semi-interactive tool for learning the
accounting cycle and statement of cash flows. It is meant to present, reinforce and test
progress in the accounting cycle in a way that leads to more consistent and deeper
understanding among our students, leading to less attrition and disappointing grades in
ACC 311. To be sure that all students keep up with the lessons during this phase of the
course, Solid Footing homework assignments must be turned in and graded.
Although you are welcome to work on Solid Footing assignments with classmates, I
encourage you to work through the problems individually before working together.
Ultimately, you will be tested on the material, so homework assignments are an excellent
opportunity to find out what you do and do not know and to ask questions about what you

do not know. The attached class schedule contains the assignments and the dates on

which they must be uploaded before the beginning of class. If you need help, please
come see me (virtually) in office hours or by appointment before the due date. I will ask

you to describe what you have attempted and what the issue is and we will work together
from there.

Textbook Homework

I have assigned textbook homework from the chapters we cover. Like the Solid Footing

homework, students should complete the textbook homework outside of class. Textbook
homework problems are neither submitted nor graded. If you need any help, please come
see me. The solutions for these questions will be available on Canvas.

Quizzes

During the semester, there will be 6 quizzes administered through Canvas. The quiz times
and windows will be announced during class and on Canvas. Tentative quiz dates are
listed on the attached Class Schedule. The quizzes will be similar to homework problems
and examples covered in class, and are not meant to be cumulative. However, course
content tends to build on prior content, and thus mastering the early content is critical to
understanding later content. There will be no make-up quizzes. However, to
accommodate any unforeseen circumstances during the semester, I will drop your lowest
quiz score. If you cannot take a quiz during the prescribed window, your grade will be

zero for that particular quiz. You will not be able to take a quiz at any time other than the
originally planned time. Quizzes will be open notes and open book, but keep in mind that
I have designed the quizzes with this format in mind.ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

The main reason for quizzes is to help you keep up with the textbook readings, course
materials, and homework problems. Quizzes also help me understand which topics are
more challenging for the class as a whole. Quizzes let me know if I should discuss certain
concepts and areas in class again to help improve your understanding of the material.
Once I collect a quiz, I will post solutions to Canvas in addition to spending the first 5-10
minutes of the next breakout sessions discussing the solutions after releasing your graded
quiz to you. This is why I cannot allow make-up quizzes.

Gradin uestions or Appeals

For all graded assignments except for the final exam, I will accept requests for re-grades.
To request a re-grade, you must submit a written request to me within one week from the
date the grade is posted on Canvas or the graded item is redistributed back to the class
(whichever is earlier). A copy of the graded original must accompany the request for a re-
grade. The request must state the area of dispute, your recommendation for a change in
grade, and an explanation or justification for your recommendation.

Note that with a request for re-grade, I will re-grade the entire assignment. This means
that over the course of re-grading your assignment, I may encounter accidentally
overlooked issues that result in a deduction of points if corrected. To maximize the
accuracy of the re-grade, I will make all corrections required to arrive at an accurate
grade for the assignment. This means that after a re-grade, your grade on that assignment
may increase, remain the same, or decrease. All regrades are final.

Office Hours

I highly encourage each of you to take advantage of my regularly scheduled office hours
to discuss problems and seek assistance when needed throughout the semester. I would
like to talk to each of you individually at least once during the semester for 15-30
minutes. If you cannot make it to my regularly scheduled office hours, please schedule an
individual appointment with me.

In an effort to make the class as successful as possible for all students, please provide me
feedback on how the course is going and how you feel you are doing in the course. I can
make this class more successful if I hear from you about the parts of the class that are
working and the parts that are not working. I welcome your feedback during office hours
and via e-mail. I understand that providing upward feedback can be very stressful. During
the semester, I will also distribute anonymous surveys for each of you to fill out and
provide feedback on how the course is going.

Personal Electronic Equipment Policy

Although I discourage the use of personal electronic devices aside from the device used
to join the Zoom class sessions because they may introduce additional distractions, I
recognize that the most effective form of learning may differ across students. Just
because I found personal electronic devices not helpful for my own purposes as a student
does not mean they are not helpful for others. I ask that you exercise good judgment and
discretion in using additional personal electronic devices.ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

Zoom Access Policies

e Jam requiring you to enter the Zoom meeting sessions using your UT EID
associated Zoom account. This will allow you to join the sessions without waiting
in the waiting room.

e Please enter our meeting sessions with your video turned on and microphones
muted.

e Although we will adopt a casual atmosphere in our meetings, please remember
this is still a professional setting and we should all conduct ourselves
professionally. I reserve the right to remove students not exhibiting professional
conduct from our Zoom meetings.

Course Assessment

Semester grades will be determined using the following factors and relative weights:

Assignment Weight Number of Points

Exam | 25% 100
Exam 2 25% 100

 

Cumulative Final Exam

In-Class Quizzes (Best 5 out 20%
of 6)

Solid Footing Homework

Total 100% 400

 

 

Final grades will be set such that the class average will be approximately 3.0-3.2 (where
3.0 = B and 3.333 = B+). No letter grades will be associated with scores on exams or
quizzes during the semester. At the end of the semester, I will calculate composite scores
and assign grades in accordance with the above guidelines. I may curve the final grades if
necessary based on the class average and the academic standards of the course. There will
be no opportunity to raise your course grade through ‘extra credit’ work during or after
the end of the semester. While the above structure does not explicitly factor attendance in
grades, my experience has been that students who attend regularly and minimize other
distractions during class (e.g., phone notifications, side conversations, reading the
newspaper) tend to perform better than those who do not.

Separately, if you earn at least 240 of the 400 (60%) points available for the course, I will
award at least a C for the course. If you earn less than 240 of the 600 points available
(239.999 or below), I may award an F for the course.

Examinations

There will be three exams in this course: two midterm examinations and a comprehensive
final examination. All three exams will be individually completed exams administered
through Canvas. The two midterms (Exam | and Exam 2) are not cumulative. However,
the nature of financial accounting is such that material you learned for Exam 1 will help
with your understanding with the material for Exam 2, although they may not necessarily
be explicitly tested. The final examination will be cumulative in nature. The dates for theACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

exams are on the attached Class Schedule.

In life, there are often legitimate reasons a student cannot attend an examination (or other
important meeting) at the originally scheduled times. In such circumstances, you should
inform me of your circumstances and I will determine if a make-up examination is
appropriate. If I deem a make-up examination appropriate, I will schedule the make-up
exam for within 2 days of the original scheduled exam time. If I deem a make-up
examination appropriate but I cannot schedule a make-up examination for logistical
reasons only, I will reweigh your final to include the weights of both your missed exam
and the final exam.

This policy also applies to the final exam, although I cannot reweigh final exams. If I
deem a make-up exam appropriate for the final exam but I cannot schedule a make-up
final within 2 days of the originally scheduled final, we will schedule the make-up final
exam for a date prior to the originally scheduled date.

Instructor Discretion

Instructor discretion may include (but is not limited to) announced or unannounced
quizzes (in or out of class), quizzes on Canvas, participation, extra homework, or other
course adjustments. If I choose to make such adjustment. I will also post the altered
course assessment incorporating the new assignments at the time the adjustment 1s
announced.

Dropping the Course

Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who stops
attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a grade of F. Consult the
Academic Calendar on the Registrar’s website (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for
specific deadlines.

Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas

A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must
inform students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster:
Since Fall 2001, web-based, password-protected class sites have been available for all
accredited courses taught at The University. Class e-mail rosters are a component of the
sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters
must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building,
Room 1. For information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html = Privacy in
Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that I
will use a merged Canvas site for all sections of the course that I am teaching this
semester. This will allow students in other sections to see that you are enrolled in the
course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn
your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you
have any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your
name from view of other students.ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

Quantitative Reasoning Flag
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are

designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of
quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of
quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.

Students with Disabilities

Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.

Diversity and Inclusion

It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives are well
served by this course, that students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the
diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as
a resource, strength, and benefit. Please let me know right away if this ever is not the
case.

Religious Holy Days

By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty

The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty.
The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have
agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class,
you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the
application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments 1s
unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and
the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutesACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020
scholastic dishonesty.

Campus Safety
Although we are conducting this course remotely, please remember to exercise good

judgment in the event of an emergency occurring in your physical location.

For students who may be residing on campus during the summer session or using
campus as a source of reliable internet access, please note the following key
recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of Campus
Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.

e Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
required to evacuate buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated.

e Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy.

e If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.

e In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors.

e Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or
fire authorities.

Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.

In case of emergency, further information will be available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.

10ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

The University of Texas at Austin Department of Accounting

Schedule for ACC 311--Fundamentals of Financial Accounting, Summer 2020

Optional Text Book Problems to Complete After Class

Day LLH Chapter Exercises Problems
Introduction, Financial Statements and Business

Decisions Q1-3,5,6,8,11,12,13,14,15,17,18 E1-1,2,3,5,6,7,9,11
Investing and Financial Decisions and the

Accounting System Q2-2,3,5,8,11,12 E2-1,2,3,4,6,8,9,11,14
Solid Footing 1-1, 2-1 due before class

Operating Decisions and the Accounting Statement Q3-4,5,6,7,8,9,10 E3-2,3,4,5,8,10,11,12 P3-2,3,4,5
Solid Footing 3-1, 4-1, 5-1 due before class
Adjustments, Financial Statements, and the Quality
of Earnings Q4-1,2,3,4,9,10,11,12 E4-3,4,9,11,12,18,19,20,21,22 P4-2,4,6

Solid Footing 7-1, 7-2, 7-3 due before class
Review for Exam 1

Exam 1 (Chapters 1-4)
Communicating and Interpreting Accounting
5 Information Q5-1,2,3 EE5-8,10,11,12,17,18

Reporting and Interpreting Sales Revenue,

Receivables, and Cash Q6-1,3,4,5,7,8,9,10 E6-3,4,5,6,7,8,9,12,16 P6-1,2
Continued, Reporting and Interpreting Cost of

Goods Sold and Inventory, Quiz 1 Q7-8,9,10,11 E7-3,5,6,8,9,12,14,18 P7-2,3,4,5,6

4
=

 

<

oof

 

=

4
=

 

=

a <=

4
=

6,7
7

<

continued

Reporting and Interpreting PP&E; Intangibles; and
Natural Resources, Quiz 2 Q8-4,5,6,7,14,15,16 E8-2,3,4,6,9,11,12,24 P8-2

Continued E8-13,15,16,17 P8-3,5,7,10,11

= io

 

4
=

Reporting and Interpreting Liabilities, Quiz 3 Q9-1,5,6,8,9,10,11,12,13,14,16 E9-1,4,5,6,8,10,12,13,16,23,24 P9-2,3,4,6,11,12,14
Continued, Reporting and Interpreting Bond
Securities Q10-1,3,5,6,7,9,10,11,12 E10-3,4,6,7,8,10,11,12,15,16,17 P10-1,3,59,10

oO
ay
oO

 

b
oO

Continued, Quiz 4

Review for Exam 2 eo
Exam 2 (Chapters 6-10) eo
11 Reporting and Interpreting Stockholders' Equity Q11-1,3,4,6,7,8,9,10,11,12 E11-3,4,5,6,9,18,19,21,22,23 P11-2,3,8,9

11,12 Continued, Statement of Cash Flows, Quiz 5 Q12-2,3,6,9,10,11,12,13 E12-1,3,4,5,6,8,9,10,11,16,17,19,22 P12-1,2,3

Continued, Quiz 6
Review for Final Exam

Cumulative Final Exam ee ee

b
N

 

 

mn