fSTA 371G
Statistics and Modeling
Unique Number 71595/71598

PROFESSOR
Betsy Greenberg
Hours: M - Th 1:30-2:30 pm, Saturday 1-3 pm or by appointment
Phone: 471-1756
E-mail: betsy.greenberg@utexas.edu

TEACHING ASSISTANTS

Holden Archer Michelle Chahda
Email: holdenarcher1@gmail.com Email: michellechahda24@gmail.
Hours: M-Th and Sunday 7-9 pm Hours: M-Th 3-5 pm and Friday 10-noon

OFFICE HOURS are on Zoom
TEXTBOOK

REQUIRDED: MyStatLab for Business Statistics, 4th Edition, by Sharpe, De
Veaux, and Velleman. You can use the book and access code or just MSL and
the e-book. If you’ve already used MSL for STA 309, you should not
have to pay to register.

GRADING
Tests 50%
Project 25%
Homework 15%
Participation 5%
Reading quizzes 5%

COURSE DESCRIPTION

Business decisions are made under uncertainty. This course provides tools for
dealing with uncertainty. Upon completion of the course you should be able to
apply decision analysis techniques, use regression analysis, and simulation
modeling. This course is designed to present applications for these techniques
and to deal with topics that prove most helpful to those involved in business.

This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning
courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for
understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter
in your adult and professional life.

PREREQUISITES

The following prerequisites are enforced for this class: Management
Information Systems 301 or 310; Mathematics 408D, 408L, or 408M; Statistics309 or 309H; and credit or registration for Business Administration 324 or
324H. I am not able to make exceptions to prerequisites. Students are
expected to be familiar with elementary statistics.

COMPUTING

As this course is online, you will need a reliable internet connection and a
computer with a camera, speakers, and microphone. Headphones can be used
(and you may prefer them anyway) if you don’t have working speakers or
microphone.

The practice of statistics requires extensive numerical calculations. We will
use R, a powerful, state of-the-art statistical software platform, for statistical
computing in this course. R is frequently used by practitioners and being able
to use R to do statistical analysis is a valuable (and marketable) skill. No prior
knowledge of R is needed; we will teach you all you need to know.

CLASS PARTICIPATION

We will be using the Learning Catalytics (included with MyStatLab) system for
class participation. You may answer Learning Catalytics questions using any
device with a web browser including your computer or phone. Your class
participation grade will be determined from the responses that you provide
whether you are watching live or recorded lectures. Learrning Catalytics
questions in a self-test format will be available until the next live class starts.
During lectures you may also use the “Ask a Question” button or the class chat.

HOMEWORK

Homework assignments will be posted on MyStatLab. All are due on the due
date by 11:59 pm. The homework assignments are designed to give you
practice with the course material. It is recommended that students work on
assignments independently.

You may open an assignment (and even print it out) several times before
submitting your answers. Assignments must be completed by midnight on
their due dates. It is recommended that you do not wait until the last minute
to complete assignments. This will allow for any unexpected difficulties (with
the material, website, software etc.).

READING

This course will be taught in a “flipped” model, which means that we will not
cover all of the material during lecture. Instead, you'll do the relevant reading
before class and complete a short pre-class assignment. This way, we can
spend more time in class on what you find challenging and less time on the
easy stuff. An average score of 75% will be counted as full credit for Reading
Quizzes. Reading quizzes are due by 7 pm the evening before the start of a
new chapter.WEB PAGE hitp://canvas.utexas.edu

This course will use a password-protected class web site. Syllabi, slides,
assignments, and other resources will be available within this site. Site
activities will include submission of assignments and posting of grades.
Registration and access to MyStatLab is through Canvas.

TESTS

Tests for this class will be given on June 22 and July 6. Each test is worth 25%
of your grade. You will access the tests through Canvas with Proctorio and
have R available for computation. You may take the test during the 10 am
class time (when I am available to answer questions) or at your convenience
as long as the test is submitted by 11:59 on the test day.

PROJECT

The course project will offer focused hands-on activities in the statistics-based
research process using regression modeling with real world data. You will
develop skills in 1) generating testable hypotheses; 2) conducting a literature
review and understanding the statistical tests used in previous research; 3)
understanding large data sets; 4) formatting and managing data in order to
perform § statistical analyses; 5) conducting descriptive and_ inferential
analyses; and 6) reporting and interpreting results.

You will also be required to do peer grading (using Peergrade.io) of projects
submitted by your classmates and submit a feedback survey after the project
is complete.

SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY

The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic
dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to
scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement
on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-
Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty
responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have
agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If
the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its
assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic
brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should
refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration
on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.Examples of scholastic dishonesty in this course include: copying or
collaborating during an exam, discussing or divulging the contents of an exam
with another student who will take the test, the use of assignment solutions
from another student or semester or violations of scientific integrity such as
data fabrication, selective reporting, omission, Suppression or distortion.

NON-ACADMEIC RESOURCES

Students with Disabilities, The University of Texas at Austin provides upon
request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities (including learning disabilities). For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259. Please provide proper
documentation from the SSD Office at the beginning of the term.

Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL), Counseling, and the Mental Health
Center Crisis (MHCC) line: College can be pretty stressful and sometimes we
need a little help. Luckily, we have a wealth of resources and dedicated people
ready to assist you.

- If you are experiencing a mental health crisis (depression, anxiety, e.g.)
call the MHCC line at 512-471-CALL (2255). Call even if you aren’t sure
you're in a full-blown crisis, but sincerely need help. Staff are there to help
you.

¢- Ifyou have a behavioral concern about someone else and need some advice
on what to do, you may call BCAL at 512-232-5050 to talk with someone
about it. The call is confidential, and you decide how much information
you'd like to share.

¢ Of course, if you feel the behavior requires immediate attention, (e.g.
person is of harm to self or you feel threatened), call 911 directly.

Personal or Family Emergencies: If you experience a personal or family
emergency (death in the family, protracted sickness, serious mental health
issues) that prevents you from attending an exam or forces you to miss
multiple days of class, you should contact Student Emergency Services in the
Office of the Dean of Students. They will work with you to communicate with
your professors and let them know of your situation.

Religious Observances: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of observance of
a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.Date

June 4
June 8*

June 9*

June 10*
June 11

June 15*

June 16*

June 17*
June 18

June 22

June 23*
June 24

June 25*
June 29

June 30*

July 1*

July 2*
July 6
July 7*
July 8*

July 9*

TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE

Topic

Introduction
Probability Review

Making Decisions
Value of Information
Review of Inference

Linear Regression

Inference for Regression
Test 1

Checking Assumptions

Multiple Regression

Building Regression
Models

Logistic Regression

Time Series
Test 2

Problems with P-values
Testing and Training

Simulation

Reading
Chapters 5-7
Sections 24.1-24.4
Sections 24.5-24.6
Chapter 11, 12

Chapter 4
Project: Proposal

Chapter 16

Sections 17.1-17.4, 17.6-17.7

Project: Literature Review
Sections 18.1-18.5

Chapter 19

Section 18.6 plus
online reading

Project: Exploratory Data
Analysis

Section 17.5, Chapter 20

Reading posted online
Reading posted online

Reading posted online

Project: Final presentation

Assignment

Due Dates

HW 1
June 9

HW 2
June 11

HW 3
June 15

HW 4
June 18

June 19

HW 5
June 21

HW 6
June 25

June 26

HW 7
June 30

HW 8
July 2

July 3

HW 9
July 5

HW 10
July 9

July 10