Urban Cultures Summer IT 2020
ANT F345C (78545), M-F, 1-2:30pm

Dr. John Hartigan Tel.232-9201; johnhartigan@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours (SAC 4.158): by appointment.

Overview: The city is one of humanity’s most profound and unwieldy inventions. This
course surveys the culture of cities, exploring their historical development and their
current dynamism. Our perspective will encompass the great global cities as well as
major urban areas in the United States. We will frame the urban experience from a
number of perspectives, examining the distinctive forms of expressive culture, ethnic and
racial conflict, and political or economic activity that cities generate. Students will gain
an understanding of the powerful impact of new technologies, immigration, and
gentrification on how cities grow and decline. There is a strong experiential learning
component to this course; students will design and conduct mini-ethnographic projects on
cultural dynamics here in Austin.

Dynamics: Through lectures, readings, and discussions, students will acquire an
informed perspective on urbanism and be introduced to the methods and theories that
anthropologists rely upon in analyzing urban settings. Lectures will frame the numerous
dimensions that inform city life, while presenting students with a means of thinking
synthetically about these complex interrelations. The readings feature a range of
disciplinary perspectives on the culture of cities, but we will also develop a sustained
attention to the work of urban ethnographers. Two exams will test your comprehension of
basic dynamics, key concepts, and critical historical developments related to urbanism.
Then a final digital ethnographic project will allow you to pull all the strands of the
course together in an applied, practice-based approach to a topic of your interest.

Grading and Course Requirements:

1) Two exams = 25% each.

2) One ethnographic project (12 pages) = 40%

3) Daily writing (paragraph summaries of topics from the readings) and class
participation (engaging in discussions of readings & lectures) = 10%

4) Attendance in daily Zoom sessions is required; if you are unable to attend a session,
please inform me immediately of the circumstances.

Required Texts:

Rethinking Urban Parks: Public Space and Cultural Diversity, Setha Low et al.
Triumph of the City, Edward Glaeser

Barrio Dreams: Puerto Ricans, Latinos, and the Neoliberal City, Arlene Davila.

Online Resources:
AnthroSource [UT Library, database] https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary. wiley.com/

City & Society: http://sunta.org/publications/city-society/

New Geography: http://www.newgeography.com/

City Lab (Atlantic) http://www.citylab.com/

Cities Project (NPR) http://www.npr.org/series/155914958/npr-citiesClass Schedule:

June 4: Introduction.

June 5: Anthropology of the City:

Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks, Chp 1; On the Plaza, Chps 1 & 2; “Cultura in the
Modern City”; Barrio Dreams, Introduction; and Triumph, Introduction.

The Origin and Design of Cities.

June 8: Origins of Cities and Urban Design pt 1

Readings: Triumph, Chp 1; “Craving for Public Spaces,” and “Forced Out, Evicted
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/02/08/forced-out ; https://evictionlab.org/
Assignment: Identify a potential site of social inquiry, physical or digital. Post to Canvas.
June 9: Urban Design pt 2: Grids and plazas.

Readings: On the Plaza, chp.4-5

 

The Industrial and Post-Industrial City.

June 10: Industrial City, pt. 1: European origins

Readings: Engles, “Working Class Manchester”; Triumph, pgs 135-136 & 152-157.
Assignment: Identify an article focused on urban contexts/dynamics in an anthropology
journal. Post a summary to Canvas.

June 11: Industrial City, pt. 2 Segregation and the inner city

Readings: The Triumph, Chps. 2-3, and Warner, “The Segregated City”; “How Racism
Takes Place,” Lipsitz.

June 12: The Post Industrial City

Readings: The Triumph, Chp. 6-7; Harvey, “Time-Space Compression and the
Postmodern Condition”; “LA as Postmodern,” Dear & Flusty.

June 15: Urban Ethnography

Readings: Kelley, “Looking for the REAL ‘Nigga’”; Goode, “How Urban Ethnography
Counters Myths about the Poor’.

June 16: Infrastructure.

Readings: “Designing Urban Democracy: Mapping Scales of Urban Identity,” and
“Water Wars in Mumbai,” Public Culture.

June 17: EXAM.

Code and Performance.

June 18: Spatializing Culture: Discussion of ethnographic projects.

Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapters 1-3; Triumph, Chp 8. “A Place in Town.”
Assignment: Post initial fieldwork ideas to Canvas.

June 19: Studying the City: Discussion of methods.

Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapters 4-8; Lloyd, “The Celebrity Neighborhood.”

 

June 22: Reading the Urban: Discussion of research questions.Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapter 9; Stevenson, “Meaning and Memory:
Reading the Urban Text” and “Imagining the City: Movies, Maps, and Cyberspace.”
Assignment: post field notes to Canvas.

June 23: Research on Cities: Discussion of research sources.

Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapter 8

June 24: Symbolic Economy.

Readings: Culture of Cities, Chp.1 & 2

June 25: Climate Change and Cities

Readings: TBA

June 26: Report on fieldwork.
Assignment: Post field report to Canvas.

Consuming Cities.

June 29: Disneyfication of Cities.

Readings: Triumph of Cities, Chp 5, and Culture of Cities, Chp. 5 & 6
June 30: Gentrification:

Readings: Barrio Dreams, Introduction and Chps. 2-3.

July 1: Contesting Public Culture

Readings: Barrio Dreams, Chps 4-6; On the Plaza, Chps 8 & 11.
July 2: Peer-review session [share drafts and field notes]

July 3: Fieldwork Day.

The Future of Cities.

July 6: Public Health of Cities: History.
Readings: The Triumph, Chp. 4. And TBA

July 7: Public Health of Cities: History: Current.
Readings: TBA.

July 8: Housing Crisis.

Readings: TBA.

July 9: Exam.

July 10: Ethnographic Papers due. By 4 p.m.
Identifying an Ethnographic Site:

After reading discussing chapters from June 5", spend some time in a public place
(physical or digital). The objective is simply to try out Setha Low’s perspective on the
construction of social space. By observing how different people occupy a similar locale,
Low tries to recognize social relations and social practices in space, as well as to
demonstrate how public space becomes meaningful to users. She considers how
differences in the use of space define social groups, and she examines the types of
boundaries these users construct. This is what Low means by the “social construction of
space”: “the actual transformation of space—through peoples’ social exchanges,
memories, images, and daily use of the material setting—into scenes and actions that
convey meaning.”So pick a place and observe it. Consider its design features and pay attention to
patterns of usage. Then try to articulate what kinds of meanings are attached to or
contested in this place. Can you picture yourself developing an ethnographic
perspective on this place?

Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with

Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/

UT Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html)
Familiarize yourself with University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of
plagiarizing: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Penalties for violation of this Code can include failure of the course and University
disciplinary action.