Religions in the United
States after 1800's

Course Number: RS F326 / HIS F351P
Unique: RS-82004 / HIS-80849
Flag: Cultural Diversity

Josefrayn Sanchez-Perry
Instructor

M & F | 10-11:30 am
Summer 2020
Zoom Meeting RoomsCourse Information

¢ THE COURSE

Title: Religions in the United States since 1800’s
Course: RS F326; HIS F351P

Unique: RS-82004 / HIS-80849

Day/Time: M & F | 10-11:30 am

Room: Zoom Meeting Rooms

Class Website: Course page on CANVAS

¢ YOUR INSTRUCTOR

Name: Josefrayn Sanchez-Perry

Pronouns: He / Him / His

What to Call Me: Josefrayn or José

Email Address: jsanchezperry@utexas.edu
Office Hours: T & W 9-11 am in Zoom or by
appointment

Office Location: Zoom Meeting Rooms

 

 

¢ REQUIRED MATERIALS
- Access to CANVAS for all readings

¢ TEACHING AND LEARNING METHODS
- Monday lectures

- Friday presentations

- Independent readings

- Journal Reflections

- PresentationsGoals and Outcomes

¢ CHARACTERIZE
Characterize and understand the themes of religion in
the United States after the 1800's.

¢ ANALYZE

Analyze the ways in which religion acts as a social
category (like a social glue) between cultures, and how
religious groups expanded, contracted, and developed
over time.

¢ SYNTHESIZE

Synthesize how scholars interpret religion, by considering
their theories and their approach in the context of US
society.

 

¢ CONTRAST
Contrast how race, class, gender, sexuality, politics,

a yt if language, and culture impact the experience of religion
| i . and its study in the context of the United States.

¢ APPLY

Apply the use of primary and secondary source materials

by understanding the difference between them and
acquiring the rudimentary skills of writing a presentation.

Course Objective and Description

The objective of this course is for you to develop a rich understanding of religion in
the United States after the 1800's. The course is set up thematically, by case studies,
exposing you to four themes: movement and displacement, gender and sexuality,
capitalism and community, race and ethnicity. While these themes are not exclusive,
they will help you frame key aspects that characterize how religion impacts and
shapes the United States. Throughout this summer term, you will learn how to
gather and interpret primary and secondary sources by submitting reading journals
and writing a presentation.Grading Plan and Scale

°* 10% Participation

Attendance on Mondays and Fridays is required for the course. | expect you to connect via
Zoom, come prepared for Monday lectures, and ready to give feedback to your classmates
on Friday Presentations. After 2 unexcused absences you will be penalized a half letter
grade for every absence.

¢ 10% Presentation Proposal

You will submit a presentation proposal, consisting of three parts: a succinct thesis
statement, an outline of the presentation, and your sense on how the author engages with
the themes in our course. The presentation proposal must be based on a reading from the
"Presentation List" or an alternative reading, approved by the instructor. The proposal

must be submitted three days before your presentation.

¢ 30% Presentation

You will give one Zoom presentation on one of the four themes of the course. Each theme
is spread throughout various points of the class timeline. You will choose a case study in
relation to a theme from the "Presentation List." Your presentation should have variations
of your proposal, like a thesis statement, an outline, and your sense on how the author
engages with the themes in our course. This grade is split into two components: 15% is
based on your notes, PowerPoint, Prezi outline, or whichever platform you use. The other
15% is based on your presentation.

¢ 50% Reading Reflections

You will submit 5 reflections on the readings, based on a prompt offered by the instructor
over the course of the class. These must be at least 300 words in length. There are 15
available prompts, which gives you the chance to choose between many reading
assignments, but 5 reflections must be submitted by the end of the summer term. You can
redo 1 of the 5 reading reflections—but you must tell me which one you want to drop.

¢ Prompt Outline

LJ What is the author's thesis and argument?

LJ What sources and examples do they use to reinforce their
argument? wis

LJ What did you find most interesting about their case study?

 

100 — 92- 89 — 86 — 82 — 79 - 76- 72- 69 — 66 — 62 - 59 -
93% 90% 87% 83% 80% 77% 73% 70% 67% 63% 60% belowClass Timeline

 

DATE AGENDA ASSIGNMENTS
M 6/8 LECTURE Syllabus
T 6/9 Movement & Displacement Jornter, “Cholera, Christ, and Jackson”; Prompt #1

W 6/10 Movement & Displacement Graber, “Kiowa Calendars"; Prompt #2
TH 6/11 Movement & Displacement Sagarena, “Building California’s Past”; Prompt #3

F 6/12 PRESNTATIONS

M 6/15 LECTURE DISCUSSING MOVEMENT & DISPLACEMENT

T 6/16 Gender & Sexuality Braude, “Women’s History”; Prompt #4

W 6/17. + Gender & Sexuality Smith, ”The Sister Wives at Court”; Prompt #5

TH 6/18 Gender & Sexuality Beliso de Jesus, “Confounded Identities”; Prompt #6

F 6/19 PRESENTATIONS

M 6/22 LECTURE DISCUSSING GENDER & SEXUALITY

T 6/23 Capitalism & Community Seales, “Secularism”; Prompt #7

W 6/24 = Capitalism & Community Lofton, “Oprah and Spiritual Capitalism”; Prompt #8
TH 6/25 = Capitalism & Community Weber, ”Protestant Capitalism”; Prompt #9

F 6/26 PRESENTATIONS

M 6/29 LECTURE DISCUSSING CAPITALISM & COMMUNITY

T 6/30 Race & Ethnicity Booker, “Civil Rights Religion?”; Prompt #10

W 7/1 Race & Ethnicity Blankenship, ”Civil Religious Dissent”; Prompt #11
TH 7/2 Race & Ethnicity Sarna, “Jewish Sunday-School Texts”; Prompt #12
F 7/3 PRESENTATIONS

M 7/6 LECTURE DISCUSSING RACE & ETHNICITY

T 7/7 Religion in the United States Orsi, “Religion and the Modern City”; Prompt #13

W 7/8 Religion in the United States Fessenden, “Culture and Redemption”; Prompt #14
TH 7/9 Religion in the United States Gould, “Fly Fishing as Religion”; Prompt #15

F 7/10 LECTURE DISCUSSING RELIGION IN THE UNITED STATESResources and Policies

¢ OFFICE HOURS

Office hours are an invaluable aid and should be
used without fear or a sense that questions and
concerns are somehow too small or too obvious. |
am here to help!

¢ MAKE-UP ASSIGNMENTS

Accommodations will be given because of a
documented medical problem, a religious holiday,
or official university business. In the case of
university business, you should send me proper
documentation at least one class prior to your
upcoming absence.

 

¢ UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE AND ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Students who violate the University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possible failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. The
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, you can talk with
me or visit the Student Judicial Services Web.

¢ ACCOMMODATIONS: DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT

If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss the
accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind
me of any testing accommodations you will need.

¢ THE WRITING CENTER

The UWC offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. These services are not just for writing that has "problems":
Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. The
UWC’s trained consultants work with students from every department on both academic and non-
academic writing. Using methods that preserve the integrity of your work, they help you develop
strategies to improve your writing and become a more independent writer. Whether you are
writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your own poetry,
UWC consultants will be happy to work with you.Resources and Policies, cont’d

* RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS

By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, | will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.

¢ BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)

If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.

¢ COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH CENTER

The Counseling and Mental Health Center serves UT’s diverse campus community by providing
high quality, innovative and culturally informed mental health programs and services that enhance
and support students’ well-being, academic and life goals. These include counseling, psychiatric,
consultation, and prevention services.

¢ CAREER EXPLORATION CENTER
The Liberal Arts Career Services provides a full range of career coaching, recruiting, and career
education services to help you prepare for whatever you want to do in the future.

¢ UT OUTPOST

Student Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of
Students has launched UT Outpost to support students
on our campus. Along with our food pantry, our team

has launched a career closet to make sure every tt
Longhorn has access to professional clothes for job and you Mma er.

internship interviews.

  
    
  
   
  

¢ STUDENT EMERGENCY SERVICES

The Student Emergency office helps students and their
families during difficult or emergency situations.
Assistance includes outreach, advocacy, intervention,
support, and referrals to relevant campus and
community resources. Please note, our office does not
provide counseling services.