MIS 366P/OM 366P
Practicum
Summer 2020

VERSION: 05/13/2020

Co-instructors:

 

Dr. Michael Hasler Russ Finney
michael.hasler@mccombs.utexas.edu russ.finney@mccombs.utexas.edu
Phone: (512) 587-1422 Phone: 512-751-6454
Teaching Assistant
TBD

Class times : Mondays, 2:00 - 5:00 pm

Class location : Online

Office Hours : TBD

Course objective:
This course is the practicum for the IROM department. It is designed as an industry sponsored project.
It has two main objectives.

First, the course aims to give students an opportunity to solve real world MIS/SCM problems by
applying the skills and knowledge acquired in the program to a business opportunity or problem of an
industry sponsor. The solution created is intended to generate business insights and create
measurable business value. The required data, problem definition and access to infrastructure are
made available by the industry sponsors. Students in the practicum may be required to sign non-
disclosure agreements (NDAs) in order to have access to sponsor's confidential data. Sponsors also
make their time and expertise available for working with students throughout the project. Students
help sponsors to further frame the opportunities/problems, define specific questions, identify data sets
needed for answering the questions, do the data analyses, build analytics models and solution,
generate business insights, and accordingly recommend courses of action for business value creation.
Second, the course aims to enhance students’ skills in presenting the findings of a business project to
both operational and top management teams of sponsors. Both objectives of the course are achieved
through working with industry sponsors, multiple in-class presentations, and feedback from instructors
and peers. Overall, the practicum aims to bring together and enhance student skills and knowledge in
four domains: (1) modeling skills and knowledge, (2) functional business domain knowledge (e.g.,
MIS, supply chain, HR, etc.); (3) information technology skills and knowledge such as scripting, SQL,
data cleansing, data aggregation; and (4) skills and knowledge in business communication,
presentation and analytical storytelling to operational and executive level audiences.

Course format:

Students will spend a significant portion of their time in this practicum in working with the project
sponsors outside of the classroom. The class sessions will be used to give students opportunities to
present their work to peers and instructors, who assume the role of the target audience (e.g.,
operations team, executive team of sponsor). Students will also spend time providing group updates
to both instructors (who may do an executive role play during these briefings). We recognize that
there are differences in the levels of presentation skills of students. Regardless, we expect all team
members to participate in all presentations of their teams. This will give the team and the instructors
opportunity to (i) identify strengths and weaknesses in team and presentation skills and (ii) address
them throughout the semester so that the team is ready to make a presentation to their sponsor at
the conclusion of the project.

By registering for this course you agree to be video recorded during the class periods. If there is an
issue with this, please contact one of us directly.Course website:

Course website is hosted on Canvas course management and learning system:
http://canvas.utexas.edu/ Please login using your UT EID and select MIS 366P or OM 366P,
whichever you signed up for. Updates to this syllabus and any other course materials will be posted on
this website.

Industry Sponsored Projects:

A project guidelines document explaining objectives, expectations, milestones, deliverables of the
project, and evaluation templates are appended to this syllabus. The deliverables will be evaluated
and graded by instructors of the course. Instructors will request feedback from sponsors as well and
will combine their assessments with those of the sponsors in assigning grades to deliverables.

Grading:

Grades will be issued by team with an opportunity for team members to do a peer evaluation at the
end of the semester. This evaluation will be considered when issuing final individual grades. Likewise,
we will seek and consider input from the clients as well. The breakdown of different deliverables
follows:

Statement of work and project presentation

Midterm update and presentation 25%

Final project recommendation and presentation
100%

The professors will discuss the rubric for deliverables in class.

 

McCombs Classroom Professionalism Policy

The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the McCombs community. The
collective class reputation and the value of the Texas BBA experience hinges on this.

Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and every class session.
Students are expected to be professional in all respects.

The Texas BBA classroom experience is enhanced when:

e Students arrive on time. This class will be 100% online through Zoom. You must use your UT
account available through Canvas to access the classroom. Although it is not as apparent when
you arrive and leave, please be on time.

e Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning in the Texas BBA program
takes place during classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they cannot contribute
to the overall learning process. This affects not only the individual, but their peers who count on
them, as well.

e Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and debate are
encouraged. Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.

Academic Dishonesty

We have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts damage the reputation of the school
and the degree and demean the honest efforts of the majority of students. The minimum penalty for
an act of academic dishonesty will be a zero for that assignment.

The responsibilities for both students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are described on

-of- . As the instructors for this course, we
agree to observe all the faculty responsibilities described therein. During Orientation, you signed the
Honor Code Pledge. In doing so, you agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities of the Honor
Code. If the application of the Honor System to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it
is your responsibility to ask us for clarification.Students with Disabilities

Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) is housed in the Office
of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth floor of the Student Services Building. Information on
how to register, downloadable forms, including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request
letters, and releases of information are available online at
http://deanofstudents.utexas,edu/ssd/index.php. Please do not hesitate to contact SSD at (512) 471-
6259, VP: (512) 232-2937 or via e-mail if you have any questions.

MIS 366P and OM 366P Practicum: Summer 2020
Tentative Schedule--Version 05132020

oe - wok ue
Project activity and
Statement of Work and Project Plan
Project activity and
Project activity and
foun foo ce
Present in
Project activity and

M

M

Project activity and
20-Jul JOne-on-one with Professor(s) freeracty and
Project activity and

Exec plans, recommendations, presentations
10-Aug |Executive/Operational presentations P|

 

iw fc |

EXPECTATIONS FROM STUDENTS

Students are responsible for developing a good working relationship with their sponsors, working with
the sponsors to define the objectives, scope, and deliverables of the project, applying their learning
throughout the course to the specific business questions of the sponsor, and delivering results that
aim to create evidence-based insights that could create business value for the sponsor.

EXPECTATIONS FROM INDUSTRY SPONSORS

Prior to the start of the semester, sponsors work with the instructors to propose projects. Sponsors
make commitments to share their business questions, data, and time and expertise with students.
They become available to the students throughout the semester to provide advice and guidance about
the project. Sponsors also provide written feedback to instructors at key milestones: (a) project
proposal; (b) status update, and (c) final project deliverables.FINAL PROJECT DELIVERABLES

Presentation: The course requires all teams make an in-class presentation of their final deliverables.
Many if not all sponsors also expect teams to present their final findings to their companies. Thus,
teams may need to make two final presentations, one in-class presentation and another on-site
presentation to their sponsors. In addition, each team is expected to submit a paper that documents
the final project. This should be consistent with the final presentation.

PROJECT PROPOSAL GUIDELINES

After you know your team, project topic, and sponsor, you should contact your sponsor immediately
to introduce the team members, clarify, discuss, and define objectives, scope, and expected outcomes
of the project. You should also discuss process-related issues such as expectations about the
availability of team members and the sponsor for regular phone conferences and/or meetings
throughout the semester, the mode of communication (e.g., phone conference, video conferencing, e-
mail), the number and length of the meetings, and so forth. In doing this planning, please recognize
that the sponsors are highly busy professionals. You should aim to minimize the time demand on
them. The role of sponsors in this project is to provide advice and feedback. You are responsible for
the actual work and the deliverables. The project proposal and status report will be reviewed by the
sponsor. The quality of your deliverables will influence the quality of feedback you receive. Here is a
generic structure for the project proposal, which you can build on and change to fit your needs:

Cover page: a cover page that lists the course name, title of project, list of team members, names
of sponsors, instructors, and date of the proposal.

Introduction: Briefly describe the phenomenon, problem or opportunity that motivates this project
and explain why this project is important to do.

Objectives of the project—specifically sponsor’s expectations

Scope of the project—Mutually agreed upon timing, goals, topics, expected outcomes based upon
sponsor’s expectations

Stakeholders of the project—Those individuals and departments potentially impacted by this
project.

Target audience of the project (beyond the stakeholders in this class, who should read your final
deliverables? Briefly explain why it is worthwhile for them to read your findings and
recommendations).

Resource and time requirements of the project. Please include time commitment requirements of
your project: e.g., time commitment expected from each student is, on average, about 12 to 15
hours per week 10 weeks during summer semester. Also clarify how much time commitment you
will need from your sponsor. Think about any other resources you may need to complete this
project.

Detailed project implementation plan. Check the course related schedule and learn about any
sponsor-specific deadlines to identify major milestones of the project. Develop an implementation
plan in the form of a table that has the following columns: (a) project activities, (b) objectives of
each activity, (c) expected outcome of each activity; (d) due date for the outcome of the activity;
and (e) primary team member responsible for the activity. At this milestone, the implementation
plan should detail the activities planned in between project proposal and status report deadlines.
The activities to be conducted after the status report milestone can be left more general. They will
be presented in more detail in the status report milestone. Please refer to the guidance given in
the project management session at the beginning of the semester in preparing your project
implementation plan.

Data and computational environment. Report on the current status of your NDA agreements with
the sponsor, access to sponsor’s data and computational environment, software tools, etc. Report
if you have completed preliminary work on the data and prepared it for substantive analyses or
not. Please report on any pending issues that could inhibit your timely progress and how you plan
to address them.

Potential risks that can inhibit successful completion of this project.

Mitigation plan to minimize the potential risks.

Literature review. Review the practitioner and academic literature on the business questions your
project focuses on; identify if there are any previously used solution approaches, conceptual
frameworks, methods, etc. for addressing similar business questions. If there are any, report howyou will build on them in your project. If there is none, state that you will need to develop a brand
new solution approach and briefly state how you intend to do so.

Format and length of project proposal:

A maximum of 2000 words using 1.5 line spacing, 12-point fonts and 1” margins on all sides,
exclusive of all supporting material (e.g., tables, figures, appendices, etc.).

PROPOSAL PRESENTATIONS

Target audience: Operational executives of your sponsor
Duration: 15 minutes total; up to 12 minutes for presentation and 3 minutes for Q&A

STATUS REPORT GUIDELINES

The purpose of the status report is to report on your progress to date and identify issues on which you
need clarification and guidance.

Content of the report:

We would recommend updating your original project proposal based on the feedback received, and
building on the revised proposal to develop your status report.

Your goal in the status reports should be to: (a) report on your progress to date and meet the
expectations of your sponsor; (b) clarify project objectives and content-related issues further. Your
sponsor will give you feedback on the status reports. The quality of the feedback will depend on the
quality and clarity of your status reports. Think about the issues on which you need further
clarification, guidance, or help, and give your sponsor an opportunity to respond to them in the
feedback document. As your instructors, we are also stakeholders in this project. From our
perspective, we would like to see the difference between your project halfway through the semester
and the original project plan you put together at the beginning of the semester. Fundamentally, we
are interested in the changes.

Format and length of status report:

See the original project plan and statement of work for formatting. You may increase the size of this
paper to 2500 words if appropriate. However, don’t increase the size of the paper unless the increase
is necessary.

FINAL REPORT GUIDELINES

The final report is the ultimate deliverable of the practicum that reports on the findings, conclusions,
and recommendations of the project.

The original report and the status update focus on the execution of the process. The final report will
focus on the outcomes.

Format and length

A maximum of 2500 words (it can be less than 2500 words but not more) using 12-point fonts and 1”
margins on all sides, exclusive of all supporting material such as tables, figures, appendices, etc.

The final report must be submitted in the form of a single file (e.g., PDF or Word) containing all
supporting tables, figures, appendices, etc.Sources: It is critical that you back up your arguments by citing credible sources. Using
citations to properly attribute sources of the ideas borrowed from others will also prevent
potential plagiarism problems (see

http://www.lib.utexas. rvi instruction/learningm | lagiarism/index.html).

At the end of the report, please include a reference list, which contains full citations of all
sources you used. Guidance on citations can be found at

http://www. lib.utexas.edu/citations

The quality of your report will be assessed based on how well you address the criteria outlined above.
It is critical that the final report flows and reads as a coherent whole rather than a collection of
fragmented arguments. Therefore, it is recommend that you plan for some time for integrating pieces
of your work, proofreading the final product, and making it a coherent whole before submission.

 

Client Rubric
1. Name: name of primary contact for project
2. Company name
3. Description of project
4. Project progress
5. Project problems
6. Do you need the professor to call you?