EDC F350:

   

TO D

  

THAN sunviMll

 

ABOLITIONIST SOCIAL STUDIES
TEACHING METHODS

 

 

The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Curriculum & Instruction
UT Urban Teachers, Social Studies
Summer 2020

* as inspired by Bettina Love’s book We Want to Do More Than Survive: Abolitionist Teaching and
the Pursuit of Educational Freedom

Course Instructors:
AI: Joanna Batt, pronouns she/her/hers, jbatt@utexas.edu, 716.480.5697, zoom office hours by appt.

TA: Dee Hall, pronouns she/her/hers, delandrea_hall@utexas.edu, zoom office hours by appt.Instructional Coach (IC) & Field Supervisor (FS):

Michael Joseph, pronouns he/him/his Heath Robinson, pronouns he/him/his
myjoseph1487@gmail.com robinson. ht@utexas.edu

Class time, days, location

Please see the calendar below for class times. Some meetings will be TBD as we are waiting on
Breakthrough’s more concrete schedule, but the majority of our learning together via Zoom will happen
from 12:30-2pm, June 4"-June 22™,

Land Acknowledgment

We begin this syllabus by recognizing that we stand on the shared lands and waters of the Comanche
and Tonkawa. We express our respect for the three federally-recognized nations: Alabama-Coushatta,
the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, and the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo, within the state as well as other
Indigenous peoples and nations such as the Karankawa, Caddo, Lipan Apache, Comanche, Wichita,
Coahuiltecan, Neches, Comecrudo, and Mission Indians that have historic ties to these homelands. We
also acknowledge the multiple ways the State of Texas and the residents of this Land have benefitted
from the forced and systematic removal of Native peoples from Texas. Land acknowledgements are a
small step toward correcting the stories and practices that erase Indigenous histories and the
ongoing presence of Indigenous peoples today. As teacher educators and researchers, many of us
are complicit in this erasure, and it is imperative that we recognize, support, and advocate for the
sovereignty of Native nations in our world. These acknowledgements are not be a box checked off
early on, or a speech made, later forgotten...we must ask, how are we living these acknowledgments,
and honoring these promises to actively remember and forge a new path by changing thoughts,
challenging governmental policies, and supporting sovereignty?

I'M FRYING T6 FREE YOUR
MIND. BUT I CAN ONLY SHOW
YOU THE BOOR. YOU'RE THE
ONE THAT HAS T6 WALK
THROUGH IT.

    

= ‘ I os y ‘<j i ;|
_”'Why are we here? What needs tobe FREED? 47%

Free your mind. You class will follow.

When learning to teach social studies, and teaching to learn people and practice true equity, we need to

grow, self-examine, and seek answers to the following questions, even while knowing we will never
arrive and are always becoming:What Will We Do?

In this course, we’ll seek to get closer and closer to this level of engaging with the world, knowing
our history, and critically that history to transform educational spaces and the ways of learning
within them. This is no small feat, and will be our introduction to teaching and social studies education.

Through an examination of critical literature and research around social studies theory and
practice, at times including film clips, popular news articles, book excerpts and more, we will also
work to build a foundation for your purpose for teaching, while considering the scope, goals, and
methods that are unique to social studies. It is our hope that your purpose for teaching social studies
becomes rooted in abolitionist possibilities for teaching, and will grow in schools where history
illuminates but does not limit what can be done towards true educational freedom, where teaching

and schooling is about centering students and their experiences through culturally relevant and
sustaining practices. We live in an education system where perspectives are often excluded,

marginalized, simplified, or simply omitted—we will aim to have these perspectives and ways of
knowing become a fundamental part of the curriculum. In doing so, we’ll understood that teaching is not
as a perfected craft but an exciting, challenging day-to-day endeavor that is reserved for the ambitious
and critically conscious teacher (THAT IS YOU!).

Additionally, this class serves as a collaborative community to strengthen your immediate teaching
in your field placement with Breakthrough, while also being part of our larger mission together in
preparing you for work in urban schools by including the development of knowledge, skills, and
dispositions for recognizing the resources that culturally and linguistically diverse students bring
to the classroom, of critical awareness of injustices common in urban schools and communities,

and of agentive strategies for working toward hope and social justice in the often restricted or
even hostile work environments of urban schools.*

1. To understand the dominant social studies narrative and the themes that serve to define the role
of teaching history, geography and economics in our society

2. To confront those dominant narratives via other/counter narratives -subtle or obvious- that take
into account other perspectives

3. To create units of study that serve more critical understandings of the social studies4. To expand the repertoire of teaching through humanizing pedagogical practices like critical
historical inquiry and critical geography

5. To recognize our lives as public intellectuals—not as teaching bureaucrats but as agents of
change and advocates for the communities we serve*

* (wording courtesy of Dee Hall)

A Quick Roadmap and a note on Intersectionality:

We’ll constantly jigsaw social studies methods and ways of teaching with topics that most need
abolitionist pedagogy and counter-stories; we will be taking these oppressions head on, calling them the
Each week and
sometimes day will attack these ISM’s and phobias head on, in order to delineate and practice how we
will do so in practice as social studies teachers. To be clear, the presentation of these ISM’s day to day
by no way means they are separate or in isolation, but in order to clearly focus on their origins and
ensuing curriculum in an organized matter; these ISM’s/phobias in fact operate in complex
intersectionality with each other, double-binding certain groups with multiple oppressions. We will
also work to understand and teach these tenets in history and today. Also, the ones that are listed are
ones we are focusing on; there are certainly and unfortunately many more we will not have time to
discuss given our tight schedule.

 

Additionally, although we are framing the course by these oppressions categorically, we will not cast
anyone as a victim, nor only present stories of trauma, pain and discrimination. Institutionalized
structures exist and have shaped history, but so have human beings in their insistent bravery, agency,
joy, and everyday lives. We must recognize both sides of the coin, and never dehumanize or rob of that
agency in how we discuss or teach history, even and especially when certain groups are treated by
hegemonic groups inhumanely.

We must also truly engender that as the topics change day to day, some of these concepts may be
theoretical for us and lived in reality by a classmate or loved one, and vice versa. What we are
talking about is never just in a history book or on a page or website—these are real oppressions
happening to real people historically and today, who have and do display dazzling and tenacious agency.
We must always keep that in the heart of our teaching wisdom.

Classroom Norms: How will we engage with each other?

Creating brave spaces, engaging in Culturally Responsive Pedagogy, or CRP, and respecting each
others’ lives realities, identities, experiences and knowledges is no small task in the best of times, and
certainly will be no small task in a time of crisis while we are learning online. As a community, we will
build these together after our first class day, and they’ll be posted on Canvas to remind ourselves of our
commitment to each other for the duration of the summer.Course Procedures AND Policies
Attendance and punctuality

Due to the condensed and expedited nature of this course, attendance and punctuality are required and
vital to making this an engaging and effective class. As a result, you are expected to attend class, be on
time, and be well prepared to participate. If unforeseen, unexpected, or conflicts arise, please notify me,
along with at least one of your classmates and/or FS/IC, as soon as you know you will be late or are
going to miss class. Regardless of the absence, students are still responsible for work that may be due
and for information covered during the absence. You may also be asked to complete an assignment tied
to the class session you missed. Missing two or more classes will result in the automatic loss of a letter
grade. Multiple tardies/early departures may also result in grade deductions.

Communication

Now is a good time to begin building your professional habits, so being responsive and timely are
important. Always respond to instructor, field supervisor and Instructional Coach (IC) emails within 24
hours. Also it is imperative that you check your syllabus and Canvas DAILY (for announcement
or instructions)!! When you receive emails from any of us, please read them carefully and let us know
with a reply (a quick response such as, “Got it, thank you,” will suffice). While texting can be
convenient, keep text communication with me, with your instructional coach, and with your facilitator
limited to emergency situations or personal matters. When you are communicating with any of us about
anything work related, e-mail is the professional way to do so. When there is an incident in your
Breakthrough classroom that warrants reflection or action and you are unsure of who to speak to about it
at the time, write and send yourself an e-mail describing the incident in detail the same day, so that you
have a time-stamped document should you need it in the future.

Active class participation

We cannot emphasize enough the need to participate actively in this class. You each bring a unique
perspective and set of experiences to our community and learning. Your contributions add to the overall
value of the entire course for you and your colleagues. Coming to class prepared means completing the
readings and a weekly reading reflection, engaging in the day’s activities, and completing any
assignment given in class.

Cell phones, laptops, and other digital devices

While these are helpful tools and are necessary for our work at times, these devices should be used only
as tools. We have a lot of important work to do each time we meet. Please do not let your electronic
devices distract you from the conversations and thinking that we’re doing in class. I get that this is
especially difficult right now in our zoom world, but stay the course and don’t distract! Your class
participation grade may be negatively impacted if you are continually surfing the web, using email,
texting, and the like.

Completing work and late work

We expect that all work for this class will be done with thought, care, and thoroughness, and because so
much of what we do is important for our work with peers and students, it is essential for your work to be
done promptly. All assignments (including readings) are due before the beginning of class to give us

5plenty of time to actually read and incorporate your feedback and reflection, which is so so important to
our classtime! Unless otherwise noted in the assignment description, it will always be so. Late work
will NOT receive full credit. Any assignments turned in late will result a 10% deduction of points for
every subsequent day the assignment is late.

*If you have a valid need for an extension, you must discuss this with me prior to the due
date. Do NOT wait until right before.

Field placement expectations and professionalism

Breakthrough acts as a part of your professional development sequence (Intern I). As a result, your
success in Breakthrough is a part of your grade for this course. If you do not successfully fulfill your
obligations to Breakthrough, you will pass this class or be allowed to move forward in this program.
This means that on days you’ll be in your field placement (Breakthrough), it is essential that you come
prepared with thoughtful plans and materials prepared. It is also imperative that you get your lesson
plans into your IC and/or FS, work with them on planning and observations, and communicate with
them effectively. So please make sure you conduct yourself in a professional way with the
Breakthrough staff and students and pay careful attention to deadlines and small details.

Guiding references

TEKS: http://ritter.tea.state.tx.us/rules/tac/chapter113/ch113a.html

NCSS themes: http://www.socialstudies.org/standards/strands

C3: http://www.socialstudies.org/c3

TexKS: http://texes.ets.org/texes/prepmaterials/texes-preparation- manuals/

 

University Course Policies

Statement on Learning Success

Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning/exclude you, let me know
ASAP. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet your needs and course requirements. We encourage
you to reach out to the student resources available via UT. Happy to connect you with a person/Center

Grading Policies
Flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. I intend to work with you
with support if you miss an assignment, but final grades are firm.

st ee*Please note that continuation in the PDS requires a minimum grade of “C” in each of the PDS courses.

Cross Cutting Themes and Professionalism

Students in this course are held to professionalism standards in line with the Cross Cutting Themes of
the College of Education (see p. 9-10 of this syllabus). As a representative of UT and a future educator,
please practice the standards of professionalism you would in a school or other educational setting,
whether this course is or 1s not field-based. We are building dispositions of the profession, which include
those professional attitudes, values, and beliefs expected of an education professional. When we learn in
schools and other educational spaces, we enter with humility, open to what we can learn in the setting
and from the students, teachers and other community members. We also practice reciprocity,
considering how we can contribute to the places where we are fortunate to learn. University classrooms
are places to engage in these practices of open learning and reciprocity. Students should be open to new
perspectives and work collegially with others, including instructors.

Attendance Policy
PDS Policy: The recommended PDS policy for attendance is as follows: Attendance is mandatory and
arriving on time and staying the full length of the class is required.
¢ There are no unexcused absences.
¢ You are allowed one excused absence for the semester (see below).
¢ Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor
¢ Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of % letter grade in your final grade.
¢ More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing grade for
the class.
¢ A pattern of tardiness or early departures will affect your grade.
¢ Excessive tardies or early departures (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused absence.
Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of religious holidays that
fall on our scheduled class day; please give me advance notice of these absences (see below
for more detailed info).

Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable.
Check with us for details or arrangements.

If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your classmates to get a run-down and notes on
any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise
questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific
questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not
specific enough.Policy on Children in Class/Working from Home

I fully support parents and guardians attending school. As the university does not have a formal policy
on children in the classroom, the policy described here is a reflection of my own beliefs and
commitments (and with all due credit to Dr. Melissa Cheyney at Oregon State University who circulated
her own policy through social media).

All exclusively breastfeeding babies are welcome in class as often as is necessary to support the
breastfeeding relationship. You and your nursing baby are welcome in class anytime. For older children
and babies, I understand that minor illnesses and unforeseen disruptions in childcare often put parents in
the position of having to choose between missing class to stay home with a child or finding childcare,
which can be a burden in many ways. While this is not meant to be a long-term childcare solution,
occasionally bringing a child to class in order to cover gaps in care is perfectly acceptable.

For students learning at home with children or others you care for at home, your children are welcome
on the screen and I understand you may need to take breaks from class when you are attending to those
in your care. Finally, I am open to talking about needed accommodations with deadlines as the semester
progresses.

Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc.)

Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they
have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor your

 

request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the

gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so
that I may make appropriate updates to my records.

University Resources for Students

Services for Students with Disabilities

This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment
for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to
maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.

Basic Needs Security

Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and believes this may affect their
performance in the course is urged to contact the Dean of Students for support. Furthermore, please

notify the professors if you are comfortable in doing so. This will enable them to provide any resources
that they may possess. (Thanks to Dr. Sara Goldrick-Rab [(@saragoldrickrab] for this language.

Counseling and Mental Health
Counselors in Academic Residence Program (CARE)CARE is the university's Counseling and Mental Health Center program that was created in
collaboration with the Office of the Provost. CARE’s primary mission is to provide access to mental
health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. The College of
Education CARE counselor, Danie White, has regular office hours 1-2p.m. T/F in SZB 212E,

512.232.6862 or dlwhite@austin.utexas.edu.

Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester: eat well, exercise, avoid drugs and alcohol, get
enough sleep and take some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.

All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.

If you/anyone you know experiences academic stress, hard life events, feelings like anxiety/ depression
we strongly encourage seeking support http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html

The Sanger Learning Center

Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of
Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/sle or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).

Other Resources
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/

ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/

 

 

BeVocal

BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus,
go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/Be Vocal.

Important Safety Information

If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right — it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.

The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.

Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring
assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In theevent of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Link to info regarding emergency
evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency

Title [X Reporting

Title [IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
become involved in a Title [X investigation.

3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title [X to the Title IX
Coordinator. Iam a Responsible Employee and must report any Title [X related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title [X Office at titlerx@austin.utexas.edu.

University Policies on plagiarism and dropping

Academic Integrity

Students should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted through a
plagiarism-detection tool, such as Canvas Turnitin. Tools like this are designed to help students
avoid plagiarism and improper citation. The software encourages original writing and proper
citation documentation practices by cross-referencing submitted materials with an archived
database of journals, essay, newspaper articles, books, and other published work. In addition,
other methods may be used to determine the originality of the paper. Tips for maintaining
academic integrity AND the University’s academic integrity policy are available at: All students
are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code
available at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_ student.php

Q Drop Policy

If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,

see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop

Cross-Cutting Themes and Creed

The teacher preparation program at The University of Texas at Austin is committed to creating a society
that is more just, caring, inclusive, and democratic through transformation of educational practices. Too
often, universities and schools have engaged in racist and other oppressive practices that replicate and
perpetuate the status quo in our society, rather than working against inequities. We believe there is a

10more powerful path. Following The University of Texas motto, “What starts here changes the world,”
we teach to change the world.

Schools, districts and universities are located within oppressive social, economic and political systems.
Teachers must recognize the oppressive conditions that many families and communities experience
related to their identities—racial, ethnic, linguistic, social class, religious, gender, sexual orientation,
immigrant status, abilities, and other positions in society. At the same time, teachers must recognize the
cultural and linguistic wealth that exists in these communities, along with their histories of resilience and
resistance in the pursuit of justice. Understanding these critical perspectives on society, culture and
schooling is critical for teachers’ development and enactment of curricular and pedagogical knowledge
across school subjects, such as reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics.

We practice vision, courage, and determination because these stances and practices require a lifelong
commitment and ongoing, critical inquiries in our personal and professional lives. As teachers, we serve
our students well by cultivating in them these same commitments and capacities.

As educators we are committed to educational change that allows us to enact our vision for teacher
preparation. Identities, Values, and Practices serve as our guide, as we are always in process. While
listed separately the themes are deeply connected, so to work on one is to work on many.

po Theme Statement Creed Statement

Who are We are continuously examining how our identities! | I am self-aware. I recognize who I am and who
we? sometimes afford us privileges and other times, I am becoming in terms of my multiple
Identities | result in oppression. We recognize that our identities.

personal identities are deeply connected to our

professional identities, and contribute to how we

work with our students, communities and

colleagues.

      

We research and inquire to better understand our I am a learner. I will grow my teaching into
students, curriculum and teaching across school more powerful practices and share them with
subjects’, and our own dispositions and practices as | others.

teachers. We continue to grow our professional

identities to support our work of building inclusive

and anti-oppressive classrooms, schools, and local

and global communities.

  
 

What do We value educational justice, inclusiveness and I value courage and determination. | will view
we value? | continuous learning, and we are committed to all challenges that confront me as opportunities
Values being teachers who take on the challenges and risks | to grow and change.

associated with teaching in service of these values.

 
   

We value the multiple cultures, languages, I value learners’ differences as strengths. I
knowledges, and experiences of our students and will respect and engage with differences and will
the communities we work alongside, and we see craft my teaching to build upon and sustain the
these as essential to a healthy and productive abilities, cultures and languages my students
society. bring to school.

We value shared responsibility over individual I value shared responsibility. I will hold
accountability within educational systems. As myself responsible for all my teaching and will
teachers, we are committed to working share in this responsibility with others to build a
collaboratively with our students, teacher community that contributes to the growth and
colleagues, families, and communities in the well-being of students.

pursuit of our collective growth and well-being.

11What do We continuously reflect on how our diverse I practice reflection on action. I will build
we perspectives and identities! matter when working humanizing practices and trusting relationships
practice? with others, including students, families and through my ongoing critical reflection.
Practice colleagues. This continual reflection allows us to

build trusting relationships and engage in
humanizing practices.

We recognize students’ identities’ and strengths
and honor the resources they bring. We question
the materials, curriculum, and instructional

methods that are in place. We continually adapt

I practice imaginative change. | will imagine
the possibilities of a student-centered curriculum
that is transformative for students and our
collective communities.

and redesign our teaching practices in response to
changing opportunities and demands in our
transnational society. We dream of possibilities for
students’ educational futures.

 

We will be the teachers who, working with families, communities and our colleagues, teach to change the world.

‘racial, ethnic, linguistic, religious, gender, sexual orientation, social class, immigrant status, abilities, and other positions in
society.

*reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics anchored in critical perspectives on society, culture and
schooling

Course Requirements

Book: Love, B. (2019). We Want to Do More Than Survive: Abolitionist Teaching and the Pursuit of
Educational Freedom. Beacon Press.

All other readings on Canvas. Access to a laptop/computer and internet access in order to access Zoom
classes. Please stay in contact if this ever becomes an issue to find and use.

Assignments

All assignments are due on the day they posted below in our day-to-day calendar, and are due 30
minutes before class begins unless otherwise noted. Due dates are subject to change.

Each day of class will require your
written/visual/oral reflection of some kind, which
will utilize direct quotes and details from readings,
comprehend big ideas in connection to our world
and education, and synthesize larger arguments. The
medium will vary each day, but will be due on
Canvas 1.5 hours before class begins.

Daily
reading/resource
reflections and
discussions

(due throughout)

Why I’m Going to be
a Teacher

This is a personal reflection sharing why you have
chosen the field of education, what in your
educational background has been inspired, shaped
and pushed against various systems of power and
ISM’s, and why this profession of teaching social
studies calls to you.

(due 6.8.20)Mantra for Learning
(due 6.5.20)
Mini-lesson I (in
group)
(due 6.23.20)
Mini-lesson II (on
own)

(due 7.3.20)

It’s A Critical Day in
the Neighborhood:
Your Critical
Geography Tour

(due 6.15.20)

Oral History

(due 6.20.20)

Interviewing a student
(Question set), and
Promises Made,
Promises Kept

(due 6.30.20)

This will be a visual and/or verbal reminder of why
you'll be learning in class each day, a touchstone to
personally inspire and direct your time, work and
energies this summer.

You will sign up for an ISM’s theme to contest via
curriculum and pedagogy, choosing a content area
(World/U.S./Texas history, Econ, Geo) and co-create
a lesson plan with a partner which you will then
deliver to our class as if we were your students

You will sign up for an ISM’s theme to dismantle
via curriculum and pedagogy, choosing a content
area (World/U.S./Texas history, Econ, Geo) and
create a lesson plan on your own (you will not teach
the class this, but create an asynchronous lesson
videoed for students)

Inspired by our classwork in critical geography and
UT’s racial geography tour, you will create a critical
geography tour of an area in your hometown, with
three stops, photos, maps and details showcasing
how the space you grew up in is not neutral
historically or void of physical power structures

This will be an audio file of you conducting an
interview with an oral history source of your
choosing, once again on an ISMs topic (a different
one from your lessons if possible) of your choosing.
Please choose a source at least two decades older
than you, and glean info from a time you have not
lived through yourself (at least fully consciously).
The idea of this project is to lay ground

work/establish value this work with students.

This will be the first part in a two-part project to be
continued in your ALD course later in the summer.
In this section you will truly stop and think about, if
the social studies content and pedagogy we teach has
to be both windows and mirrors for our students,
what will you need to know about student lives, their
funds of knowledge, their experiences with power,
their struggles against ISMs and their general
humanity to craft a rich and culturally sustaining
curriculum and pedagogy? How will you listen to
your students, and in doing so, let them know they
are valued and reassure them that their learning is
truly for them? Questions should dig deep, ten total.
Promises to all students should be ten total as well.Participation and
Professionalism

Every day the way you show up in class, support
learning, yourself, and your classmates, and
challenge your own norms and those of society is a

glimpse of how you will show up as a teacher. Go all
in, keeping in mind that teaching isn’t just a job; it’s

a profession and way of LIFE.

 

Course Outline

All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website

at https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course

Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you

receive the changes with as much advance notice as possible).

Course Schedule

Wednesday, June 3
10-11:30am

UTUT Orientation

Readings/Viewings due:

The Danger of a Single
Story TED Talk,
Chimamanda Ngozi
Adichie; Love Chapter 1

Thursday, June 4
10-11:30am

The Single Story

Topics:
What is the purpose of social studies?
What are our purposes for teaching?
How has social studies been taught throughout American
history?
What is a ‘single story’?
How does social studies education connect with society at
large?
What is abolitionist social studies?

Readings:
Loewen (2008 - Intro); Trouillot, Chapter 1; Banks, 1993; skim
Van Sledright

Friday, June 5
10-11:30am

Don’t fill the pail, light the FIRE

Topics:
Two Truths and a Lie: A Game?
How do we teach social studies?
How do we not bank?
How does how we teach relate to what we teach and vice
versa (ie what is pedagogy)
How do we structure discussion in the classroom?

Readings:
Parker (2006); Rethinking our Classrooms; Freire (1970/2000)
Preface and Chapter 1; skim Sexias (1993)

Watch: The Revisionaries; Precious Knowledge

Other Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

Mantras due and photos posted in discussion by 1 lam

 

14Monday, June 15th
12:30-2pm

ANTI-Sexism and ANTI-
Ableism

Topics:

Dislodging power
through curriculum
Historical narratives
and counter-narratives
Socract-ish seminars

Readings: Salinas and
Blevins (2014); excerpts
from The Psychiatric
Persuasion (1994)

Watch: excerpts of Crip
Camp, Netflix

Assignments:

Your Critical Geography
Tour, 1 lam; Response due
by llam

Tuesday, June 9th
12:30-2pm

ANTI-Colonialism

Topics:

What is agency and what
is victimization?

What is historical inquiry?
Counter-narratives using
primary source documents
and multimodalities

Readings:
Lomawaima (1993); Grande
(2004); Seixas and Peck (2004)

Watch: America’s Native
Prisoners of War TED Talk,
Aaron Huey

Assignments:

Why I’m Going to be a Teacher
due by 11am; Response due by
llam

 

Tuesday, June 16th
12:30-2pm

ANTI-Sexism

Topics:

« Teaching Intersectionality:
A look at social
movements

Readings: Collins and Bilge
(2016), Chapter 3

Watch: Episode 3 of “Mrs.
America’, Hulu

Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

Wednesday, June 10th
12:30-2pm

ANTI-Colonialism

Topics:

« Teaching Indigenous
History
Constructivist lesson
design

Readings/Viewings:
Shear, Sabzalian, Brown
Buchanan (2018); Jadallah
(2000); Freire (1970/2000)
Chapter 2

Guest speaker: Judith
Landeros, Cultural Studies in
Education PhD Student

Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

Tuesday, June 17th
12:30-2pm

ANTI-Homophobia and
ANTI-Transphobia

Topics:

« Transformative social
studies: teaching against
systems of
gender/sexuality
oppression
Lesson planning = voicing
the counter-story

Readings:

Blackburn and Smith (2010);
Reis (2004); Sheppard and
Mayo (2014)

Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

Thursday, June 11th
12:30-2pm

CRITICAL Geography

Topics:

Constructivist lesson
design

Geography teaching
methods/PBL
Teaching local history

Readings:
Love (2018) Chapter 2;
Schmidt (2015)

Take: Racial Geography Tour
of UT Campus (virtual)

Assignments:
Response due by 1 lam

Thursday, June 18th
12:30-2pm

ANTI-Xenophobia and
ANTI-Racism

Topics:

Teaching slavery with
active antiracism
Historical memory
Media Literacy in
practice

Readings: Bery (2014);
Lack (1981)

Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

Friday, June 12th
12:30-2pm

CRITICAL Geography and
ANTI- Classism

Topics:

= Aesthetic
materials/multimodalities in
teaching social studies
Historical narratives and
counter-narratives
Counter-story lesson
planning prep

Readings:

NCSS C3 Framework (2013 -
PAGES 12 - 19; 23-25; 29; 53-
55; 59-62)

Garrett and Kerr (2016); Naseem
Rodriguez (2015)

Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

Tuesday, June 19th
12:30-2pm

ANTI-Racism

Topics:

« The more things change, the
more they stay the same:
Teaching social studies
that’s still very much alive
Critical citizenship

Readings: Kohl (2007); Coates
(2015) excerpt; Baldwin (1963);
Silvestrini (1997); skim Brown
and Brown (2010)

Assignments:
Oral History uploaded by 11am;
Response due by 1 lam

 

15Tuesday, June 23rd
12:30-2pm but TBD around BT

CRITICAL Economics
Topics:

«= — Rethinking economics
«= What does teaching critical
economics entail?

Guest speaker: Dee Hall,
Social Studies PhD Student and
our fabulous TA

Readings:
Shanks (2017)

Assignments:
Mini-lesson I due by 1 lam;
Response due by 1lam

Tuesday, June 30%

Assignments:

Interviewing a Student:
Question Set, due by 1lam

Thursday, June 25"
12:30-2pm but TBD around
BT

ANTI-Ethnocentrism
Topics:

«= Teaching World
History without
centering the U.S.
Jigsawing knowledge

Readings: Asante (1991);
Hall (2018)

Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

Thursday, July 2™4 Tuesday, June 30"
12:30-2pm

Last Class Day...BUT
WE’RE NEVER DONE!

Topics:
Assignments:
« From paper/screen to Mini-lesson I due by 1 lam
practice...

Readings: hooks (2003)
Chapter 4

Listen: Naseem Rodriguez
podcast

Assignments:
Response due by 1lam

 

16