Current Issues in Nutritional Science W394
Summer 2020 Course Syllabus

Course Instructor

Charlotte Herzele MEd, PhD, MPH
Department of Nutritional Sciences https://he.utexas.edu/ntr

Virtual Office Hours: by appointment.
Email: herzele@utexas.edu

Communication Plan and Contacts

Canvas Support: https://community.canvasims.com/community/help
Assistant Director of Online MSNS Program: Natalie.Poulos@utexas.edu

Course Description

NTR W394 — Current Issues in Nutritional Science
Unique Number 85135
3 Credit Hours

Summary: In this course we will dig deeper into a few areas of nutrition
that offer exciting possibilities through research or are important to the
public. We will be exploring these areas using a method of evidence-
based analysis (©Evidence Analysis Manual Academy of Nutrition and
Dietetics). You will employ the knowledge and skills you have been
developing throughout the program.

Course Format

This course will be taught entirely online through Canvas. There will be
no class meetings on campus. There will be 12 modules and anevaluation project over the course of 7 weeks. See the course calendar
for more details.

Navigation Instructions: When you log into Canvas, you will arrive at
your Canvas dashboard. Select the relevant course tile to access the
course. Use the course menu on the left side of your screen to navigate
within the course. Please make sure to read the brief descriptions on
each page that help guide you through the content. It is my way of
talking to you on a moment-to-moment basis. At times, these blurbs
provide important content, so, be sure to read them!

Required Course Materials

Textbook: There is no required textbook.
Additional assigned readings and articles will be posted on Canvas.

Technology Requirements

Access to high-speed internet

Basic computer skills

Ability to communicate via Internet tools such as chat, email

Computer with speakers or headphones

Supported web browser: Internet Explorer, Firefox, Safari, or Chrome
Download and installation of BigBlueButton: any other plugins
Computer software & hardware: The primary software requirement for
accessing course materials in Microsoft Office 2010, or later. (NOTE: do
not submit documents as zip files or files that are not compatible with
Microsoft Office 2010 or later, e.g. Google docs, etc., unless otherwise
specified.)Grading Policy

Your semester grade will be based on a combination of your
performance in Mini-module Assessments, Key Topic Discussions, Peer
Reviewed Responses and Module Projects. Final grades will be based
on students earning the following points out of a possible 1200:

Required Assignments Contribution to Course Grade
Discussions 10 @ 10 points = 100 points
Peer Reviewed Responses 10 @ 15 points = 150 points
Mini-module Assessments 5 @ 20 points = 100 points
Module Projects 6 @ 100 points = 600 points
Final Evidence Analysis 1 @ 250 points = 250 points
Total 1200 points

Course Schedule

All dates and times are in Central Daylight Time (CDT). Two modules
will be available at the beginning of each week (Sunday, 12:00 a.m.)
Note that assignments from the first module must be completed by
mid-week (Wednesday, 11:59 p.m.) and assignments from the second
module must be completed by the end of the week (Saturday, 11:59
p.m.). Assignments may be completed before the due dates.Week

1. June 7 - June 13

2. June 14 - June 20

3. June 21 —June 27

4. June 28 — July 4

5. July 5—July 11

6. July 12 —July 18

7. July 19 - July 26

Course Activities

Modules

1&2

3&4

5&6

7&8

9&10

11 &12

Due Dates

Module 1: throughout week
Module 2: Sat 11:59 pm 6/13

Module 3: throughout week
Module 4: Sat 11:59 pm 6/20

Module 5: throughout week
Module 6: Sat 11:59 pm 6/27

Module 7: throughout the week
Module 8: Sat 11:59 pm 7/04

Module 9: throughout the week
Module 10: Sat 11:59 pm 7/11

Module 11: throughout the week
Module 12: Sat 11:59 pm 7/18

Final Evidence Analysis: Sat 11:59 pm 7/26

Each week of the course will examine a different current issue area. The
first module of the week is an exploration of the topic and the second
module is the module project. In the module project you will work in
teams to conduct an evidence evaluation to answer a PICO*-based
research question your group has agreed upon. Below are the activities
and assessments you will encounter as you work your way through the

course.*PICO

« P--Populations/People/Patient/Problem
e I- Intervention(s)

e C-Comparison

e O- Outcome

Read/Watch/Explore/Listen: Didactic content activities in which you
interact with key concepts presented in engaging video and web-based
formats.

Discussions: In each module at the beginning of the week (each odd-
numbered module) we will explore a current issue area. Discussions at
the end of some of the lessons are designed to allow you to comment
on the material and your peers’ entries. Each discussion is worth 10 pts
for a total of 100 points toward the course grade.

Peer-reviewed Responses (PRR): In the PRRs you are challenged to
provide a more structured and supported response to the prompt
given, based on the associated module lesson. You will submit your
response by the due date and then be assigned three of your peers’
responses to grade anonymously. Each PRR is worth 15 pts for a total
of 150 points toward your course grade.

Mini-module Assessments (MMA): MMAs are brief assignments that
either demonstrate your knowledge and/or ability or are building
blocks to the module project in the ensuing module. Each MMA counts
for 20 points, for a total of 100 pts toward your course grade.

Module Projects (MP): In the second module each week (even-
numbered modules), you will have a module project. Based on the
current issue area presented in the first module of the week, your team
will decide on a PICO-based research question and conduct an evidence
analysis. These MPs are designed to allow you to practice developing
evidence-based conclusions about current research.

Final Evidence Analysis (FEA): The FEA, worth 250 points, will be an
evidence analysis that your team conducts on a topic of the team’schoosing. It might be a different question on a topic that was covered in
the previous modules or a different area of interest. there will be a
mini-literature review and broader look at the literature required,
otherwise, it will follow the MPs you have completed throughout the
course.

Course Policies

Students’ Responsibilities: As a graduate student in this course, you are
responsible for being curious, striving to stretch your brain, and, of
course, learning all of the course material specified in the syllabus. You
may be required to learn some of the course material independently
through readings specified in the study guide and lecture recordings on
Canvas. You are responsible for turning in all assignments on time and
asking questions in advance if you don’t understand an aspect of an
assignment.

LATE ASSIGNMENTS: Late assignments will generally not be accepted.
In case of exceptional circumstances, write me an email and we can talk
in general, even in extreme circumstances, 10 points will be deducted
for each day the assignment is late.

DROP/ADD DEADLINES:
June 5 Last day of official add/drop period for the summer session
June 9 Last day to drop for possible refund

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE: Anyone feeling that a dispute exists after the
grading of an exam or assignment may submit a written grievance. The
grievance should identify the item in dispute and provide arguments
supporting the student’s position. Grievances must be submitted within
two class periods following the return of the exam or quiz. Attach your
entire exam or quiz to the grievance.UT AUSTIN SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY STATEMENT: The University
expects every student to maintain a high standard of individual
integrity. Scholastic dishonesty is a serious offense that includes but is
not limited to cheating on a test, or other classwork, plagiarism (the
appropriation of another’s work, and the unauthorized incorporation of
that work in one’s own work), and collusion (unauthorized
collaboration with another in preparing college work offered for credit).
In cases of scholastic dishonesty, the faculty member responsible for
the course will initiate disciplinary proceedings against the student.

ADA POLICY STATEMENT: The Americans with Disabilities ACT (ADA)
(42 U.S.C. 12101, et seg.) is a federal anti-discrimination statue that
provides comprehensive civil rights protection for persons with
disabilities. Among other things, this legislation requires that all
students with disabilities be guaranteed a learning environment that
provides for reasonable accommodation of their disabilities. If you
believe you have a disability requiring an accommodation, please
contact the Department of Disability Services. Their Phone number is

(210) 458-4157. Website: http://usta.edu/disability/

COMMUNICATION AND INTERACTION EXPECTATIONS:
Use proper grammar and syntax when posting messages.

Interact appropriately and respectfully with instructors and your fellow
class members.

Respond in an appropriate timeframe (usually 24 hours) to emails and
assessments (usually 48 hours).

NETIQUETTE (INTERNET ETIQUETTE): There is an informal code of
conduct that most people follow on the internet. Usually people who
break the code become the victims of flame emails. Netiquetteincluded not sending email or messages in ALL CAPS or with too many
exclamation points or asking repetitive questions in forums that have
FAQs posted. Sending spam is also a violation of netiquette. You are not
legally obligated to follow proper netiquette, but you will have an
easier time communicating with others over the internet, if you do.

TIPS FOR SUCCESS

Become familiar with Canvas technology.

Make sure you know your UT Austin Library ID and passphrase.
Regularly check the Canvas course for announcements and updates.
Log into your Canvas course every day.

Complete all required assignments and quizzes by due dates.
Participate in all required blog posts. Online learning is not solitary
learning: you must interact with your classmates in the various blog

posts.

Take responsibility for your own learning. Take the course and yourself
seriously.

Be aware of the amount of class work you need to accomplish.
Eliminating on-campus meetings does NOT mean less work. Usually,
eight hours of work outside of class are required each week in order to
succeed in this course.

Be polite and respectful in all communications with the instructor and
other members of the class.ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES — YOUR STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES:

You will ensure your full name and course number and section are
listed on the subject line of the email (e.g., John Doe BIO 1033.002) so |
know in which course/section you are registered.

You will check your email account regularly.
You will not fall behind the syllabus/schedule.
You will check announcements.

You will not consistently wait until the last minute to take assessments
or submit assignments.

While you MAY be given a grace period to allow for technical problems,
you MUST report problems immediately to me and to IT@UT.

COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE: Copying, displaying, and distributing
copyrighted work may infringe the owner’s copyright. The University of
Texas System’s policy statement on Fair Use of Copyrighted Materials
can help you determine whether your use of a copyrighted work may
be an infringement. Any use of computer or duplication facilities by
students, faculty, or staff, for infringing use of copyrighted works is
subject of appropriate disciplinary action as well as those civil remedies
and criminal penalties provided by federal law.

Copyright law applies to the Internet, which contains a mixture of
copyrighted and non-copyrighted materials. An item does not have to
display a statement of copyright to be copyrighted it is assumed that an
item is copyrighted until otherwise determined. For more informationon copyright, see the University of Texas System Office of General
counsel website.

THE TEACH ACT: Copyright law provides educators with a separate set
of rights, in addition to fair use, to display (show) and perform (show or
play) others’ works in the classroom (not online). These rights are in
Section 110(1) of the Copyright Act and apply to any work, regardless of
the medium.

CONDUCT: “Courtesy, politeness, manners, and civility are all, in
essence, forms of awareness. Being civil means being constantly aware
of others and weaving restraint, respect, and consideration on into the
very fabric of this awareness. Civility is a form of goodness; it is gracious
goodness. But it is not just an attitude of benevolent and thoughtful
relation to other individuals; it also entails an active interest in the ell-
being of our communities and even a concern for the health of the
planet on which we live.”

P.M. Forni - Choosing Civility: The 25 Rules of Considerate Conduct

PRIVACY: Canvas software automatically stores course access records,
quiz scores, email postings, discussions postings, and chat room
conversations. This is one more reason to make sure that your
communications adhere to the netiquette policy.

ALTERNATE COMMUNICATION: In the event that a Canvas problem

makes it impossible to use the course communication tools for more
than 24 hours, the instructor will communicate with class members

through email.

CHANGES: The syllabus, along with course assignments and due dates,
are subject to change. It is your responsibility to check Canvas for
corrections or updates to the syllabus. Any changes/correcxtions to thecourse materials, assignment dates, or other updates will be posted
ahead of time in the course Announcements tool. It is your
responsibility to check Canvas regularly for updates.

Please refer to the Canvas Orientation to the MSNS Program “More
Resources: MSNS Program Information” page for additional course
policies including grading structure, accommodations, academic
integrity, religious holidays, and drop dates.

Emergency Procedures when on Campus

The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from
the Office of fCampus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safet

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alar
activation or announcement requires exiting an assembling outside.

Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building
you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the
one you used when entering the building.

Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor
in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation,
follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.

Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following:
Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.

Use the Behavior concerns Advice Line (BCAL) hotline to report any
behavior or incident that is suspicious or disturbing: 512-232-5050Link to information regarding evacuation routs and emergency

procedures can be found at utexas.edu/emergency.

Student Resources
Note: The following are all links to external sites.

Campus safety and Security: http://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/
Counseling and Mental Health Center: https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Forty Acres Pharmacy: http//www.fortyacrespharmacy.com/
University Health Services: https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu
University of Texas Police Department: http://policeutexas.edu/

UT Recreational Sports: https://www.utrecsports.org/