THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
Second Year SPANISH II-— Summer Session 2 2020

SPN 611D — #82785
NOTES:

A. This course will be taught synchronously online via Zoom at the time indicated on the
Registrar’s course schedule. Please make sure you have access to reliable internet so you
can attend class sessions. Please locate your Zoom room within your Canvas course.

B. This class is part of a 3-semester language sequence designed specifically for non-native
and non-heritage speakers of Spanish. If you were exposed to Spanish on a regular basis
while growing up, you should be enrolled in our 2-semester heritage language sequence
(SPN 604 & SPN 612).

 

"This document contains important information and represents an agreement between the
Department of Spanish and Portuguese and its students.

= You are responsible for knowing all of the information contained in this document.

"You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.

 

The objectives of the Spanish Language Program address the basic tenet of a liberal arts education:
the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language in society. This
objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic
internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.

The Language Program promotes the development of multilingual literacies through the analysis
and use of Spanish as a second or third language. The program focuses on three major types of
competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):

1) linguistic competence: phonetics/phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon, discourse, etc.

2) communicative / interactional competence: sociocultural uses of language, pragmatics,
cultural backgrounds, perspectives, etc.

3) metalinguistic competence: language as a conceptual, symbolic system

SPN 611D is the third course in The University of Texas lower-division Spanish program. The
course focuses on developing speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in Spanish, while
building vocabulary, learning basic rules and terminology of Spanish grammar, and gaining a
better understanding of Hispanic cultures in order to communicate in an accurate, effective, and
informed manner within a variety of sociocultural situations.By the end of this course you should be able to do the following in Spanish:

(a) describing in detail

(b) narrating in the past

(c) narrating past events and reacting subjectively to them

(d) expressing opinions and reacting to dramatic events and situations

(e) reporting what other people said

(f) discussing past actions affecting the present

(g) recognizing dialectal, social and contextual variation

(h) talking about actions completed before other past actions

(1) talking about hypothetical situations in the future or past

(j) understanding the main ideas in moderately complex written texts (with improved skimming,
cognate recognition, and inference skills)

(k) understanding the main ideas of moderately complex oral discourse (with improved
recognition of tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)

(1) maintaining conversations of a substantial length (with improved fluency strategies, such as
circumlocution, discourse markers, etc.)

(m) producing written work of a substantial length (with improved organization, connectors, and
appropriateness of register)

The prerequisite for this course is a passing grade (C or better) in SPN 610 D, equivalent credit
transferred from another university, or credit by exam. If you do not have the prerequisite, please
drop the course now. If you are a heritage speaker of Spanish (if you grew up speaking Spanish
with family), consider enrolling in SPN 612 instead of SPN 611D. If you have any questions
regarding placement, please speak with Lia Haisley, the Liberal Arts Advisor for Spanish &
Portuguese, either in person (in BEN 2.108) or via email (liah@austin.utexas.edu).

This course carries a Global Cultures Flag. Courses with this flag are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-US. cultural group, past or present. At least one third of the course
grade for SPN 611D 1s based on content related to Global Cultures.

Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any questions or problems you may have relating to
the class. If you have a concern that you wish to discuss with someone other than your instructor,
contact the Course Supervisor. If you feel that the issue has not been satisfactorily addressed by
the Course Supervisor, you may refer the matter to the Director of the Language Program.

Course Instructor
Name: Wilfredo José Burgos Matos

Office: Zoom Personal Meeting Room (https://utexas.zoom.us/j/48432981 42)
Office hours: Fridays (1:00PM-3:00PM)Office phone: N/A

Email: wjburgosmatos@utexas.edu

 

Program Director
Name: Dr. Melissa Murphy
Email: mmurphy@mail.utexas.edu

Textbook: Ogando-Lavin M.; Murphy, M.; Montesinos, D.; Por mi_mism@ 3th edition
revised. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt, 2014. [At the Co-op or online at

https://he.kendallhunt.com/product/por-mi-mism

 

TalkAbroad: You must purchase TWO “conversations” ($15 each) at Talkabroad.com.

Canvas: This course uses Canvas as its course management system. You are
responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for important

documents, assignments, grades, etc.

Pelo malo, Venezuela, dirigida por Mariana Rondon, 2013 (Link provided)
Tambien la Iluvia, Espania, dirigida por Iciar Bollain, 2010 (Link provided)
No, Chile, dirigida por Pablo Larrain, 2012 (Link provided)

Attendance is required at all classes and is checked daily. All absences count (except religious
holidays, documented jury duty, documented military duty or university-sponsored
activities). Your instructor will take attendance at the beginning of each 75-minute session
(i.e. twice per day). Up to six 75-minute session absences will not result in a reduction of your
final grade because of the absence itself. However, each absence during a 75-minute session
beyond six, regardless of the reason for the absence, will carry a 1%-point penalty toward your
final grade. Three tardies equal one absence. Note: Arriving more than 35 minutes late counts
as an absence. Three tardies (arriving to class at least 5 minutes late) equal one absence.

Movies:

Please familiarize yourself with the following procedures:

Reason for absence Procedures

Religious holiday e Notify your instructor via email during the first week of class.
e For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will

receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.
e For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.e At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
upon return.

Jury duty e Notify your instructor via email as soon as you are aware of the

conflict.
Military duty e For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will

. . receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
University-

sponsored activity instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.

e For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.
e At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
upon return.

Documented illness e Notify your instructor immediately via email.

or emergency e No make-ups are permitted.

e Fill out and submit to your instructor a “Request for Grade
Averaging Form” (posted on Canvas), along with the appropriate
documentation within 1 week of your absence. A Supervisory
Committee will determine whether or not you may receive grade
averaging for your missed assessment(s).

 

 

Grade averaging = The average from your other scores in the same category will be used as your score on
the missed assessment.

THERE WILL BE NO FINAL EXAM IN SPN 611D DURING SUMMER 2020.

There is no curve or extra credit available in this course. If your final average is 89.9, your
course grade will be a B+. Do not expect to receive a passing grade simply because you complete
all requirements. To receive an “A”, all or most of your work must be excellent. A “B” indicates
that your work is very good. A “C” means that your work is adequate and you may continue with
the next course. Please keep in mind that a grade of C or higher in this course is required in
order to continue in Spanish. A grade of C- or Pass is not sufficient to go to the next level.
Final letter grades are assigned according to the following scale:

93-100 A 83-86.9 B 73-76.9 C 63-66.9 D
90-92.9 A- 80-82.9 _B- 70-72.9 _C- 60-62.9 D-

 

 

87-89.9 Bt 77-79.9 Ct 67-69.9 D+ 0-59.9 F10. GRADE DISTRIBUTION AND COURSE ASSESSMENTS

The grade distribution in SPN 611D is as follows:

 

 

3 Exams 30%
Oral Activities
@ TalkAbroad (2) 10%
e jA Hablar! (3) 5%

Noticias y sociedad (3)
Culture Journal (3) and other cultural activities

Asynchronous online activities

TOTAL 100%

 

EXAMS: You will have 3 exams, one after each chapter. The exams will include vocabulary,
grammar, semantic, pragmatic and cultural topics covered in the textbook, in class discussions,
and in homework assignments. Both listening comprehension and written skills will be evaluated.
The focus of each exam will be the material from the most recent chapters. However, since learning
a second language is a cumulative process, you should also expect to encounter previous material
on exams. Exam dates are listed on your course calendar.

TALK ABROAD: Two times during the semester you will have a 30-minute (recorded)
conversation online with a native Spanish speaker living in Latin America. In addition to the
conversations themselves, you will complete a pre-activity, which is designed to help you prepare
for your conversation, and a follow-up activity, in which you will reflect on what you have learned
about your partner’s country (customs, geography, dialect, etc.)

jA HABLAR!: This is one of the oral components of the course. Once per chapter, you will spend
25-30 minutes speaking in small groups. These discussions will be unrehearsed, and will relate
directly to the chapter themes. Your grade will be based on your ability to express yourself,
maintain a conversation and interact effectively with others. The dates are listed on your course
calendar.

READING ACTIVITIES: Towards the end of each chapter, you will complete a reading
assignment (called Noticias y sociedad). The assignment can be found in your book, but the
questions must be completed online. These are in-depth activities that require you to think about
both familiar and unfamiliar vocabulary and grammatical structures as well as the content and
organization of each text. Plan to set aside several hours in order to complete each one, as this
process will help you develop stronger reading and linguistic skills.

CULTURE JOURNAL: Two times per chapter, you will be given written texts and movies
exploring a variety of cultural perspectives related to the chapter themes. You will 1) summarize
the content, demonstrating comprehension of the material, and 2) comment subjectively, reflecting
on what you have learned and making comparisons between the culture(s) presented and US
culture. We will drop the lowest grade.HOMEWORK: Your instructor will assign homework to turn-in and be evaluated. Participation in
class, exercises and homework are essential for success in the course. At times you also will be
required to correct your own homework using a homework key posted on CANVAS. Class time
will be used for interactive and creative exercises. See important notes about the use of translation
devices in the section on Academic Integrity on page 9.

ASYNCHRONOUS ONLINE ACTIVITIES: For each topic covered in this course, there is a
series of accompanying activities on Canvas that must be completed by the date and time listed in
Canvas to receive full credit. The Canvas gradebook automatically deducts 25% of the score for
each day these activities are submitted past their due date (any assignment that is 4 days late thus
automatically receives a zero), so please make sure that you are keeping up with the asynchronous
online work.

FINAL EXAM: Due to the online nature of this course, there will be no final exam in SPN 611D
during Summer 2020.

11. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT ASSESSMENTS

Throughout the semester, you will be acquiring knowledge (e.g. vocabulary, grammar) and you
will be developing skills (e.g. reading strategies, data analysis). Therefore, course assessments are
designed to reflect your progress in both of these areas. Assessments can include material not
explicitly studied, but that is closely related to the course content and tests a student’s ability to
apply acquired information and abilities to unfamiliar situations and contexts.

KNOWLEDGE

Vocabulary: You are responsible for all words and phrases on the vocabulary lists. You should
know the meaning, gender and spelling of these items. Furthermore, you will be expected to use
these words within a context. Therefore, make sure you know not only the English translations
for the words, but also understand how they would be used in Spanish discourse.

Grammar: You are expected to know all grammar structures included in the course syllabus.
Make sure you fully understand all formulas and rules. For verb conjugations, you will be expected
to know how to conjugate not only regular verbs, but also irregular verbs and verbs with spelling
and stem changes.

Terminology: In order to talk effectively about language, you will be expected to know the
appropriate terminology. You should be prepared to answer questions involving technical
linguistic terminology and/or identify these elements both in class and on exams or other
assessments.

Sociocultural: Your instructor will expose you to different interactional contexts and a variety of
dialects and their principal characteristics throughout the semester. You must familiarize yourself
with this material and will be expected to recognize these features on exams and other gradedassignments.

SKILLS

Reading: Of the four skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking), the ability to read 1s typically
retained for the longest period of time. With this natural tendency in mind, one of the main goals
of our program is to develop strong reading skills that will stay with you for years to come. In this
course, you will be given many opportunities to develop these skills, both in groups and
individually, both at home and in-class. You will develop skills such as skimming, recognizing
cognates, making inferences, etc. It is in your best interest to work pro-actively on developing
these reading skills at home, since you will be tested on your ability to read and comprehend
unfamiliar texts containing unfamiliar vocabulary and to do so with relative speed.

Data analysis: Our department implements a guided inductive approach to language learning.
This means that you will be exposed to language data (written or oral) and will be encouraged to
formulate your own rules and test your own hypotheses regarding language forms and structures.
Since a substantial part of the course will involve this type of data analysis, you should expect to
be tested on this skill via graded assignments and exams. In other words, you will not only be
expected to reproduce language practiced in the classroom, but will also be given new data, about
which you will be asked to draw conclusions.

Students are expected to enter this course with a working knowledge of:

® nouns , adjectives , pronouns (agreement, placement)

® conjugations of regular, irregular and stem-changing verbs (present, present progressive,
preterit and imperfect, periphrastic future, synthetic future, formal and informal
commands, present subjunctive, past subsunctive, conditional)

e@ mood selection (indicative, subjunctive, imperative)

e simple and complex sentences

@ reading strategies (skimming, recognizing cognates, making inferences, etc.)

e listening strategies (tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)

@ speaking strategies (circumlocution, fluency, etc.)

e writing strategies (process writing, discourse connectors, paragraph organization,
paraphrasing, etc.)

e metalinguistic skills (recognizing parts of speech, recognizing dialectal variation,
identifying functional uses of grammar, etc.)

If you feel you have weaknesses in any of these areas, it is your responsibility to review your
610 D material as soon as possible and consider working with a tutor if necessary.In order to be successful in this course, students must fulfill several responsibilities both in class
and at home and must also be able to demonstrate their progress in course assessments.

Homework: Your instructor will assign homework regularly. Many of these assignments are
given in order to prepare you for the following class day. Therefore, it is imperative that you
complete this work in order to be able to participate in class. Homework is also given to provide
you with ample opportunities to practice the course material and identify potential areas of
weakness. As a result, you will experience an increase in self-awareness, which will enable you
to take a pro-active stance in your progress, thus becoming a more effective learner overall.

Studying: You should not limit your work at home only to homework assignments collected by
your instructor for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis,
since attempts to memorize large amounts of material quickly before an exam are not normally
successful. You should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of
any items you may not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions
and resolve issues before a quiz or exam.

Practice: Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as re-reading or staring
at tables and lists of words / rules. This type of traditional studying is not sufficient in a language
course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t develop the
automaticity necessary to successfully complete exams and compositions within a limited time
frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to:

® practice conjugating verbs
practice writing sentences, letters, essays, etc.
practice reading newspaper articles, ads, etc.
practice speaking with friends and/or classmates
practice listening via news broadcasts, television or online videos

Interaction: Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and
rely heavily on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will
be pair work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the
facilitator. All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.

Focus: The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class. Smart
phones, tablets, laptops and outside reading materials are NOT allowed in class, as they limit your
participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.

Spanish: In order to improve your oral communication skills, you must practice both listening to
and speaking Spanish! Therefore, your instructor will speak almost exclusively in Spanish, which
will not only help you learn new vocabulary and grammar structures, but will also increase your
comfort level over the course of the semester. In turn, you are expected to speak in Spanish during
all activities and for basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom,
asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.). Don’t be shy! You won’t be graded on the
accuracy of your speech in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.

14. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
8The University provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students
with disabilities. Any students with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who require
academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students, 471-6259, as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. Before course accommodations can be made, the letter from SSD
must be presented to the instructor. Approved accommodations will not change the basic elements
of the course.

The University’s honor Code states: “the core values of the University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.” Please note that all graded work (e.g. essays,
homework) done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing that appears to be the
work of someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or print source) or that
appears to have been written in English and then translated by an online translation program will
not be accepted, and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on the particular assignment.
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the university, policies on
academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, visit the Student Judicial
Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/

 

 

Any student who, acting singly or in concert with others, obstructs, disrupts, or interferes with any
teaching, educational, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, or other activity or
public performance authorized to be held or conducted on campus or on property or in a building
or facility owned or controlled by the U.T. System or institution is subject to discipline. For more
information, visit http://www.utsystem.edu/bor/rules/S50000Series/50101.pdf.

 

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police department, or Fire Prevention Servicesoffice. Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.

SPN 611 D: CALENDARIO SUMMER 2020

Capitulo 1: Dime como eres...

e Contenidos funcionales: Describir personas, expresar cambios, expresar acuerdo y desacuerdo e
interrumpir

e Contenidos semanticos: Las apariencias y la personalidad, Los estereotipos, la belleza y la
autoestima

e Contenidos culturales: El privilegio blanco en América Latina; Visionado de la pelicula Pelo

malo dirigida por Mariana Rondon

Contenidos gramaticales: Ser/estar +adjetivos, verbos de cambio

Contenidos socioculturales: Los atenuadores del discurso

Contenidos pragmaticos: Estructuras para aumentar la fluidez

Estrategia de lectura: Predecir palabras por el contexto

Lectura: Relaciones con los demas. Objetivos: comprension lectora y revision del subjuntivo

El tema en la literatura: D. Juan Manuel y Bécquer

Tarea final: Un debate

 

 

13 julio e Introduccion al curso
e jDéjate volar! y Abriendo el tema

e Entrando en materia: Las apariencias y la personalidad

 

14 julio e jGramaticando! Usos de ser y estar
e@ Lectura de cultura: El privilegio blanco en América Latina

e Pre-actividad de TalkAbroad

 

15 julio e@ ;Gramaticando! Usos de ser y estar II

 

10pS e Pre-actividad de la pelicula Pelo malo

Del 15 de julio al 22 deben ver la pelicula Pelo Malo. Su instructor les proporciona un link para
su visionado.
16 julio e Entrando en materia: Los estereotipos

e jGramaticando! Adjetivos que cambian de significado con ser y estar
e Entrando en materia: La belleza y la autoestima
@ ;Gramaticando! Verbos que expresan cambios
e Entregar TalkAbroad 1
20 julio e jGramaticando! Verbos que expresan cambios
e El tema en la literatura

e A hablar 1

 

21 julio e@ Mejorando el discurso: Estructuras para aumentar la fluidez
@ El lenguaje vivo: Atenuadores del discurso

@ Noticias y sociedad 1

 

22 julio e Actividad de post visionado de Pelo Malo

@ Revision para Examen I

23 de julio e@ Examen 1

Introduccion al capitulo 2: Déjate volar y Abriendo el tema

 

Capitulo 2: La maquina del tiempo

 

 

 

 

e Contenidos funcionales: Relatar hechos en el pasado, hablar de hechos cerca del presente o en el
pasado del pasado, enfatizar el paciente

e Contenidos semanticos: Acontecimientos esenciales para el mundo, logros sociales, rituales

festivos

Contenidos gramaticales: Pretérito e imperfecto, los pasados compuestos, voz pasiva y se pasivo

Contenidos socioculturales: Los arcaismos

Contenidos pragmaticos: Conectar y ordenar

Contenidos culturales: Lectura sobre los indigenas tras la llegada de Colon; Visionado de la

pelicula También la Iluvia de Iciar Bollain

Estrategia de lectura: Mejorar la comprensi6n de un texto

e Lectura: Mujeres rompedoras. Objetivos: comprender y resumir un texto

11e El tema en la literatura: Arrdncame la vida Angeles Mastretta
e Tarea final: Un reportaje

24 julio

27 julio

 

e@ Entrega del diario de cultura 1. Escritura sobre Pelo Malo y “E| privilegio blanco

en América latina”
e Entrando en materia: Acontecimientos que marcaron el mundo
@ Gramaticando! Pretérito e imperfecto I
@ Gramaticando! Pretérito e imperfecto II

e Lectura de cultura: “El encubrimiento de América”

 

Del 28 al 31 de julio deben ver la pelicula También la lluvia. Su instructor les proporciona un link
para su visionado.

 

28 julio

@ Pre-actividad de TalkAbroad
@ Pre-visionado de la pelicula También la lluvia

e Entrando en materia: Logros sociales a través de la historia

 

29 julio

30 julio

3 agosto

 

e@ ;Gramaticando! Los pasados compuestos
e Entrando en materia: Rituales festivos

e A hablar 2

e@ ;Gramaticando! Voz pasiva y se pasivo I

e Noticias y Sociedad 2

Entregar TalkAbroad 2
El tema en la literatura
Post-visionado de la pelicula También la lluvia

@ Mejorando el discurso: Conectar y ordenar cronol6gicamente

e Revision examen 2

 

124 agosto @ Examen 2

@ Comenzar el capitulo 3: ;Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema

 

Capitulo 3: Ciudadanos del mundo

 

 

e Contenidos funcionales: Expresar condiciones, expresar deseos, finalidad, mandatos, opiniones
negativas...

e Contenidos semanticos: El medio ambiente, el mercadeo internacional, los derechos y las
responsabilidades

e Contenidos culturales: Lectura sobre las protestas en Puerto Rico; Pelicula No, Chile; dirigida

por Pablo Larrain

Contenidos gramaticales: Clausulas con si, usos del subjuntivo

Contenidos socioculturales: El lenguaje corporal

Contenidos pragmaticos: Conectores que dan coherencia al discurso

Estrategia de lectura: Identificar tipos de texto y sus caracteristicas

Lectura: Transgénicos. Objetivos: Analisis de la estructura del texto y debate sobre el mismo.

El tema en la literatura: “A la deriva” Horacio Quiroga

Tarea final: Una presentacion

 

5 agosto e Entregar Diario de cultura 2: También la Iluvia y “El encubrimiento de
América”
e Lectura de cultura: “El poder de los artistas se deja sentir en ... Puerto Rico”

e Entrando en materia: El medio ambiente

 

6 agosto e@ ;Gramaticando! Condiciones potenciales
e Entrando en materia: El mercadeo internacional

e A Hablar 3

 

7 agosto @ jGramaticando! Clausulas con si I

e Actividad de pre-visionado de No

@ jGramaticando! Clausulas con si II

13e Entrando en materia: Los derechos y las responsabilidades

11 agosto e Noticias y Sociedad 3
e jGramaticando! Repaso de algunos usos del subjuntivo I

e Actividad de post-visionado de No

12 agosto e@ |Gramaticando! Repaso de algunos usos del subjuntivo II

e Entregar el diario de cultura 3: No y “El poder de los artistas se
manifiesta...Puerto Rico”
13 agosto @ El lenguaje vivo
e@e = Revision del examen 3

14 agosto e Examen 3

e CIS Evaluations

 

14