THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
SECOND YEAR SPANISH II- Summer Session 2 2020

SPN s611D — 82794
NOTES:

A. This course will be taught synchronously online via Zoom at the time indicated on the
Registrar’s course schedule. Please make sure you have access to reliable internet so you
can attend class sessions. Please locate your Zoom room within your Canvas course.

B. This class is part of a 3-semester language sequence designed specifically for non-native
and non-heritage speakers of Spanish. If you were exposed to Spanish on a regular basis
while growing up, you should be enrolled in our 2-semester heritage language sequence
(SPN 604 & SPN 612).

 

= This document contains important information and represents an agreement between the
Department of Spanish and Portuguese and its students.

= You are responsible for knowing all of the information contained in this document.

"You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.

 

The objectives of the Spanish Language Program address the basic tenet of a liberal arts education:
the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language in society. This
objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic
internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.

The Language Program promotes the development of multilingual literacies through the analysis
and use of Spanish as a second or third language. The program focuses on three major types of
competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):

1) linguistic competence: phonetics/phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon, discourse, etc.

2) communicative / interactional competence: sociocultural uses of language, pragmatics,
cultural backgrounds, perspectives, etc.

3) metalinguistic competence: language as a conceptual, symbolic system

SPN 611D is the third course in The University of Texas lower-division Spanish program. The
course focuses on developing speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in Spanish, while
building vocabulary, learning basic rules and terminology of Spanish grammar, and gaining a
better understanding of Hispanic cultures in order to communicate in an accurate, effective, and
informed manner within a variety of sociocultural situations.By the end of this course you should be able to do the following in Spanish:
(a) describing in detail
(b) narrating in the past
(c) narrating past events and reacting subjectively to them
(d) expressing opinions and reacting to dramatic events and situations
(e) reporting what other people said
(f) discussing past actions affecting the present
(g) recognizing dialectal, social and contextual variation
(h) talking about actions completed before other past actions
(1) talking about hypothetical situations in the future or past
(j) understanding the main ideas in moderately complex written texts (with improved
skimming, cognate recognition, and inference skills)
(k) understanding the main ideas of moderately complex oral discourse (with improved
recognition of tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)
(1) maintaining conversations of a substantial length (with improved fluency strategies,
such as circumlocution, discourse markers, etc.)
(m) producing written work of a substantial length (with improved organization,
connectors, and appropriateness of register)

The prerequisite for this course is a passing grade (C or better) in SPN 610 D, equivalent credit
transferred from another university, or credit by exam. If you do not have the prerequisite, please
drop the course now. If you are a heritage speaker of Spanish (if you grew up speaking Spanish
with family), consider enrolling in SPN 612 instead of SPN 611D. If you have any questions
regarding placement, please speak with Lia Haisley, the Liberal Arts Advisor for Spanish &
Portuguese, either in person (in BEN 2.108) or via email (liah@austin.utexas.edu).

This course carries a Global Cultures Flag. Courses with this flag are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-US. cultural group, past or present. At least one third of the course
grade for SPN 611D 1s based on content related to Global Cultures.

Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any questions or problems you may have relating to
the class. If you have a concern that you wish to discuss with someone other than your instructor,
contact the Course Supervisor. If you feel that the issue has not been satisfactorily addressed by
the Course Supervisor, you may refer the matter to the Director of the Language Program.

 

| «| s Course Instructor Teaching Assistant
Luis F. Avilés Gonzalez Rafael Jiménez-Baralt

 

BEN 5.H34A BEN 5.H28AOffice hours: MT 12:00-12:50P WR 12:00-12:50P

Office phone: N/A

Email: laviles@utexas.edu rybaralt@gmail.com

 

Program Director
Name: Dr. Melissa Murphy
Email: mmurphy@mail.utexas.edu

Textbook: Ogando-Lavin M.; Murphy, M.; Montesinos, D.; Por mi_mism@ 3th edition
revised. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt, 2014. [At the Co-op or online at

https://he.kendallhunt.com/product/por-mi-mism

TalkAbroad: You must purchase TWO “conversations” ($15 each) at Talkabroad.com.
|

This course uses Canvas as its course management system. You are

Canvas:
responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for important
documents, assignments, grades, etc.

Movies: Pelo malo, Venezuela, dirigida por Mariana Rondon, 2013 (Link provided)

También la lluvia, Espana, dirigida por Iciar Bollain, 2010 (Link provided)
No, Chile, dirigida por Pablo Larrain, 2012 (Link provided)

Attendance is required at all classes and is checked daily. All absences count (except religious
holidays, documented jury duty, documented military duty or university-sponsored
activities). Your instructor will take attendance at the beginning of each 75-minute session
(i.e. twice per day). Up to six 75-minute session absences will not result in a reduction of your
final grade because of the absence itself. However, each absence during a 75-minute session
beyond six, regardless of the reason for the absence, will carry a 1%-point penalty toward your
final grade. Three tardies equal one absence. Note: Arriving more than 35 minutes late counts
as an absence. Three tardies (arriving to class at least 5 minutes late) equal one absence.

Please familiarize yourself with the following procedures:

Reason for absence _ | Procedures
Religious holiday e Notify your instructor via email during the first week of class.e For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will
receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.

e For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.

e At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
upon return.

 

Jury duty e Notify your instructor via email as soon as you are aware of the

conflict.
Military duty eFor written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will
receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your

University-
y instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.

sponsored activity
e For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.

e At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
upon return.

 

Documented illness | e Notify your instructor immediately via email.

or emergency e No make-ups are permitted.

e Fill out and submit to your instructor a “Request for Grade Averaging
Form” (posted on Canvas), along with the appropriate documentation
within 1 week of your absence. A Supervisory Committee will
determine whether or not you may receive grade averaging for your
missed assessment(s).

 

 

Grade averaging = The average from your other scores in the same category will be used as your score on the
missed assessment.

[8 FINALEXAM
| __ THERE WILL BE NO FINAL EXAMIN SPN 611D DURING SUMMER 2020. |

There is no curve or extra credit available in this course. If your final average is 89.9, your
course grade will be a B+. Do not expect to receive a passing grade simply because you complete
all requirements. To receive an “A”, all or most of your work must be excellent. A “B” indicates
that your work is very good. A “C” means that your work is adequate and you may continue with
the next course. Please keep in mind that a grade of C or higher in this course is required in
order to continue in Spanish. A grade of C- or Pass is not sufficient to go to the next level. Final
letter grades are assigned according to the following scale:93-100 A 83-86.9 B 73-76.9 C 63-66.9 D

90-92.9 A- 80-82.9 B- 70-72.9 C- 60-62.9 D-
87-89.9 B+ 77-79.9 C+ 67-69.9 D+ 0-59.9 F

 

 

10. GRADE DISTRIBUTION AND COURSE ASSESSMENTS

 

 

The grade distribution in SPN 611D is as follows:

 

3 Exams 20%
3 Listening Quizzes 10%
Oral Activities

@ TalkAbroad (2)

e@ jA Hablar! (3)

 

Noticias y sociedad (3)
Culture Journal (3) and other cultural activities

Homework 5%
Asynchronous online activities 15%

TOTAL 100%

 

 

 

EXAMS: You will have 3 exams, one after each chapter. The exams will include vocabulary,
grammar, semantic, pragmatic and cultural topics covered in the textbook, in class discussions,
and in homework assignments. Both listening comprehension and written skills will be evaluated.
The focus of each exam will be the material from the most recent chapters. However, since learning
a second language is a cumulative process, you should also expect to encounter previous material
on exams. Exam dates are listed on your course calendar.

LISTENING QUIZZES: Once per chapter, you will have a short listening quiz in class. This will
offer you the opportunity to have regular, low-stakes, listening assessments rather than less
frequent, high-stakes listening assessments on major exams.

 

FINAL TASKS: There will be 3 “final tasks”, one at the end of each chapter. Two will be oral
activities (a debate and a presentation) and one will be written (a news report). The topics will
relate to the vocabulary themes and cultural content of the respective chapters.

TALK ABROAD: Two times during the semester you will have a 30-minute (recorded)
conversation online with a native Spanish speaker living in Latin America. In addition to the
conversations themselves, you will complete a pre-activity, which is designed to help you prepare
for your conversation, and a follow-up activity, in which you will reflect on what you have learned
about your partner’s country (customs, geography, dialect, etc.)jA HABLAR!: This is one of the oral components of the course. Once per chapter, you will spend
25-30 minutes speaking in small groups. These discussions will be unrehearsed, and will relate
directly to the chapter themes. Your grade will be based on your ability to express yourself,
maintain a conversation and interact effectively with others. The dates are listed on your course
calendar.

READING ACTIVITIES: Towards the end of each chapter, you will complete a reading
assignment (called Noticias y sociedad). The assignment can be found in your book, but the
questions must be completed online. These are in-depth activities that require you to think about
both familiar and unfamiliar vocabulary and grammatical structures as well as the content and
organization of each text. Plan to set aside several hours in order to complete each one, as this
process will help you develop stronger reading and linguistic skills.

CULTURE JOURNAL: Two times per chapter, you will be given written texts and movies
exploring a variety of cultural perspectives related to the chapter themes. You will 1) summarize
the content, demonstrating comprehension of the material, and 2) comment subjectively, reflecting
on what you have learned and making comparisons between the culture(s) presented and US
culture in written format. We will drop the lowest grade.

HOMEWORK: Your instructor will assign homework to turn-in and be evaluated. Participation in
class, exercises and homework are essential for success in the course. At times you also will be
required to correct your own homework using a homework key posted on CANVAS. Class time
will be used for interactive and creative exercises. See important notes about the use of translation
devices in the section on Academic Integrity on page 9.

ASYNCHRONOUS ONLINE ACTIVITIES: For each topic covered in this course, there is a
series of accompanying activities on Canvas that must be completed by the date and time listed in
Canvas to receive full credit. The Canvas gradebook automatically deducts 25% of the score for
each day these activities are submitted past their due date (any assignment that is 4 days late thus
automatically receives a zero), so please make sure that you are keeping up with the asynchronous
online work.

FINAL EXAM: Due to the online nature of this course, there will be no final exam in SPN 611D
during Summer 2020.

11. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT ASSESSMENTS

Throughout the semester, you will be acquiring knowledge (e.g. vocabulary, grammar) and you
will be developing skills (e.g. reading strategies, data analysis). Therefore, course assessments are
designed to reflect your progress in both of these areas. Assessments can include material not
explicitly studied, but that is closely related to the course content and tests a student’s ability to
apply acquired information and abilities to unfamiliar situations and contexts.KNOWLEDGE

Vocabulary: You are responsible for all words and phrases on the vocabulary lists. You should
know the meaning, gender and spelling of these items. Furthermore, you will be expected to use
these words within a context. Therefore, make sure you know not only the English translations
for the words, but also understand how they would be used in Spanish discourse.

Grammar: You are expected to know all grammar structures included in the course syllabus.
Make sure you fully understand all formulas and rules. For verb conjugations, you will be expected
to know how to conjugate not only regular verbs, but also irregular verbs and verbs with spelling
and stem changes.

Terminology: In order to talk effectively about language, you will be expected to know the
appropriate terminology. You should be prepared to answer questions involving technical
linguistic terminology and/or identify these elements both in class and on exams or other
assessments.

Sociocultural: Your instructor will expose you to different interactional contexts and a variety of
dialects and their principal characteristics throughout the semester. You must familiarize yourself
with this material and will be expected to recognize these features on exams and other graded
assignments.

SKILLS

Reading: Of the four skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking), the ability to read 1s typically
retained for the longest period of time. With this natural tendency in mind, one of the main goals
of our program is to develop strong reading skills that will stay with you for years to come. In this
course, you will be given many opportunities to develop these skills, both in groups and
individually, both at home and in-class. You will develop skills such as skimming, recognizing
cognates, making inferences, etc. It is in your best interest to work pro-actively on developing
these reading skills at home, since you will be tested on your ability to read and comprehend
unfamiliar texts containing unfamiliar vocabulary and to do so with relative speed.

Data analysis: Our department implements a guided inductive approach to language learning.
This means that you will be exposed to language data (written or oral) and will be encouraged to
formulate your own rules and test your own hypotheses regarding language forms and structures.
Since a substantial part of the course will involve this type of data analysis, you should expect to
be tested on this skill via graded assignments and exams. In other words, you will not only be
expected to reproduce language practiced in the classroom, but will also be given new data, about
which you will be asked to draw conclusions.

12. EXPECTATIONS OF STUDENTS ENTERING SPN 611 D

Students are expected to enter this course with a working knowledge of:
® nouns , adjectives , pronouns (agreement, placement)® conjugations of regular, irregular and stem-changing verbs (present, present progressive,

preterit and imperfect, periphrastic future, synthetic future, formal and informal commands,

present subjunctive, past subjunctive, conditional)

mood selection (indicative, subjunctive, imperative)

simple and complex sentences

reading strategies (skimming, recognizing cognates, making inferences, etc.)

listening strategies (tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)

speaking strategies (circumlocution, fluency, etc.)

writing strategies (process writing, discourse connectors, paragraph organization,

paraphrasing, etc.)

e metalinguistic skills (recognizing parts of speech, recognizing dialectal variation, identifying
functional uses of grammar, etc.)

If you feel you have weaknesses in any of these areas, it is your responsibility to review your
610 D material as soon as possible and consider working with a tutor if necessary.

13. STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES

In order to be successful in this course, students must fulfill several responsibilities both in class
and at home and must also be able to demonstrate their progress in course assessments.

Homework: Your instructor will assign homework regularly. Many of these assignments are
given in order to prepare you for the following class day. Therefore, it is imperative that you
complete this work in order to be able to participate in class. Homework is also given to provide
you with ample opportunities to practice the course material and identify potential areas of
weakness. As a result, you will experience an increase in self-awareness, which will enable you
to take a pro-active stance in your progress, thus becoming a more effective learner overall.

Studying: You should not limit your work at home only to homework assignments collected by
your instructor for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis,
since attempts to memorize large amounts of material quickly before an exam are not normally
successful. You should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of
any items you may not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions
and resolve issues before a quiz or exam.

Practice: Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as re-reading or staring
at tables and lists of words / rules. This type of traditional studying is not sufficient in a language
course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t develop the
automaticity necessary to successfully complete exams and compositions within a limited time
frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to:

® practice conjugating verbs

® practice writing sentences, letters, essays, etc.

® practice reading newspaper articles, ads, etc.

@® practice speaking with friends and/or classmates@ practice listening via news broadcasts, television or online videos

Interaction: Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and
rely heavily on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will
be pair work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the
facilitator. All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.

Focus: The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class. Smart
phones, tablets, laptops and outside reading materials are NOT allowed in class, as they limit your
participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.

Spanish: In order to improve your oral communication skills, you must practice both listening to
and speaking Spanish! Therefore, your instructor will speak almost exclusively in Spanish, which
will not only help you learn new vocabulary and grammar structures, but will also increase your
comfort level over the course of the semester. In turn, you are expected to speak in Spanish during
all activities and for basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom,
asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.). Don’t be shy! You won’t be graded on the
accuracy of your speech in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.

The University provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students
with disabilities. Any students with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who require
academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students, 471-6259, as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. Before course accommodations can be made, the letter from SSD
must be presented to the instructor. Approved accommodations will not change the basic elements
of the course.

The University’s honor Code states: “the core values of the University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.” Please note that all graded work (e.g. essays,
homework) done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing that appears to be the
work of someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or print source) or that
appears to have been written in English and then translated by an online translation program will
not be accepted, and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on the particular assignment.
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the university, policies on
academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, visit the Student Judicial
Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/Any student who, acting singly or in concert with others, obstructs, disrupts, or interferes with any
teaching, educational, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, or other activity or
public performance authorized to be held or conducted on campus or on property or in a building
or facility owned or controlled by the U.T. System or institution is subject to discipline. For more

information, visit http://www.utsystem.edu/bor/rules/S50000Series/50101.pdf.

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police department, or Fire Prevention Services
office. Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.

 

10SPN 611 D: CALENDARIO SUMMER 2020

Capitulo 1: Dime como eres...

= Contenidos funcionales: Describir personas, expresar cambios, expresar acuerdo y desacuerdo e interrumpir
= Contenidos semanticos: Las apariencias y la personalidad, Los estereotipos, la belleza y la autoestima
= Contenidos culturales: El privilegio blanco en América Latina; Visionado de la pelicula Pelo malo dirigida por Mariana
Rondon
=" Contenidos gramaticales: Ser/estar +adjetivos, verbos de cambio
= Contenidos socioculturales: Los atenuadores del discurso
= Contenidos pragmaticos: Estructuras para aumentar la fluidez
= Estrategia de lectura: Predecir palabras por el contexto
= Lectura: Relaciones con los demas. Objetivos: comprensi6n lectora y revision del subjuntivo
= El] tema en la literatura: D. Juan Manuel y Bécquer
= Tarea final: Un debate
13 de julio Introduccion al curso
jDéjate volar! y Abriendo el tema
Entrando en materia: Las apariencias y la personalidad
jGramaticando! Usos de ser y estar
Lectura de cultura: El privilegio blanco en América Latina
Pre-actividad de TalkAbroad
jGramaticando! Usos de ser y estar II
Entrando en materia: Los estereotipos
Pre-actividad de la pelicula Pelo malo
Del 15 de julio al 21 concn ver la pelicula Pelo Malo. Su instructor les proporciona un link para su visionado.

14 de julio

 

15 de julio

PNT YN eer

 

 

16 de julio 1. jGramaticando! Adjetivos que cambian de significado con ser y estar
Entrando en materia: La belleza y la autoestima
Jv Listening quiz 1
17 de julio 1. jGramaticando! Verbos que expresan cambios
J Entregar TalkAbroad 1
Mejorando el discurso: Estructuras para aumentar la fluidez
El tema en la literatura
V Ahablar 1
21 de julio 1. El lenguaje vivo: Atenuadores del discurso
Noticias y sociedad 1
22 de julio 1. Actividad de post visionado de Pelo Malo
V Tarea final 1: el debate
V Examen 1
V diario de cultura 1.

 

20 de julio

NO Re

 

 

11Capitulo 2: La maquina del tiempo

=" Contenidos funcionales: Relatar hechos en el pasado, hablar de hechos cerca del presente 0 en el pasado del pasado,
enfatizar el paciente

= Contenidos semanticos: Acontecimientos esenciales para el mundo, logros sociales, rituales festivos

= Contenidos gramaticales: Pretérito e imperfecto, los pasados compuestos, voz pasiva y se pasivo

= Contenidos socioculturales: Los arcaismos

= Contenidos pragmaticos: Conectar y ordenar

= Contenidos culturales: Lectura sobre los indigenas tras la Ilegada de Colon; Visionado de la pelicula También la
lluvia de Iciar Bollain

= Estrategia de lectura: Mejorar la comprension de un texto

= Lectura: Mujeres rompedoras. Objetivos: comprender y resumir un texto

= El tema en la literatura: Arrdncame la vida Angeles Mastretta

=" Tarea final: Un reportaje

 

 

23 de julio Introduccion al capitulo 2: Déjate volar y Abriendo el tema
Entrando en materia: Acontecimientos que marcaron el mundo
24 de julio Gramaticando! Pretérito e imperfecto II

]

2

]

2. Pre-visionado de la pelicula También la Iluvia

3. Listening quiz 2

1. Pre-actividad de TalkAbroad

2. Entrando en materia: Logros sociales a través de la historia
3. jGramaticando! Los pasados compuestos

Del 27 al 31 de julio deben ver la pelicula También la Iluvia.

27 de julio
Su instructor les proporciona un link para su visionado.
28 de julio 1. Lectura de cultura: “El encubrimiento de América”
2. Entrando en materia: Rituales festivos
3. A hablar 2

29 de julio 1. jGramaticando! Voz pasiva y se pasivo I
2. Gramaticando Voz pasiva y se pasivo II
3. Noticias y Sociedad 2
30 de julio 1. Entregar TalkAbroad 2
2. Mejorando el discurso: Conectar y ordenar cronologicamente
3. Post-visionado de la pelicula También la lluvia

31 de julio 1. El tema en la literatura
2. Entregar Diario de cultura 2
3 de agosto 1. Tarea final: Reportaje (Se hace en clase)
pee a komcaacns mem
4 de agosto 1. Examen 2
2. Comenzar el capitulo 3: ;Déjate volar! y Abriendo el temaCapitulo 3: Ciudadanos del mundo

= Contenidos funcionales: Expresar condiciones, expresar deseos, finalidad, mandatos, opiniones negativas...
= Contenidos semanticos: El medio ambiente, el mercadeo internacional, los derechos y las responsabilidades
= Contenidos culturales: Lectura sobre el conflicto en la Patagonia; Pelicula No, Chile; dirigida por Pablo Larrain
= Contenidos gramaticales: Clausulas con si, usos del subjuntivo
= Contenidos socioculturales: El lenguaje corporal
= Contenidos pragmaticos: Conectores que dan coherencia al discurso
= Estrategia de lectura: Identificar tipos de texto y sus caracteristicas
= Lectura: Transgénicos. Objetivos: Analisis de la estructura del texto y debate sobre el mismo.
= El tema en la literatura: “A la deriva” Horacio Quiroga
= Tarea final: Una presentacion
4 agosto . Comenzar el capitulo 3: jDéjate volar! y Abriendo el tema
Lectura de cultura: “Conflicto en la Patagonia”
Entrando en materia: El medio ambiente
5 agosto . jGramaticando! Condiciones potenciales
Entrando en materia: El mercadeo internacional

 

6 agosto 1. jGramaticando! Clausulas con si
2. Actividad de pre-visionado de No
3. A Hablar 3

7 agosto 1. Entrando en materia: Los derechos y las responsabilidades
2. jGramaticando! Repaso de algunos usos del subjuntivo I
3. Listening quiz 3

10 agosto 1. Noticias y Sociedad 3

2. jGramaticando! Repaso de algunos usos del subjuntivo II
3. Actividad de post-visionado de No

11 agosto 1. Entregar el diario de cultura 3
2. El lenguaje vivo

12 agosto 1. Tarea final 3: Presentacién de un producto

13 agosto 1. Revision del examen 3

 

14 agosto 1. Examen 3
2. CIS Evaluations

 

 

13The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Spanish and Portuguese
Addendum to Department Syllabus
SPN s611D —- SUMMER 2020

 

 

 

 

Course # 82794

Meeting M-F 1:00-3:50 pm

ZOOM LINK; Meeting ID: 939 5579 7810
Talk abroad
FlipGrid https://flipgrid.com/span61 laviles

 

Luis F. Avilés Gonzalez TA Rafael Jiménez Baralt

Email laviles@utexas.edu Email rybaralt@gmail.com
Phone (txt) (512) 766-3801 Phone N/A
Office BEN 5.H34A Office BEN 5.H28A

Office Hours | MT 12:00-12:50p Office Hours | WR 12:00-12:50p

 

 

 

 

 

The following is a personal addendum to the departmental syllabus
“Language is the road map of a culture.

It tells you where its people come from
and where they are going.”
— Rita Mae Brown

PREAMBLE: This course is the last on the L2 Spanish acquisition sequence. This course is the
equivalent of 34 of a year of second year Spanish in one semester. The course is demanding on
nature and requires a full commitment to the subject matter since the first day. It is of utter
importance to complete all assignments by the due time stipulated by your instructor to ensure
success. I have seen students struggle to pass when they fall behind attempting activities,
homework, or show no participation in the class. Please remember that this is SYX-unit class and
demands the amount of time and dedication in and outside the class.

HYBRID: This course is a hybrid, which mean that half of the class will be at home/outside the
classroom, and the other halt will be in the online classroom. The concepts will be introduced
during class time, and you will be responsible for completed any assigned CANVAS and book
assignments. Manage your time wisely and set up a calendar since week 1, is your responsibility
to familiarize yourself with the structure of the website and ask questions when confused. Any
changes in the calendar will be announced by the instructor.

ATTENDANCE: Department of Spanish and Portuguese policies will be followed. Attendance
at all class meetings is expected. You are permitted one full day absence (3hrs) without penalty
during the summer semester. Use these wisely, because all absences count. Also, please remember
that arriving late interrupts the flow of class. Three late arrivals or early departures will incur one
absence. I will create an attendance folder, which I will pass around at every class session. It is

your responsibility to sign in the folder as proof of your attendance.PARTICIPATION: The main key to succeed in this class is participation. Each week I will assign
you a participation grade based on a rubric that is posted on canvas under the main section.
Participation will include preparedness to class, homework completion, and quality of
participation. Grades on Participation will be included in the homework section of the gradebook.

OFFICE HOURS: I have allotted office hours abroad. I highly encourage you to book a time to
meet with me via the above link. Office hours also imply that I work in lesson planning, grading,
meet with supervisors, and meet with other colleagues. Although I may be physically there, I would
like to devote to you my undivided intention.

COMMUNICATION: Check your email on a regular basis for course documents, information,
announcements, grades, and other pertinent information. Since important documents will be posted
on Canvas, make sure you have access to a working printer, with paper. Inability to print will not

be considered an acceptable reason for not being prepared for class activities and assignments.

VY Please check your email regularly.
© Keep in mind that we do not answer emails after 5:00pm on weekdays or
during the weekend.
o Make sure to communicate if you are missing, so I can keep it in mind when
planning the class.
Y Guidelines for email correspondence:
o Include a pertinent subject line (i.e. “available times outside of office hours’’)
o Begin email with a salutation (i.e. Dear/Hola/Estimada/o )
o Develop a concise question/narrative regarding your request.
o Sign-off with a closing line and your name (i.e. Sincererly/Best/Saludos/Thanks
your name)

HOMEWORK: There are three main homework avenues for this course

Y ONLINE DRILLS: These are practice exercises that aim to help you familiarize with the
grammar and concepts being studied. These are recommended to be completed after
completing the self inducting exercises in the workbook. These drills can be found in the
online homework calendar with your CANVAS assignments. You will find this in your
main page, as well on the right side of the home page in a calendar form.

¥Y WORK BOOK: the self-inducted exercises will be given at the end of each class. This
homework can be found in the power-point of the day assigned. These exercises will be
check everyday before or after class.

¥Y ONLINE WORK: Additional work like Diario de Cultura, Timed Writings, Tareas
Finales, Cultural Activities will be in the modules of the course, and can also be accessed
through the calendar site. Additional extra work not completed in class will be included in
this option and will require uploads to the site.

QUIZZES: Listening quizzes will be the avenue of listening assessment. Make sure to be ON-
TIME the day of the quiz, failure to do so will result in 0 for your score. Additionally, there will
be several “pop” quizzes during the semester. Think of quizzes as your friends! They generally
focus on a small amount of material and, if you are prepared, you are likely to get a high score.More importantly, quizzes will help you determine your strengths and weaknesses in order to
improve for major assignments and exams.

“WHAT DID I MISS?”: The first day of class you should exchange phone numbers and email
addresses with at least 3 classmates. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to contact both of
them before contacting me to find out what you missed during class, and what was assigned as
homework for the next day. I recommend you all set up a class group me as a forum for questions,
support and community building.

LATE WORK: No late work is accepted; however, if you do not turn in an assignment when it
is collected, and you want me to look over it for your benefit (not for a grade), I will gladly do so
during my office hours. For missed assignments due to an absence, refer to the syllabus.

CLASS COURTESY: My goal is to provide an enjoyable environment conducive to language
learning. Therefore, please be respectful to your classmates and your instructor by arriving on
time and staying for the full duration of class. Our sessions are dedicated to working on activities
in Spanish, so please leave crossword puzzles, newspapers, laptops and assignments for other
classes tucked away or at home. To avoid disruptions, cell phones, blackberries, and other
electronic devices should be turned off. If a phone is seen or heard during class, it will be
grounds for a pop-quiz on the spot!!

DIFFERENTLY ABLE STUDENTS (SSD): Make sure to contact the center and meet with me
to sort out accommodations. I must meet with you first before any accommodation can be taken
into consideration. Make sure to turn in the appropriate paperwork as soon as it is issued by the
office, to ensure I can take care of the matter sooner rather than later.

©SECRETS FOR SUCCESS
Always come to class
e In class, we will be doing activities that allow you to engage with the information beyond
simply reading it.
e Plus, there is nothing like missing a class to make a person feel lost, confused, and out of it.

e Not only do you miss the material from the day you were gone, but you get less out of the
next class too because there are references to things you don’t remember, and you’re shy
about asking questions because you think your question may have been covered while you
were absent.

e Then you start to tune out, and it goes downhill from there.

Talk to Luis
e ...1f you do not understand something, you have an idea, you disagree with something you’ve
read, you’re intrigued by something you’ ve read, etc.
e Do not be shy about using my office hours. They are time that I have set aside to meet with
students; you are never “interrupting” when you come to see me during those hours.
e Ifthose times do not work for you, you can try making an appointment—you’ll have better
success if you ask at least 2 days in advance.
e It is very inefficient if people skip class then want to make individual appointments.
So, please try to use my office hours after following up with a classmate.

Talk to your classmates
e Discuss your readings, assignments, projects, ideas. Study together.

Do not fall behind
e This one should be easy because of the frequent homework, deadlines, and exams.

Read the textbook

e This textbook is engaging and written precisely for a course like ours!

e Educational research suggests that repeated reading is not a good study strategy—the material
begins to look familiar, producing a false sense of mastery

e But reading the chapter once—noting your questions and comments—and then consulting it
when you are unclear on something is extremely beneficial!
e It gives you a chance to see more examples than in class, and to work through them at your

own pace.

Things you should expect
e Readings and homework are challenging and take time
e Projects require a lot of steps

Things you should not expect
e concepts seem mysterious
e what is expected of you is unclear
e itis unclear how to proceed, or how to tackle a problem
When these happen, tell me so I can try to fix it—you will be doing your classmates a favor