TEXAS McCombs

The University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business
Business Foundations

MAN 320F
Foundations of Management — Web Based (71660)

Summer 2020 (June 4 — July 26)

Instructor Kristie J. Loescher, MPH, DBA, SHRM-SCP

Email Kristie.loescher@mccombs.utexas.edu

Phone (512) 471-9318

Office Hours Wednesdays 3:00-4:00pm (see Canvas for Zoom link) or by appointment

Use the Question & Answer Forum link on Canvas homepage for questions

Course Description

This is a survey course in organizational behavior designed to give you exposure to essential
theories and concepts for analyzing, understanding, and managing human behavior in
organizations. In this course we will tie concrete organizational situations (as reflected in cases)
to essential theories and effective management practices. In this course, we will investigate:

e Individual behavior in organizations, including personality, decision-making, personal
networks, and ethics

e Interpersonal behavior, including teamwork, conflict, leadership, and power and
influence

e Organizational factors affecting behavior, including reward systems, culture, and
organizational design

This course is fully asynchronous (no synchronous/zoom class meetings) and you may work it at
your own pace as long as you complete each quiz and exam on or before the due date/time.
While you can work the course faster, no late work is accepted.

Course Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, students will understand and be able to apply:

High-performance and evidence-based management practices.

Essential team processes that directly impact team effectiveness.

Concepts of power, influence, and conflict to accomplish organizational objectives.
Theoretical concepts of leadership.

Change models to successfully initiate and accomplish organizational change objectives.
Concepts of motivation to build and maintain employee engagement in organizations.
Strategies for creating, changing and strengthening organizational culture.
Organizational structure and design concepts to create alignment in organizations.

ONAMRBWNPTEXAS McCombs

Required Materials

All materials are provided electronically on Canvas. The link for you to pay for your materials is
provided on Canvas (see Getting Started Module). You must pay for your materials before you
can enter the course.

e Textbook

Osborn, Richard, N & Schermerhorn Jr, John, R, & Uhl-Bien, Mary. (2014). Organizational
Behavior. Hoboken, N.J. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

e Computer set-up for remote proctoring of exams (Proctorio)

- Chrome web browser

- Proctorio Chrome extension
(https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials#fragment-3)

- High speed Internet (.7 mb download and .3 mb upload)

- Web camera (built in or external) with microphone

- Laptop or desktop (smartphone/tablet insufficient)

- Government issued photo ID
(UT student ID, driver’s license, passport, military ID)

e Online Articles/Resources/Materials
- See calendar for assigned readings in addition to the textbook. These readings
are covered in your course materials fee and are provided through Canvas

Grading Criteria and Due Dates

Although this is a flexibly-paced course, there are due dates for key assignments. If you miss
the due date, you will not be able to submit the assignment and will receive no credit.

Please note that the activities in this course build in complexity as the course progresses; the
activities in the first half of the course are considerably less time-intensive than the activities in
the latter half of the course, and the assignments listed below may have pre-requisites to
complete before you can access them, so please plan accordingly. Activities that require you to
enter your analysis or thoughts on a topic will be spot-checked for completeness.

All times are Central Standard Time (CST).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Quiz 1 (Units 1-3) Sunday, June 14, 8:59 p.m. 7.5%
Quiz 2 (Units 4-5) Sunday, June 21, 8:59 p.m. 7.5%
Midterm Exam (Units 1-5) Sunday, June 28, 8:59 p.m. 35.0%
Quiz 3 (Units 6-7) Sunday, July 12, 8:59 p.m. 7.5%
Quiz 4 (Units 8-10) Sunday, July 19, 8:59 p.m. 7.5%
Final Exam (Units 6-11) Sunday, July 26, 8:59 p.m. 35.0%
Total 100%

 

 

MAN 320f-WB Summer 2020 Page 2Course Grading Scale

TEXAS McCombs

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

From To Grade GPA
94.00% | 100% A 4.00
90.00 <94.00 A- 3.67
87.00 <90.00 B+ 3.33
84.00 <87.00 B 3.00
80.00 <84.00 B- 2.67
77.00 <80.00 C+ 2.33
74.00 <77.00 C 2.00
70.00 <74.00 C- 1.67
70.00 | de

  

 

 

Assignment Descriptions

Quizzes

There are graded quizzes at the end of units 3, 5, 7, and 10. Each quiz comprises
20 questions.

— Time limitation 45 minutes.

Time begins from the moment you start a quiz and runs continuously: once time
begins there is no way to pause it, including loss of connectivity or logging out,
so please plan accordingly and make sure you have a strong internet connection.

— Number of attempts allowed before submission. One. Once you submit your
answers, you will not be able to edit them.

— Resources you may use: Written and digital materials and a self-created note sheet.
Direct or indirect assistance from any individual(s) is(are) STRICTLY PROHIBITED and
is an unequivocal violation of the McCombs School of Business Code of Ethics and
the University’s policy on Academic Dishonesty and Cheating.

Your ability to use the allowed resources will be constrained by the time limit
and you are only allowed one attempt at each quiz.

RECOMMENDATION. \|n addition to diligent review and practice before taking each
quiz, it is highly recommended that you craft a self-created note sheet for use
during the quiz—it is an excellent aid for reviewing the material and taking the
quizzes.

Your performance on graded quizzes is worth 30% of your final grade.

MAN 320f-WB

Summer 2020 Page 3TEXAS McCombs

Exams

Each exam is closed-book, closed-note, closed-material; you are not to access any materials
during the exam. Each exam has 50 questions and you are allowed 90 minutes. Exams will be
taken online through Canvas and monitored via a proctoring service. It is required that you
complete a test of the proctoring software before beginning the class, so you can contact
technical support if needed (see the Getting Started module on Canvas). Note that the midterm
exam includes units 1-5 and the final exam includes units 6-11 (the final is NOT cumulative)

Please make sure you follow these exam proctor policies:

e Make sure your phone or other digital device (including smart watch) is not on your person
or out in the room where you are taking the exam (a desk drawer or backpack is a good
storage place)

e Keep your eyes on the monitor/screen, don't stare to your right/left since that can
generate an exam proctor violation

e No headphones, earphones, radio, or TV

e Do not leave the room or stand up from your chair during the exam

e Take the exam where you will not be disturbed - no other people can be in the room with
you during the exam

e Work at a desk where the webcam can see your head and torso and the room behind you
(avoid using a laptop while sitting on a bed or on the floor since the webcam can't see
enough to verify the environment)

e You will be limited to the use of one screen and will not be able to leave the quiz page. Any
action outside of the quiz page will end your exam attempt

Proctorio is the remote proctoring service used to monitor exams. Proctorio is a secure
monitoring platform that integrates with Canvas and ONLY works within the Chrome web
browser. In order to use Proctorio you will need to download the Proctorio Chrome extension,
have a high-speed internet connection, along with a webcam (internal or external) with a
microphone, a windows or apple Operating System, and a government issued photo id. You will set
your system up for Proctorio-proctored exams and test your equipment before starting the course
(see the Getting Started module on Canvas).

Technical Difficulties During Exams. If you experience technical difficulties during one of the
proctored exam, don’t panic! The exams are set up to only take the average student an hour to
complete, so losing up to 30 minutes should not severely impact your ability to complete the exam.
However, if you experience a technical difficulty that takes more than 15 minutes away from your
exam time, you may contact me (512-471-9318) to discuss extending your exam time. If you
complete the exam without attempting to contact me, your exam grade will stand except in
situations of severe communication and technical malfunctions. If you feel you have experienced a
catastrophic technical failure but were unable to contact me during the exam, send me
information/documentation of the technical difficulty. | will decide on a case-by-case basis whether
the technical failure should result in a midterm retake. If you are granted a midterm retake, note
that you will have to accept the retake midterm grade — even if it is lower than your original score.

MAN 320f-WB Summer 2020 Page 4TEXAS McCombs

Students have three days after they take an exam to contact me about a potential exam retake.
After that time, the exam grade you earned on your first attempt will stand. If you are unable to
complete the exam due to technical difficulties, contact me as soon as possible to schedule a
retake.

Online Activities

In addition to the assessments, you are expected to participate in all of the online activities in
this course, including discussion forums, video-based peer exchanges, ungraded knowledge
checks, and case analyses. These activities are designed to supplement the readings and
support your learning, and are required to unlock the assessments. Failure to complete an
activity will result in up to 5 points off the Unit Quiz for each activity. While you do not need to
write the maximum allowed number of words, you do need to make an honest effort at
completion.

Support

For any questions regarding the course itself, please use the Question & Answer Forum on the
course homepage.

For any technical issues with the proctoring software, consult
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials#fragment-3

Course Polices

You are encouraged to access this course daily including weekends. By doing so you will be able
to actively participate, complete your assignments, and access announcements in a timely
manner.

Any issues with an exam or quiz grade must be raised with the professor by email within 72
hours of grade posting. After that time, no allowances for technical issues or other concerns
will be addressed. Note that an email from ProctorU is not sufficient notification; the student
must contact the professor, describe the issue, and outline any request.

Code of Ethics — McCombs School of Business

The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at

http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics.

Harassment Reporting Requirements

Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), which went into effect on January 1, 2020, is a Texas State Law
that requires all employees (both faculty and staff) at a public or private post-secondary
institution to promptly report any knowledge of any incidents of sexual assault, sexual
harassment, dating violence, or stalking "committed by or against a person who was a student
enrolled at or an employee of the institution at the time of the incident". Please note that both
the instructor and the TA for this class are mandatory reporters and MUST share with the Title

MAN 320f-WB Summer 2020 Page 5TEXAS McCombs

IX office any information about sexual harassment/assault shared with us by a student whether
in-person or as part of a journal or other class assignment. Note that a report to the Title IX
office does not obligate a victim to take any action, but this type of information CANNOT be
kept strictly confidential except when shared with designated confidential employees. A
confidential employee is someone a student can go to and talk about a Title IX matter without
triggering that employee to have to report the situation to have it automatically investigated. A

list of confidential employees is available on the Title IX website.

Diversity and inclusion. \t is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and
perspectives be well served by this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed
and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and
be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please let me know if you
experience any barriers to learning so | can work with you to ensure you have equal
opportunity to participate fully in this course.

Academic Integrity — University of Texas at Austin

The McCombs School of Business strives to uphold high standards of scholastic integrity and has
no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The University defines scholastic dishonesty as
cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act
designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also
includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on an exam or other assignment, and submission of essentially
the same written assignment for two different courses without the permission of faculty
members. Access, use, or sharing of course materials from hard copy or online sources (e.g.
course hero, etc) not expressly allowed in class syllabi is forbidden.

The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the McCombs School of
Business.

By teaching this course, each instructor agrees to observe all faculty responsibilities described
in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of this Policy Statement to any
class assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask the instructor for
clarification.

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies
on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.

Please note that it is in violation of University policy to download material from a course an
upload it to course hero or any other exam/course material sharing website.

You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at

http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the General Information Catalog to access the official

University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on

MAN 320f-WB Summer 2020 Page 6TEXAS McCombs

what constitutes scholastic dishonesty. For more on the University of Texas policy of Academic
Dishonesty and Cheating, follow the link at http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct

Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-

471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/

Religious Holy Days

By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work before or, within a reasonable time, after the
absence. Note the course end date since no work will be scheduled after that date.

Campus Safety and Security
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/

o Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.

o Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used
when entering the building.

o Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in
writing during the first week of class.

o Inthe event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.

o Donot re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office.

o Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050

o Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and
emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.

MAN 320f-WB Summer 2020 Page 7Course Outline

Unit

Unit 1:
Introduction to
Management

Unit 2:
Personality &
Emotional
Intelligence

MAN 320f-WB

TEXAS McCombs

Course Activities Suggested
Completion
Reading and Online Content 6/7
[1 Textbook, Chapter 1 — Introducing

 

 

 

 

Organizational Behavior
Key Concepts

Home Towne Hardware case study

Activities

 

 

 

 

 

Poll(s)
Home Towne Hardware Case Analysis
Remote Proctor Systems Test

Assessment

LU

None

Reading and Online Content 6/10

LU

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Textbook, Chapter 2 (pp. 29---35, 40---

45) — Diversity, Personality, and Values
Textbook, Chapter 4 (pp. 76---82) —

Emotions, Attitudes, and Job Satisfaction

Key Concepts

Emotional Intelligence and Emotional Leadership
SWA Video Series

Activities

Big 5 Personality Test

Discussion Forum: Emotional Intelligence in
Hiring

Practice Quiz: Big 5 Personality Traits

 

Summer 2020 Page 8TEXAS McCombs

Course Activities Suggested

Completion

Unit 3: Reading and Online Content

Perception, 0
Social Identity, &
Biases O

Textbook, Chapter 3 — Perception, Attribution,
and Learning
Key Concepts

Activities

 

 

 

 

 

 

Unit 4: Read
Motivation CT

 

 

 

 

LU

Poll(s)

What is Happening Here?

Social Learning Theory
Employer/Employee Expectations

Assessment: Quiz 1

Sunday, June 14, before 8:59pm

ing and Online Content

Textbook, Chapter 5 — Motivation
Textbook, Chapter 6 — Motivation and
Performance

Key Concepts

Activities

 

 

 

 

MAN 320f-WB

 

Poll(s)
Case Analysis Discussion Forum: National

Burgers (Case is presented within discussion
forum activity)
SWA Video Series

Summer 2020 Page 9TEXAS McCombs

Unit Course Activities Suggested
Completion
Unit 5: Individual 6/20

Reading and Online Content

Decision---Making .
Textbook, Chapter 9 — Decision Making and

Creativity
Carter Racing case study

 

 

 

 

Key Concepts
Activities
‘| Poll(s)

 

 

Decision Biases and Heuristics

 

Movie Mogul

 

 

 

Runaway Trolley

 

Assessment: Quiz 2

Sunday, June 21, before 8:59pm

Assessment: Mid-Term Examination (Units 1-5)

Sunday, June 28, before 8:59pm

e Note: remember to set-up your Proctor U appointment at least 72 hours before the exam

e The last available appointments will be at 7:30pm on the due date
Holiday: July 4

Take a break!

 

MAN 320f-WB Summer 2020 Page 10TEXAS McCombs

Unit 6: Teams Reading and Online Content

 

Textbook, Chapter 7 — The Nature of Teams

 

 

Textbook, Chapter 8 — Teamwork and Team

 

Performance

Key Concepts

SWA Video Series

The Team That Wasn’t case study

 

 

 

 

 

Activities
Discussion Forum: Team Experiences

 

Making Teams Work Better

 

 

 

Case Analysis Discussion Forum: The Team That
Wasn’t

The Team That Wasn’t, Part 1

The Team That Wasn’t, Part 2

Murder Mystery

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Course Activities Suggested
Completion
Unit 7: Power, Reading and Online Content 7/11
Influence & _| Textbook, Chapter 10 — Conflict and Negotiation
Conflict |] Textbook, Chapter 12 — Power and Politics
Key Concepts

C

Power and Influence: Achieving Your Objectives
in Organizations
|] Thomas Green: Power, Office Politics and a
Career in Crisis case study
Activities
‘| Poll(s)
Case Analysis Discussion Forum: Thomas Green

 

Environmental Program Participation

 

 

 

Using Power to Manage Conflict in the Thomas

 

Green Case

Assessment: Quiz 3

Sunday, July 12, before 8:59pm

 

MAN 320f-WB Summer 2020 Page 11TEXAS McCombs

 

 

Course Activities Suggested
Completion

Unit 8: Reading and Online Content 7/14
Leadership Textbook, Chapter 13 — The Leadership Process

Textbook, Chapter 14 — Leader Traits and

Behavior Styles

Key Concepts

SWA Video Series

Leadership That Gets Result

Merck Sharp & Dohme Argentina, Inc (A) case

Merck Sharp & Dohme Argentina, Inc (B) case

Activities

Tower---Building

Mosquera’s Value System

How Mosquera Has Fundamentally Changed the

Organization

|| Case Analysis Discussion Forum: Mosquera’s
Options
(] What Should Mosquera Do?

Unit 9: Reading and Online Content 7/16

Organization
Structure and
Design

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Textbook, Chapter 16 — Organizational Structure
and Design

Key Concepts (Videos)

Remaking Microsoft: Why America’s Most
Successful Company Needed an Overhaul

Activities

Poll(s)
The Jupiter Corporation (discussion forum)
Six Dimensions of Structure

Microsoft’s Dynamic Structure practice quiz

 

 

MAN 320f-WB

Summer 2020

Page 12TEXAS McCombs

 

Unit

 

Unit 10:
Organization
Culture

MAN 320f-WB

 

Course Activities Suggested

Completion

Reading and Online Content

Textbook, Chapter 15 — Organizational Culture
and Innovation

Key Concepts

SWA Video Series

Leading by Leveraging Culture

 

 

 

 

 

How to Change a Culture: Lessons From NUMMI
Activities

Poll(s)

A Conversation with Professor Dierking about

 

 

 

 

 

Leveraging Culture
SnapApps, Part 1

 

SnapApps, Part 2

 

 

 

A Conversation with Professor Dierking About

 

Culture’s Effects on Organizations

Assessment: Quiz 4

Sunday, July 19, before 8:59pm

Summer 2020 Page 13TEXAS McCombs

 

 

 

 

Unit Course Activities Suggested
Completion
Unit 11: Reading and Online Content 7/22
Organizational _| Key Concepts
Change ‘| Pierre Frankel in Moscow (A): Unfreezing Change
case study
[| Pierre Frankel in Moscow (B): Unfreezing Change
case study
[|] Pierre Frankel in Moscow (C): Unfreezing Change
case study
[| Leading Change: Why Transformation Efforts Fail
case study
Activities
‘| Poll(s)

 

Case Analysis Activity: Leading Change, Part A

 

Practice Quiz: Why Transformation Efforts Fail
Kotter’s 8 Steps
Change Plan Comparison

 

 

 

 

 

Assessment of Frankel’s Change Leadership

 

Assessment: Final Examination (Units 6-11)
Sunday, July 26, before 8:59pm

e This exam only includes the units covered since the midterm, it is NOT cumulative

e Note: remember to set-up your Proctor U appointment at least 72 hours before the exam
e The last available appointments will be at 7:30pm on the due date

 

14