The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Curriculum & Instruction
UT Urban Teachers Program

 

EDC 339E: Adolescent Literacy — Summer 2020

 

 

Instructors
Lori Van Dike Adair (she / her / hers) Lakeya Omogun (she / her / hers)
Email: lvandike@utexas.edu Email: lomogun@utexas.edu

Phone: (281) 705-3721
Office Hours: Monday through Friday, by appointment via Zoom
Field Supervisor/Instructional Coach

Claire Collins (she / her / hers)
Email: clairecollins@utexas.edu

 

Introduction and Rationale

Welcome to Adolescent Literacy! We approach this course with the understanding that teachers are most effective when they have
knowledge of theory to inform their daily teaching decisions—the big picture that draws together the smaller pieces. In a study of
eight successful urban teachers, Gloria Ladson-Billings (1995) found that the teachers’ success went “beyond the surface features of
teaching ‘strategies’” to the “philosophical and ideological underpinnings of their practice” (p.162). Therefore, this class is more than
a collection of methods and strategies; together, as a collaborative community we will investigate how we think about students,
literacy, and learning. As we examine definitions of literacy, we will discuss literacy teaching and learning as processes that have
academic, social, personal, political, and moral dimensions. We will consider how to draw on and merge students’ various literacy
practices to strengthen their academic, social, private, and civic lives.

Reading and writing traditional texts are the primary literacy practices through which schools require students to engage in academic
learning. However, students communicate and learn through many other meaning-making tools (modalities such as texting, social
networking sites, drawing, and even fashion), and they are often quite adept at demonstrating their knowledge and abilities through
these modalities. Much of our discussion will focus on the multitude of strengths students bring to our classes, and how we can build
on these strengths in our curriculum. Some of this discussion will challenge the ways we think about a traditional English classroom.
How could we “do” English differently? (Because this class is meant to support your teaching in Breakthrough and fit within a larger
design of learning across the UT Urban Teacher’s program, we will focus primarily on writing instruction this summer. In your Fall
2018 methods course, you will delve deeply into reading pedagogies and have opportunities to design curriculum and instruction to
support adolescent readers.)

The class serves to strengthen your immediate teaching in your field placement with Breakthrough while also preparing you for work
in urban schools, including the development of knowledge, skills, and dispositions for recognizing the resources that culturally and
linguistically diverse students bring to the classroom; critical awareness of injustices common in urban schools and communities; and
agentive strategies for working toward hope and social justice in the often restricted work environments of urban schools.

Course Goals:

broaden our understanding of literacy

explore students’ out-of-school literate lives

recognize students’ literacy practices as legitimate and skillful

examine ways we can draw on students’ out-of-school literacies in our classrooms

consider how this understanding of literacy shapes the teaching of English

collaborate with other teachers to construct meaning and build on ideas

gain practical knowledge and strategies for teaching and planning reading and writing

learn how to teach students to understand and apply strategies and tools to help them compose texts and grow as writers
develop a vision for teaching (one that will continually undergo revision)

This program, like any other preparation program, cannot teach you every method or strategy there is to know about teaching; in fact,
we are always in a process of becoming, always evolving into the teachers we will be tomorrow. Thus, we will not “finish” these
conversations. As teachers, we return to these themes again and again.

This course was also designed around the belief that learning is social, collaborative, and recursive. Throughout the semester, you will
be asked to be an involved participant in your own learning, engaging in class discussions, actively questioning and seeking out more
information about ideas, working with and providing feedback to your peers on your work, and reflecting on and growing from your
experiences. We also anticipate that you will contribute to this course by thoughtfully considering the activities and ideas we exploreand sharing suggestions about how our class can support your learning goals. As we grow as a community of learners, it is my hope
that we can become a supportive network for each other this summer, in the coming semesters, and moving forward in our teaching
careers.

Required Course Readings

 

All students will need a copy of Building Adolescent Literacy in Today’s English Classrooms by Dr. Randy Bomer. We will read
several chapters from this text this summer, and it will also be an important text in your English Methods course in the fall.

Other readings include articles and book chapters, all of which can be found on Canvas.

Course Requirements and Assignments

Below is an overview of your work for this course, followed by details about each assignment.

Reader Responses (RR) Eachclass Ongoing — post by 8 am Post on Canvas Discussion Board 30
& Class Participation meeting each class

Writer’s Workshop: Always Ongoing Submit pictures of notebook + 30
Writer’s Notebook + 1 draft due June 18 published piece of writing through
writing piece 2™4 draft due June 23 Canvas; Be prepared to talk about

34 draft due June 25 your process with the class

Final draft due June 30
Promises to your future Once July 7 Informal presentation in class; 10
students Submit through Canvas
Teacher’s Notebook Always July 9 (Week 1) Submit pictures of your notebook + = 10

reflection and interview questions
under Assignments in Canvas

In-depth Lesson Plan Once July 9 Presentation in class; Submit 20
and reflection artifacts through Canvas

 

Reading Responses and Class Participation (30 points)

Each class, unless indicated otherwise, you will write a reader response (RR) to reflect on the readings and prepare for class
discussions. Post all RRs on the discussion forum (“Discussion” tab) within Canvas. RRs will be assessed on depths of understanding
the readings, thoughtfulness regarding others’ ideas, and connections to the craft of teaching. Each RR should consist of the
following:

e Synthesize ideas across all readings, raising thoughtful questions or critiques about issues raised in the readings

e Make connections among the readings and what you have seen or experienced in classrooms or other youth-centered contexts

e Consider what the ideas in the readings mean for your teaching now and in the future

It’s okay to show your struggles or tensions with these readings. We hope you will share your thinking, grapple with issues, and push
yourself to consider new and multiple perspectives.

Post your RRs no later than 8 am on the day of class (exception: 6/4). The timeliness of your posting is important as Lakeya and I
will read your responses before class so that we can get a sense of what you are thinking about. During and in between classes, you
will then have opportunities to read and respond to your classmates’ posts. Please consider your classmates as the primary audience
for your RRs. While Lakeya and I may join the conversation from time to time, the primary objective is for you to make meaning
together with your peers.Writer’s Workshop: Keeping a Notebook and Moving a Piece to Publication (30 points) — ongoing, Final Due 6/25

Across the few weeks we have together, we will participate in a writer’s workshop. During this short time, we will launch writer’s
notebooks and move a piece through a writing cycle—from brainstorming to publication. Writing time during these weeks will begin
with a mini-lesson followed by work time and share time. During work time, you will be working on your own writing, conferring
with me and Lakeya, and/or meeting with peers to discuss your work. Some of this writing will happen in class, but you will also be
expected to be working on your writing outside of class as needed. You should have 10-12 notebook entries by the time we begin
revising (this means daily writing for the first three weeks of class). In addition to this participation, you will receive feedback on
your published piece of writing, and you will reflect on the overall experience and what you are learning about teaching writing.

You will also be going through this process with your Breakthrough students, so the writing you do for our class will double as
curriculum you can use in your teaching.

Promises to Your Future Students (10 points) —7/7
Making the future better in real and concrete ways is part of our work as transformative intellectuals. As teachers, it is important for
us to think towards the future and about why this learning matters for us, and more importantly, for our students.

For this assignment, please make a list of 8-12 commitments/promises to your future students that are based on ideas we have read and
discussed in this class. For each promise, write a statement that explains how you imagine you will put it into action in your
classroom. Then, connect this statement to research without using direct quotes from the articles (your students might not be interested
in this, but your future colleagues and administrators might...). Although it is not required, we encourage you to think about your
Breakthrough students within these promises.

You don’t need page numbers for your citations if the idea is built up through the whole article. If you choose to cite Dr. Bomer’s
book as a source, though, be sure to include the chapter number if you don’t use a page number. Maybe it will be something like this
(but with actual information, and in your own style)

1. I promise to respect and value the language or languages that you speak.

In order to do this, I will... (include concrete actions, things that you can reasonably expect to do and have
control over in your classroom).

Valuing and respecting students’ language practices is important to me, and supported by research that says
abc (name, year), Imn (name, year), and xyz (name, year).

Be honest, thoughtful, and creative. We are open to alternative formats, too ©.

Teacher’s Notebook (10 points) — Due July 9

You will begin your teacher’s notebook when you start working with your Breakthrough students. This summer will likely be
challenging, maybe even overwhelming at times, and it will also be very exciting and rewarding. While you will certainly be
reflecting on all of these experiences with your facilitators, peers, and instructors, your notebook will serve as your most constant
companion. This notebook is a tool for your thinking, so we imagine that you might each use it a little bit differently. You might use
this space to explore questions, record and reflect on data from class, work out challenges in your teaching or researching, think
through patterns or trends you’re seeing in the classroom, and so on.

As part of the questions and observations you record, we also encourage you to use this notebook as a space to name and reflect on the
specific strengths of your students. At the end of your Breakthrough teaching experience, you will write individual letters to each of
your Breakthrough students about their academic and personal strengths. Thus, this notebook should serve as an important place for
recording specific data about students (e.g. conference notes, things students say, student strengths, etc.) that will not only inform your
teaching but will also help you write your letters to students at the end of the summer. You are welcome to create a digital
notebook/blog if you prefer.

Interview questions: Your notebook is also a space for future thinking and planning. In your Summer Session I] course, ALD 327
Sociocultural Differences, you will be conducting a case study of a particular student you teach. To prepare for the interview and to
get to know your student better, it is important that you prepare questions in advance. These questions (about ten total) should dig
deep in seeking to better understand your students’ interests and strengths as a person and as a literate being. Consider the following:
e What do you need to know about your students, their lives, their funds of knowledge, and their existing and evolving
literacies to craft a rich and culturally sustaining curriculum and pedagogy?
e How will you listen to your students, and in doing so, let them know they are valued and that their voice is important?
Please include these interview questions when you submit your Teacher’s Notebook entries.Plans for Daily Teaching + Selection & Reflection of an In-depth Lesson (20 points) — Due 7/9

You’ll be teaching every day in your field placement this semester. Likewise, you’ll be developing lesson plans for each of these
lessons. Your facilitator/instructional coach will talk to you about the expectations for these daily lesson plans. For this class, to give
us a close look at your teaching, you’ll choose one of these lessons to highlight and reflect on from your first two weeks of teaching.
For this lesson, you'll first provide the written lesson plan and any additional materials you created for teaching this lesson. As
described below, you will also provide examples of student responses to the lesson and a reflection on your planning and teaching.

You also need to include two or three examples of student work produced within this lesson. This could be formal or informal writing
students engage in, a project of some kind, conference notes that evidence what students were doing, or some other kind of tangible
documentation of how students responded to this lesson. For privacy purposes, please remove students’ name from their work. For
each example of student work, also include a written response to or assessment of that student’s work with a brief explanation of your
thinking/rationale behind your response/evaluation of student work. For example, if a student earned full points on an assignment,
what about that student’s work can you point to as evidence of her meeting or exceeding the assignment’s criteria? What do you know
about a student’s current developmental level, effort, or academic progress in this class and how did that knowledge shape the
responses or grade you gave to that piece of the student’s work?

For your chosen lesson, include a statement in which you describe your thinking and decision-making as you planned the lesson. For
instance, what were you excited, nervous or unsure about in planning the lesson? What was challenging and easy in the planning?
Who/what served as resources for you in planning? What did you expect to go well and what did you think would be challenging for
you and your students during the experience of teaching and learning this lesson? In the second half of the statement, reflect on the
actual experience of teaching and learning with this lesson. How do you think the lesson went—both successes and challenges? What
surprised you in the experience of teaching and learning? What did you learn about teaching, about yourself as a teacher, about your
students? How will you (or how did you) draw on what you learned in this lesson in lessons to come? You may draw from your
teaching journal in preparing these reflection pieces.

Class Policies

Attendance & Punctuality

Attendance and punctuality are absolutely vital for your thinking and your peers’ thinking throughout this course. Please notify me,
along with at least one of your classmates, as soon as you know you will be late to or missing class. After one absence, 1.5 points will
be deducted from your final grade, and 3 points will be deducted from your final grade for any subsequent absences. Missing more
than three class sessions will result in failing the course. Multiple tardies/early departures may also result in grade deductions.

Communication

Now is a good time to begin building your professional habits, so being responsive and timely are important.

Always respond to instructor, field supervisor and Instructional Coach emails within 24 hours. When you receive emails from
any of us, please read them carefully and let us know with a reply (a quick response such as, “Got it, thank you,” will suffice. While
texting can be convenient, keep text communication with me, with your instructional coach, and with your facilitator limited to
emergency situations or personal matters. When you are communicating with any of us about anything work related, e-mail is the
professional way to do so. When there is an incident in your Breakthrough classroom that warrants reflection or action and you are
unsure of who to speak to about it at the time, write and send yourself an e-mail describing the incident in detail the same day, so that
you have a time-stamped document should you need it in the future.

Laptops, Cell Phones, and Other Digital Devices

These tools are helpful and necessary for our work, especially in this online teaching and learning format. That said, please do not let
your non-class related electronic activities (surfing the web, using email, texting, etc.) distract you from the conversations and thinking
that we’re doing in class. We have a lot of material to cover in our 1.5 hour zoom meetings, so please show up to class with your
devices charged and ready to use.

Late Work

Because so much of what we do is important for our work with peers and students, it is essential for your work to be completed
promptly. All assignments (including readings) are due at the beginning of our class unless otherwise noted in the assignment
description. Depending on the nature of the assignment, late work may not be accepted. If it is accepted, it will be penalized the
equivalent of one letter grade.

Writing Expectations
I expect that all work for this class will be done with thought, care, and thoroughness. This includes attention to citing sources and
editing. In addition, formal assignments will be graded according to the following criteria:
e the degree to which the assignment has been completed and edited according to APA’s 6" edition style guide
e shows insight or thoughtfulness with respect to the topic, other course readings, and to classroom and other relevant
experiencesThe following resources could be helpful as you are writing these formal assignments.
e UT Undergraduate Writing Center Handout: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/node/56
e APA sources: http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/

In addition, the UT Undergraduate Writing Center offers one-on-one consultations about your work in progress. More information can

be found at: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/

Grading Policies
Flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. We intend to work with you if you miss an assignment,
but final grades are firm. Please note the grading scale as follows:

A 93-100 B+ 87-89 B- 80-82 C 73-76 D 60-69
A- 90-92 B 83-86 C+ 771-79 C- 70-72 F 59-0
Academic Integrity

Students should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted through a plagiarism-detection tool, such as Canvas
Turnitin. Tools like this are designed to help students avoid plagiarism and improper citation. The software encourages original
writing and proper citation documentation practices by cross-referencing submitted materials with an archived database of journals,
essay, newspaper articles, books, and other published work. In addition, other methods may be used to determine the originality of the
paper. Tips for maintaining academic integrity AND the University’s academic integrity policy are available at: All students are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code available at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php

 

 

Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)

Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race,
culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor
with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name

 

that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of

any changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students

Services for Students with Disabilities

This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our
learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official
letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.

Basic Needs Security

Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and believes this may affect their performance in the course is urged
to contact the Dean of Students for support. Furthermore, please notify the professors if you are comfortable in doing so. This will
enable them to provide any resources that they may possess. (Thanks to Dr. Sara Goldrick-Rab [@saragoldrickrab] for this language.)

Counseling and Mental Health

Counselors in Academic Residence Program (CARE)

CARE is the university's Counseling and Mental Health Center program that was created in collaboration with the Office of the
Provost. CARE’s primary mission is to provide access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or
academically. The College of Education CARE counselor, Danie White, has regular office hours 1-2p.m. T/F in SZB 212E,
512.232.6862 or dlwhite@austin.utexas.edu.

 

Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep
and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.

All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and
an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.

If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly

encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.htmlThe Sanger Learning Center

Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their
academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).

 

Other Resources

Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwe.utexas.edu/

Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/

ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/

Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/

 

 

 

 

BeVocal

BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to prevent high-risk behavior
and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can
help to build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/Be Vocal.

 

Important Safety Information

If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right — it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share
your concerns.

The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,

http://www.utexas.edu/safety/

Title IX Reporting

Title [X is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual
misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a
learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
university can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX
investigation.

3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that
they are required to report violations of Title [IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any
Title [X related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title [IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone
for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information
about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title [X Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.Course Calendar

 

Please note: course readings are subject to change. Please refer to the modules in Canvas for the most up-to-date readings. We will do
our best to ensure that you receive notification of any changes with as much advanced notice as possible.

Week 1: Broadening understandings of literacy and adolescence/-ts

Wednesday, June 3 Thursday, June 4 Friday, June 5
10 — 11:30 AM 10 — 11:30 AM, Zoom 10 — 11:30 AM, Zoom

UTUT Orientation Topics: Topics:

= Who am I? Where does literacy live in = Understanding our students as
my life? How do my interests and lived adolescents/in adolescence.
experiences inform my existing (and = Understanding our students as people who
multimodal) literacies? have a right to use their languages
What is literacy? Noticing literacy in = _Writer’s workshop
everyday life & how it connects to ELA
instruction. Readings:
Modes of writing in this class (writing to | Finders (1998); BALTEC, Ch.5&10
think & for audience) Stewart (2014) OR Belle (2016)
Teacher as Writer + launching a Writer’s
Notebook Other Assignments:

Reading Response post (Due @ 8AM)

Readings: Writer’s notebook entries

BALTEC, Ch. 1&2; ILA Statement; Garcia &

ODonnell-Allen (2015)

Week 2: Writing Instruction, Critical Literacy

Monday, June 8 Tuesday, June 9 Thursday, June 11
10—11:30 AM 10— 11:30 AM 10— 11:30 AM
Zoom Zoom Zoom

Topics: Topics: Topics:
= Teaching toward strategies |= Critical Literacy = Writing for social action
(Mini-lessons & = Power & schooling = Genre & purpose studies
Conferencing) = Mentor texts
= Multilingual students Readings:
Gainer (2010); Paris & Alim Readings: Bomer & Bomer
Readings: (2014); Kinloch (2007) (Ch. 8); BALTEC, Ch. 13
De los Rios & Seltzer (2017);
Daniels & Pacheco (2016) Other Assignments: Other Assignments:
RR post RR post
Other Assignments: Writer’s notebook entry Writer’s notebook entries
RR post
Writer’s notebook entry

Week 3: Writing Instruction, Multilingual & Multimodal Learners

Monday, June 15 Tuesday, June 16 Thursday, June 18
10 — 11:30 AM 10 — 11:30 AM 10 — 11:30 AM
Zoom Zoom Zoom

Topics: Topics: Topics:

Writing, languages, and Authentic & responsive Audience and text design

thinking critically about other | instruction Multimodal texts

writers

Teaching Writing Readings: Readings: Hicks (2009);
Muhammad & Behizadeh McLean (2010)

Readings: (2015);

Assaf (2014); Smagorinsky Whitney (2011) Other Assignments:(2010)

Other Assignments:
RR post
Writer’s notebook entries

Other Assignments:
RR post
Writer’s notebook entries

Week 4: Writing Revision & Assessment

Breakthrough Training

Week 5: Responsive Teaching

Breakthrough Training

Week 6: Transformative Teaching, Transformative Teachers

a June 23

Zoom
Topics: Revision
Readings: BALTEC, Ch. 12

Other Assignments:
Draft 2 — try 3-4 of Bomer’s
revision strategies

a June 30

Zoom

Topics:

Publication of a piece +
reflection of writing process
Assessment & Rubrics

Readings: Wilson (2007);
Perks (2011)

Other Assignments:
RR post

Final draft due + writer’s
notebook

RR post
Draft for written piece

ee June 25

Zoom

Topics:

Feedback: Recognizing students
strengths & using students’ self
assessment to inform teaching

Readings: Bomer, K. (Hidden
Gems, Ch. 6-7)

Other Assignments:
RR post
Draft 3

ae J Me 2

Zoom

Topics:

Lesson Planning: WNB mini-
lesson for your teaching
Preparing to teach

Readings: NCTE (2018)
“Understanding and Teaching
Writing”

Other Assignments:
RR post

Writer’s Workshop Kickoff!
(teach students - 7", 8" & 9"
graders)

ae J Ne 7

Zoom

Topics: Debrief on teaching
Teaching for social justice &
breaking boundaries

Readings: Winn (2013);
Giroux (1985)

Other Assignments:
RR post
Promises to Future Students

ae J ‘e 9

Zoom

Topics: Reflecting on practice

Assignments:

Presentation of In-Depth
Lesson & Reflection
Teacher’s Notebook (Week 1),
including interview questions