Syllabus
BIO F344 Molecular Biology
Summer 2020
Lectures: Delivered by video to be watched before the in-class exercises
In-Class Exercises Mo Tu We Fr 11:30 A - 12:30 P
Exams (except for June 4) Th 11:30 A - 12:45 P
Professor Stevens’ Office Hours: Mo Tu We Fr 12:30 P - 1:00 P
Dr. King’s Office Hours: Th 8:00 A- 9:00 A
Course and Office Hour Zoom Room: <https://utexas.zoom.us/j/91774289640>
Discussion Section and Dr. King’s Zoom Room: < https://utexas.zoom.us/j/5241078500>

Instructor: Dr. Scott W. Stevens, Ph.D.

Associate Professor of Molecular Biosciences

Office: NMS 1.122

email: scott.stevens@austin.utexas.edu or through Canvas

Teaching Specialist: Dr. Peter King
email: through Canvas

Description and objectives

This course is a survey of the principles of modern molecular biology. This course will be taught at a
fairly high level using both the assigned textbook as well as primary literature describing the
phenomena being taught. Unlike the more basic biology courses, this course will not only tell you
what you need to know, but how it is we came to know them. For this course, I feel this is an
important distinction and learning about the experimental details will allow you understand how
modern molecular biologists answer the important questions and their relation to human health. The
major topics under study will include contributions of chromatin structure to gene expression,
control of RNA transcription, RNA processing, ribosomal and other RNA biogenesis, RNA export,
protein translation and many aspects of the most modern molecular biology technologies such as
genomics/transcriptomics/proteomics etc.

Prerequisites

BIO325 (Genetics) with a grade of C or better. No exceptions to this prerequisite will be made.

Biochemistry (BCH339F or BCH369) and/or Organic Chemistry is recommended, and may be required,

depending on your major and year of matriculation.

New Q/F drop policies

Please familiarize yourself with the revisions to the Q drop policies. All of these changes are outlined
on the following webpage: https: //ugs.utexas.edu/vick/academic/adddrop/qdrop

Format

There are videos of the lecture content in Canvas in the Video Recordings folder. These should be
viewed before the date and time of the lecture described below. In-class exercises and discussions
will be held during class time. Office Hours will be held at the end of every class session.Textbook (Optional)

Molecular Biology (5th ed) by Robert F. Weaver McGraw Hill Companies, New York, NY

This textbook is optional but highly recommended. The material that you will be tested on will all be
covered in the lecture notes, online homework, and practice problems in ways that are not dependent
on this particular textbook. | have suggested readings based on the 5 Edition of Weaver that are
meant to reinforce your understanding of the topics we will cover in class, but reading the equivalent
sections of any modern Molecular Biology textbook should serve you just as well. You are absolutely
NOT expected to know every single fact mentioned in the readings. They are meant to provide you
with additional background information to help you understand important concepts. I do strongly
recommend that you have access to at least one recent Molecular Biology textbook as a useful
reference for this and for subsequent upper division courses.

Other Reading Material

The reading assignments outside the textbook may be provided as PDF files on Canvas.

“Attendance”

Regular viewing of all videos, attendance during in-class presentations and at discussion sections is
expected. You are responsible for all announcements made in class; additional announcements will
be conveyed by email or by posting to the Canvas site. Attendance will be taken during discussion
sections. Poor attendance may affect your final grade (see below).

Discussion Sections

 

Section Day Time Location
84348 Tu 1:30-3P ZOOM < https://utexas.zoom.us/j/5241078500>
84349 Tu 3 - 4:30P ZOOM < https://utexas.zoom.us/j/5241078500>

Attendance will be taken at the sections. Please note that attendance requires your presence through
the section and active participation.

Exams and grades

There will be five (5) in-class exams during the semester, and no comprehensive Final exam. Please
note the exam dates on the course schedule. Each exam = 20% of your grade. Exams will consist of
T/F, fill in the blank and short answer/essay questions and problems similar to the homework. The
best preparation for exams is to regularly attend class, discussion sections and office hours, read the
textbook material and solve the assigned problems. You may not use any electronic device during
exams. The lowest of your hour-exam scores will be dropped. Since the lowest exam will dropped,
there will be no make-up exams for any reason whatsoever. You will get a zero for other missed
exams. Your Overall course score = total points from your top-four hour exams (80% of grade), your
homework and discussion section participation (20% of grade) + 8 bonus pts. if you turned in all
homework assignments and attended all of the discussion sections. Overall scores for all students
will be adjusted upward if necessary so that the median score for the class is at least 75%. Individual
hour exams will not be curved.Hour Exam 1 20% Adjusted % score Grade

Hour Exam 2 20% 90-100 A
Hour Exam 3 20% 80-89.9 B
Hour Exam 4 20% 70-79.9 C
Quizzes/Attendance 20% 60-69.9 D

100% 0-59.9 F

Re-grade requests

Re-grading of individual exams will be done only with clear evidence of an error by me or the TA,
(addition error or missing a correct answer). Differences of opinion or interpretation are very
unlikely to result in a re-grade. Requests for re-grading must be made within 3 class-days of the date
that the graded exams are returned to the class as a whole.

Use of Class Materials

The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
assignments are copyright-protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions. Additionally, sharing of class materials
without the written approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, resulting in further disciplinary action. (Including, among

other things, uploading materials to websites to share with other current or future students).

University policy on scholastic dishonesty

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Policies on scholastic dishonesty
are strictly enforced. Read, and be familiar with: http: //deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ and
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/

Academic accommodations for students with disabilities and other needs

The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students
at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY. It is the responsibility of the student to discuss needed
accommodations with the instructor within the first few days of class.

Communicating with the instructor

The best means of contact outside of class is by e-mail. | encourage questions about anything
connected with the class. However, scientific questions should be reserved for class or office
hours. You may also make an appointment to meet with me at other times, subject to my availability.
I will use e-mail to send announcements to the whole class, using your email address that was on
record at the time you registered for this class. It is your responsibility to ensure that your address
on record is current, to check it regularly, and that messages sent to that address don't bounce.Religious Holy Days

Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. Sections 51.911 and
51.925 of the Texas Education Code address absences by students and instructors for religious holy
days. Section 51.911 states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy required students to
notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can
be made. Section 51.925 prohibits the university from discriminating against or penalizing an
instructor who is absent from class for the observance of a religious holy day. Proper notice must be
given to the department chair. Prior to the begin of classes each semester, the instructor must
provide the department chair a list of classes that will be missed due to observance of a religious holy
day. The list must be personally delivered, acknowledged and dated by the chair, or sent via certified
mail, return receipt requested. Consistent with regular university policy, the instructor is responsible
for finding a qualified substitute UT Austin instructor for any missed class(es).

Classroom policy

During class, please refrain from any behavior that can be a distraction to other students. Please
respect the learning environment of your professor and your classmates. Cell phones, pagers, video
games, MP3 players, talking and the like will not be tolerated. Please turn off all electronics before
you enter any Zoom sessions. In the event that a cell phone or pager does go off, please turn it off
immediately. Repeated events will result in the student being asked to mute their connection or
leave the Zoom session. Needless to say, questions about the topic being discussed are encouraged.

Miscellaneous

There is no “extra credit” possible, outside of the assignments and exams so please, do not ask.Course schedule

Topics listed are tentative till they are covered in class. The dates of exams are not expected to
change, except when forced by University closure or delayed opening.

PLEASE REMEMBER TO VIEW THE LECTURE VIDEOS BEFORE THE IN-CLASS MEETING!

Date (lecture #)

June 4 (1) History of Molecular Biology; RNA and DNA Ch. 1, 2, 3

June 5 (2) Techniques and technologies Ch. 4,5

June 8 (3) Chromatin Ch. 13 (pp 360-377), Other*
June 9 (4) Prokaryotic RNA transcription Ch. 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12
June 10 (5) Eukaryotic RNA transcription Ch. 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12
June 11 Exam 1

June 12 (6) mRNA Capping and modification Ch. 15.1, 16.4, Other*
June 15 (7) mRNA splicing - mechanism Ch. 14

June 16 (8) mRNA splicing - assembly and control Ch. 14.2, Other*

June 17 (9) mRNA polyadenylation and export Ch. 15.2, Other*

June 18 Exam 2

June 19 (10) Coordination and control of gene expression Ch. 15.3, Other*

June 22 (11) RNA quality control and decay Ch. 16.5. Other*

June 23 (12) Ribosome biogenesis | Ch. 16.1, 19.1, Other*

June 24 (13)
June 25
June 26 (14)

June 29 (15) Translation | Ch. 17, Other*

June 30 (16) Translation II Ch. 18, Other*

July 1 (17) miRNA / RNAi Ch. 16.5-16.9; Other*
July 2 Exam 4

July 3 (18) Protein turnover Other*

July 6 (19) Retroviruses Ch. 23.4 Other*

July 7 (20) Transgenic techniques and organisms Other*

July 8 (21) Genomics & Genome-wide gene expression Ch. 24.2, 24.3, 25, Other*
July 9 Exam 5

Topic

Ribosome biogenesis II]
Exam 3
Other RNAs (tRNA, snRNA, snoRNA)

Chapter(s) covered

. 16.1, 19.1, Other*

. 16.2, 19.2, Other*

* Other materials may be used (eg. Material uploaded to Canvas, primary literature, etc.)