OM 335: OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT

OM 335: OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT (Summer 2020)

#71539 :
Instructor : Michael Hasler E-Mail: michael.hasler@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office ‘GSB 5.148 Phone: (512) 587-1422 (cell)

Mailbox >: CBA 5.202 Course Website: http://courses.utexas.edu
Office Hours : TBD

TA : Paulina Echanove

Email : pauechanove@utexas.edu
Phone

Office hours :

COURSE DESCRIPTION:

Operations Management (OM) is the cost effective management of resources to achieve
organizational goals. OM focuses on the systematic planning, design, operation, control, and
improvement of the processes which produce goods and deliver services. Managing
operations is vital to every type of organization, for it is only through effective and efficient
utilization of resources that an organization can be successful in the long run. This is
especially true today, when we see that significant competitive advantages accrue to those
firms that manage their operations effectively.

| come to this course with over 25 years in operations, supply chain, and general management.
The experience of owning, managing, and consulting to businesses of a variety of different
sizes provides me with a context for this course that we can use for a basis of discussion and
learning. Please question me on the issues in this course covered through the books, cases,
and lecture so that your learning takes place at the level of quality you expect.

This course is the “foundations course” for our Supply Chain Management major. This class
can also be useful to students with other majors because every business has an operations
component.

This class will be conducted during the first session of the Summer 2020 classes. Students
should take note that this course will be held online using Zoom and extensive use of Canvas.
Registration in the course is authorization for the University of Texas to use any recordings or
images from this class. If you choose to not be on-screen, please contact me directly.

Prerequisites: credit or registration for BA 324 (or credit for MIS 324) and credit or registration
for STA 309.

COURSE OBJECTIVES:

The main objectives of this course are:
e To provide you with an understanding of the crucial importance of operations
management in today’s business environment.To familiarize you with the basic concepts, techniques, methods and applications of
operations management.

To enhance your analytical skills and ability to uncover problems and opportunities for
improvement in production and service processes.

COURSE MATERIALS:

1.

Optional Readings

Textbook: “Matching Supply with Demand: An Introduction to Operations Management”
by Cachon, G. and C. Terwiesch. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill / Irwin. 2006.

ISBN: 0-07-291899-3

Required Readings
Course Packet: Available at the University Co-op. It contains a set of cases we will
discuss in class.

All materials are available in an electronic format through the University Co-op.

2. Course Website: This course will use Canvas extensively. The login page is located at

http://courses.utexas.edu. A UT EID is required for accessing the web site. If you need more

information or tutorials, go to http:/Avww.utexas.edu/cc/Canvas. If you have problems using
Canvas, you can call the ITS help desk at 512-475-9400. You will find the following on Canvas:

Course Notes: | will post the slides for each class on Canvas the night before each
class. You may download and print those slides if you would like to use them as lecture
note guides. | will purposely have some blank slides in the lecture for discussion
purposes.

Assignments and Solutions: The purpose of homework assignments is to provide
learning reinforcement and promote class preparedness. You will find that the
homework provides excellent learning feedback and is a confidence-building tool. The
assignments will also help you prepare for the exams.

Forums: | will provide a forum on Canvas if it is requested. If we have a forum, then
high quality forum postings will count toward your class participation grade. You can
also post any comments your have about the material and ask questions. Finally, you
can post comments, criticisms and suggestions anonymously regarding the course. In
particular, let me know throughout the semester if there is anything | can do to make the
delivery of the course better for you.

Surveys: Periodically throughout the semester | may be surveying the class for
feedback on the course and how it can be improved. Please participate in these
surveys, as | use them to adjust the class to improve your learning experience. If,
however, you have a suggestion, please feel free to contact me to share your thoughts.

Grades: Grades on exams and assignments will be posted on Canvas. Please check
that the grade posted is correct and notify the instructor (for exams) or the TAs (for
assignments) as soon as possible in case of a discrepancy.

OM 335, Summer 2020 —Hasler 2PERFORMANCE EVALUATION:

Your grade will be assessed through homework assignments, exams and class participation.
Below is a description of how the various types of assignments and tests contribute to your
grade, as well as a description of each type of graded work.

Grade

88 100

84.0 — 86.9

5. 80.0 — 83.9

C+ 77.0-—79.9
-__G__| _74.0- 76.8 _

70. 0- 73. 9
*“Comes from the Provost Recommanded Grade Schedule

 

 

 

 

Exams

Exam 1 will cover the materials from roughly sessions 1-9 (Process Analysis and Quality).
Exam 2 will be non-comprehensive and will focus on the materials from sessions 11-20
(Project Management, Queuing Theory and Inventory Management).

Exams will be online through Canvas and will be multiple choice. The exams are closed book
and closed notes. Remember to have a calculator. You will be allowed to have a formula sheet
that you will upload with your exam.

Offering a make-up exam for a missed exam is entirely at the discretion of the instructor.
Students with legitimate reasons and letters of proof could request to take make-up exams.

Any concern regarding the grading of exams should be addressed directly to the instructor, no
later than one weeks after the grade was assigned.

Homework Assignments

There are up to 12 homework assignments throughout the semester. You may do the
homework assignments in teams unless otherwise noted, but in this case, each student must
submit a separate copy of their own work in their own words and indicate the names of the
people they worked with on the front page. If you do the assignment individually, then you may
(and in fact are encouraged to) type it.

Homework assignments will be submitted through Canvas by the beginning of the class
session listed on the schedule. If the submission will take place any other way besides
Canvas, we will discuss it beforehand in class. The solutions to the homework will be provided

OM 335, Summer 2020 —Hasler 3at the end of the day when it is due; therefore no late homework assignments will be accepted.
| do reserve the right to assign a make-up homework for pre-approved situations such as
significant illness or emergency.

When computing the average grade on homework assignments, your final score will be the
total of your 10 best scores. Homework assignments will be graded by the TA on a scale of 0
to 10. In general this means:

e 0 points for no submittal or no reasonable effort

e 2 point for submittal

e 4 points for submittal and good faith attempt, but missed the mark on the goal of the
assignment

e 6 points for essentially correct, good effort

e 8 points for correct, very good effort

e 10 points for exceptional work, including correct answers to the challenging questions

Points will be given for effort (especially for the case-based assignments), correctness of your
answers and presentation. Any concern regarding the grading of homework assignments
should be addressed directly to the TA and not to the instructor, no later than one week after
the grade was assigned.

Class Participation

Regular attendance at all class meetings is expected. Students are expected to prepare
before class. Participation in class, in the form of answering questions and/or commenting on
the material is strongly encouraged. Participation on the Canvas forum will also be counted
towards the class participation grade, as long as the posted comments are relevant. In
addition, coming to office hours counts as class participation as well and is judged accordingly.

We may begin each class session with a discussion of a current news topic in the context of
supply chain management. A news article will be posted the class session before it will be
discussed (e.g., Monday posting for a Wednesday discussion). You are expected to read and
develop your thoughts on the article before arriving in class. | will call on students randomly to
begin the discussion.

SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY

The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
htto:/Awww.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, | have
agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this
class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If
the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is
unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic
brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the
Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official

OM 335, Summer 2020 —Hasler 4University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on
what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.

STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS

Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.

If for some reason you need special assistance to take an exam or complete an assignment
please notify me ahead of time so that special arrangements can be made in a timely fashion.

 

STUDENTS WITH DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION

It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served
by this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that
students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource,
strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.

RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS

By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least five days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.

CAMPUS SAFETY

Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http:/www.utexas.edu/safety:

e Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.

e Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building.

e Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during
the first week of class.

e Inthe event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.

e Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.

e Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050

e Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: http:/Avww.utexas.edu/emergency.

OM 335, Summer 2020 —Hasler 5SCHEDULE

A tentative schedule of meetings, readings, and deliverables for the semester will be posted on
Canvas. This is subject to change. When there are major changes, you will be notified by
email; a current schedule will always be available on the Canvas course website.

OM 335--Intro to Operations Management: Summer 2020

Tentative Schedule--Version 05052020
ate. Topic nee
Intro to Process Analysis Chapter 2
Process Capacity and Bottlenecks, Rush Order Flow Time, Flow Analysis, Cycle
9-Jun |Time, Utilization
Process Analysis, Capacity, etc., Line Balancing, Push vs Pull Chapter 3
Labor, Utilization, Profit HW 1 Chapter 4
Batch systems, Set ups, and capacity--Recommended Batch Sizes, Target flow
15-Jun |r HW 2 Chapter 7.1-7.5
Processes in Services, Benihana

Begin Quality Management and Statistical Process Control P|
Chapter 10, 11, TMMC
18-Jun Quality Management, Statistical Process Control, Toyota Production System Case

T
T

T

W 3
Ww4
W5
Intro to Project Management
W6

po
[aan |nsoiomnjetmanagimens
. Po
-- Chapter 13
po
po
Pp

ates
xam 1
Queuing Theory Wrap-up and Intro to Economic Order Quantity
T OQ Wrap-up
Review and Wrapup

Newsvendor Model, discrete
Newsvendor Model, continuous, Sport Obermeyer

a a a
= = =
Wo Qo N
g | ~

p <

[sas fuvewanewapp

=
=
R
2°
Zz
<

2
3
4
5
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
T 1
2

H
H
H
H
H

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
1

2

 

OM 335, Summer 2020 —Hasler 6