Intro to ABA
Syllabus

Introduction to Applied Behavior Analysis, Semester 1

SED F388

Unique Number 74495

Instructor: Katherine Hoffman, PhD, BCBA-D

Contact: Canvas Message* or katherine.hoffman@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant: Ashley Bagwell, BCBA

Contact: Canvas Message* or afbagwell@utexas.edu

 

Virtual Weekly Zoom class: Wednesdays, 1-2:15pm OR 7-8:15pm

Virtual Office Hours (via Canvas Conference) or by Appointment:
Mon
Tues 7-7:30pm (Dr. Hoffman)
Wed 5-5:30pm (Ashley Bagwell)
Thurs 1:00-1:30pm (Dr. Hoffman)
Fri 6:30pm-7pm (Ashley Bagwell)

* This is the primary mode of communication for the course and will be used for all course-
related questions. If I have not responded to your question within | business day, please
follow up with me.

Course Description

This is an initial course in applied behavior analysis and will introduce you to the history and
basic concepts behind the science of behavior analysis, and give applied examples of how the
science of behavior analysis is used. You will learn how behavior is defined and measured, and
how we can manipulate the environment, both before behavior and after behavior occurs to make
it more or less likely to occur in the future. Applications for these processes will be explored.

Course Objectives

Upon completion of this course, through lectures, discussions, quizzes, and projects the student
will be able to demonstrate the following competencies related to the science of Applied
Behavior Analysis:

Describe the history and rationale of applied behavior analysis

Be able to describe and use behavior measurement systems.

Understand the concept of reinforcement and its use for behavior change

Understand the concept of punishment and its use for behavior change.

Understand extinction and differential reinforcement and how they can be applied to teach
new behaviors.

Understand verbal behavior concepts and how we can use verbal behavior to teach language.

RYN

aaIntro to ABA
Syllabus

I. Course Requirements and Considerations
Required Textbook

Cooper, J. O., Heron, T. E., & Heward, W. L. (2020). Applied behavior analysis (3rd ed.).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.

Supplemental Readings

In addition to readings from the above referenced text, students will be expected to complete
additional readings, described in the Course Schedule. Copies of all additional readings will be
made available to students through Canvas. The readings will be in pdf format and you may print
them out or read them online. To do this, you must have Adobe Acrobat Reader loaded on your
computer. For information on how to download Adobe Acrobat Reader, see
https://get.adobe.com/reader/

Class Participation

Students are expected to complete assignments on time unless prior arrangement has been made.
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class assignments. If you miss an assignment, or
other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to
complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the observance. It is the policy of The
University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days
prior to the due date of the assignment or on the first day of class if the religious holiday falls
within the first two weeks of the semester.

Course Requirements

1. It is expected that course assignments and projects will be completed and turned in on time.
Assignments turned in late will result in a lower grade unless a prior arrangement has been made
or there is a clear, documented emergency. An assignment will be considered late if it has not
been turned in by the class session at which it was due or by the time specified in the syllabus.

2. On all written assignments, students are expected to use the standards described in the
Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (6th Edition), particularly the
standards for quotation and use of materials. You should consult the APA 6th Edition Manual if
you have any questions about such standards.

University of Texas Honor Code

The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers andIntro to ABA
Syllabus

community.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the

Student Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/

Important Dates for This Semester:

Please see the following website for a complete list of important dates in The University of
Texas at Austin Calendar: https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars

University Electronic Mail Notification Policy

All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order
to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications
may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice a
week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your email address are

available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify html

Students with Disabilities

Students with disabilities who require accommodations need to get a letter that documents the
required accommodations from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of
the Dean of Students (512-471-6259 voice or 512-471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard
of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. See following website for more

information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/

II. Course Format & Correspondence

Canvas

This course will utilize Canvas. You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site
every class day for class work and announcements. As with all computer systems, there are
occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notification of theseIntro to ABA
Syllabus

disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for
late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will
make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date. Canvas is available at
https://canvas.instructure.com/login. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 or
you can submit a help request here: http://www.utexas.edu/its/helpdesk. Office hours are posted

 

here as well, so plan accordingly.
Weekly Virtual Class via Zoom

There will be a required virtual class component to this class on Wednesdays starting July 10.
Before the first class, you will be required to sign up for one of two section times. This section
time will be the same for you each week throughout the course. You will get course credit for
attending the class. There will be an alternative assignment (posted on Wednesday by 10pm) that
will need to be completed by Friday at 11:59pm if you do not attend class for that week. I offer
the alternative assignment to be a flexible and responsive instructor, however I have been given
feedback from students that attending the live classes is important in your learning. Please make
every effort to attend class.

Correspondence

I will be using the Canvas Announcements to send weekly messages detailing assignments due
for the coming week. It is recommended that you link your Canvas account to your current email
account so that you receive announcements as they are sent, or you can simply check your
Canvas account daily.

For your questions, using the Canvas Messaging is the fastest way to get your questions
answered. If the question is about a specific assignment, please include the Assignment Name in
the subject (ie. “Module 3 Quiz’). This will ensure that I can get your questions answered
quickly before deadlines.

I will try to respond within 1 business day. If there has been no response after this time, please
re-send. A response might be a note that tells you that I will get back with you soon, but I will try
to send a response.

Office Hours:

Virtual Office Hours: There will be multiple opportunities to get questions answered via virtual
office hours through Canvas. To access virtual office hours, log in to the course on Canvas and
then click on “Conferences”. If you are within the time window of office hours, there should be a
conference going on. Click on “Join Conference Now”. You may have to allow audio feed to ask
questions, or you can use the chat function to type them. Virtual Office hours is a time reserved
to answer live questions in an online chat and/or video chat format, as well as a time reserved to
respond to content questions via Canvas Message. I know when using technology, sometimes
technological issues occur. I will have a back-up method of communication (phone or email)
ready so that I can get your questions answered. Times for office hours are listed at the top of theIntro to ABA
Syllabus

syllabus. If there is a change in office hours, I will notify you via Canvas announcements (I try to
get this into the weekly Canvas announcement if I know in advance).

Content Questions: I have set up office hours to help respond to content questions (both live and
Canvas Message) before deadlines. If you have a content question that needs a response, please
plan to be available for live chat OR submit it via Canvas Message the evening prior and I will
attempt to respond before the end of office hours.
Technical Questions: For technical questions or issues, my expectation is that you have made a
good faith attempt to resolve the issue prior to contacting me. If you do contact me, it is helpful
to know the things you have tried, so that I can help you as quickly as possible. So, here are the
first lines of defense for a technical problem:
1. Contact ITS Help Desk at http://www.utexas.edu/its/helpdesk/ or 512-475-9400
If the technical question is specifically about Canvas, you can call the Canvas Help
Hotline at 1-855-308-2494, as well as access technical support through the “Help” tab in
Canvas.
3. Email another student in the class.
4. Email/Message the instructor & TA. Please include the steps you have taken to resolve
the problem thus far, so we can most readily help you.

 

III. Types of Assignments

Guided Reading

In this assignment, students will read the assigned text, and then answer the guided reading
questions, which include fill-in-the-blank and short answer questions. Misspelled words will be
considered incorrect. Feedback will be given if an answer is incorrect, but the correct answer will
not be given. Progress monitoring of the number of correct answers, and the number of questions
remaining in the assignment will be given. These assignments are open-book, and students are
encouraged to use readings to answer questions. After the assignment has been completed for
credit, questions may be repeated for continued practice.

Article Summary

For this assignment, students will be given an article or list of articles (as shown on the
assignment list). The article summary should identify the following: rationale and experimental
question, participants and relevant characteristics, settings and materials used, independent and
dependent variables, type of single subject design used, results, and strengths and limitations of
the study. A rubric is available on Canvas for article summaries. Article summaries will beIntro to ABA
Syllabus

graded by participation, and intermittently, randomly graded for content based on the rubric
posted on Canvas.

Quiz

These are timed quizzes covering module topics. They are multiple choice. For each question,
more than one answer choice may be correct. Students earn up to .5 points per question

The entire quiz is 10 questions and worth 5 total points. After each question, feedback on
whether the answer was correct is given. The correct answer is not given. Each student can
attempt a quiz up to 3 times. If a student takes the quiz, and is satisfied with the first score, then
he or she does not need to take the quiz again. Quizzes are closed book, and timed. The highest
score achieved across multiple attempts will be your score for the quiz.

NOTE: It is highly recommended that you complete at least your first quiz attempt BEFORE
your class time on Wednesday, so that you can get any clarifications or questions resolved during
class. This allows you to repeat the quiz after class and improve your score. All final attempts
at quizzes are due Wednesday by 11:59pm.

Video Assignments

The video lesson to view will be listed in Canvas. You will need to watch the video and
complete the assignment, which might vary in format depending on the video. Instructions will
be posted along with links or actual video within the modules.

Lecture Assignments

These assignments are in the format of recorded lectures from the instructor (usually 15-30
minutes in length). Following each lecture, you will need to answer a series of questions on
Canvas to gain credit for this assignment.

Presentation/Final Project

Students will be required to give a brief virtual presentation using PowerPoint of their final
project to their peers in the last two classes of the course. Students will be choosing a peer-
reviewed research intervention article of a topic in this course. I will give further details on this
project as the course proceeds.Intro to ABA

Syllabus

IV. Grades and Feedback
Point Distribution
1. Class Attendance or Alt. Assignment (6x2pts) — lowest 10%
2. Quizzes (5x5 pts each) - lowest 20%
3. Guided Reading (16x1.5pt.) — 2 lowest 21%
4. Article Summary (4x2pt) - lowest 6%
5. Lecture/Videos/Activities (17x1.5) — 2 lowest 22.5%

6. Presentation (Concept/Outline/PowerPoint/Peer Reviews) 20.5%

Total Points 100%

Grades

Grades will be assigned in the following manner
A = 90-100 points

B = 80-89

C= 70-79 points

D = 60-69 points

F = < 60 points

Course Feedback

Feedback is an important part of any kind of learning. Without feedback on how well students
understand the material, it is more difficult for students to make significant progress. During this
course each of you will give feedback on your learning in informal and formal ways, such as
assignments and class discussions. Please let us know when something we discuss is not clear.
This kind of communication will enable us to provide additional information when needed or to
explain a concept in different terms.

In addition to feedback on your learning, we will ask for feedback from you about how our
teaching strategies are helpful in your learning through anonymous course surveys. This kind of
feedback is very important to us as we strive to be effective instructors.Intro to ABA
Syllabus

Finally, it is the policy of the College of Education that all organized courses be evaluated using
a Course Instructor Survey arranged through the Measurement and Evaluation Center at the end
of the semester. You will be given the opportunity to complete a student course evaluation
during the last week of the course. Student evaluations remain anonymous; the instructor will not
be present during the evaluation and will not see the answer sheets until grades have been
officially reported.