SED 303

 

Summer Session 2 2020

AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER:
TRUTHS AND CONSEQUENCES

“If you’ve met one person with autism, you've met one person with autism.” Stephen Shore

Instructional Team

Katie Klingler Tackett, Ph.D

About Me: | am a former general
education and special education
teacher. I'm a parent (through both
biology and the foster care
system). My responsibilities here at
UT include teaching and
overseeing the Special Education
undergrad program.

Alexandrea Pena

About Me: | am originally from
Albuquerque, NM. | previously
taught in special education
programs that served students with
Intellectual and Developmental
disabilities. Currently, | ama 2nd
year doctoral student here at UT in
the Special Education Equity and
Diversity program.

Yeji Kim

About Me: | am a former special
education teacher from South
Korea. Currently, | am a 3rd-year
doctoral student at UT in the
Special Education Equity and
Diversity program.

SED 303

 

 

What this course is about...

Welcome to the world of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). You
always have been living in this world, and some of you are
extremely comfortable and familiar with this world, whether as an
individual, friend, and/or family member. Others, however, will
experience your first formal exposure to ASD in this course. You will
identify which approaches and strategies help improve the lives of
people with ASD and which ones are wastes of time and money (or
even downright dangerous).

The goal of this course is to help you to become an educated
consumer of research. We will look at various claims and the
research behind each of them. Additionally, we will examine the
role research plays in the public perception of these claims. We will
consider how research findings are communicated - and how we
can best translate these findings into everyday language.

The picture is of Taipei, where Alex and | were supposed to be
leading a Study Abroad program this summer. It has nothing to do
with this class.

cD This course carries the Cultural Diversity flag. https://

ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/cultural-diversitySED 303 Summer Session 2 2020

Course Objectives

e¢ Explain how the definition and history of ASD impacts prevalence numbers
¢ Compare and contrast quantitative and qualitative research in educational settings

e Explain how the questions researchers ask determine the methods they use to study
ASD

e Describe various research methods used by researchers to study ASD

e Identify strengths and limitations of various educational research methods

Course Format

You will take this class online. The class will not meet in person or online synchronously,
and there will be no scheduled exams or lectures.

You are encouraged to access the course content regularly and treat this class as if we met
regularly. By doing so, you will be able to actively participate in class activities, complete
your assignments, and access announcements in a timely manner.

You can complete this course in a condensed period. That doesn’t mean that you should,
though.

oll
You must complete each (od thecoffeebee
module in order to move on
to the next module. The “We didn’t used to have all this ADHD

lessons build on each other, ~— and Autism and stuff” | think what you
so skipping around between ;

modules doesn't make mean is that people used to go

sense. undiagnosed and get absolutely no help
Strong time management and were forced to suffer through their
skills will be your bestasset —‘|jfe because they had no support or

in this course. Poor time understanding whatsoever but sure,
management IS a Major

reason why grades sufferin Janice, pretend my generation invented
online courses. Autism.

SED 303 2SED 303 Summer Session 2 2020

ASSIGNMENTS

“Normal is an illusion. What is normal for the spider is chaos for the fly.” Barbara Sher

Detailed guidelines and evaluation criteria for assignments will be provided. The following descriptions
serve as an overview of the expectations for each assignment.

We've set up due dates in Canvas for when we think you should complete modules in order to spread out
the workload AND best meet our course objectives. There will be no penalty for late work, though. All
assignments are due at 11:59 pm on Friday, August 14th. All work must be turned in by then.

1. Module Prompts. (150 points; 10 prompts x 15 points each) At the end of each module, you will write a
brief (less than 200 words) response or record a short video reaction (less than 90 seconds) to a prompt
provided on Canvas. Prompts will be graded on a 15-point scale.

2. Module Quizzes. (100 points; 10 quizzes x 10 points each). As you complete each module, you will take a
ten-question quiz to assess your understanding of the content covered in each module. Before you start
the quiz make sure you have completed the readings and watched the videos found in the module. Each
quiz consists of a bank of questions, and you will be given 10 questions to answer from the bank.You
have two chances to take each quiz; the highest grade will count. Once you choose to start each quiz,
you will have 90 minutes to complete all 10 questions. You may refer back to the content in the module to
answer your questions, but you must submit an answer for each question within the 90 minutes. NOTE:
Time begins from the moment you start the Module Quiz and runs continuously: once time begins there
is no way to pause it, including loss of connectivity or logging out, so please plan accordingly.

3. Research Analysis: 50 points. For this assignment, students will be assigned an article to annotate,
summarize, and critique. The article review should identify the following: rationale, research question(s),
participants and relevant characteristics, settings and materials used, variables, results, and strengths and
limitations of the study. You will be filling out a template for this assignment; it is not a paper. The review
will also contain a section where you will “translate” the research findings into practice-friendly language.

A rubric is posted on Canvas.

Cell Percentage Ce Tel Percentage
A
A-
Br
B

B- "Traditional rounding

 

SED 303 3SED 303 Summer Session 2 2020

“| view ‘autistic’ as a word for a part of how my brain works, not for a narrow set of
behaviors and certainly not for a set of boundaries of a stereotype that | have to stay
inside.” — Amanda Boggs

Important Notes

¢ Life happens. Please let the instructional team know if things beyond this course may be affecting your
ability to complete work for this class in a timely manner.

e Your success is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or cause you to feel excluded, please let
the instructional team know as soon as possible. Together we'll develop strategies to both meet your
needs and the requirements of the course.

e You need to be fully present when logged into class. It is impossible to participate in this class while
texting, Snapchatting, tweeting, working on other things, online shopping, etc. When taking an online
class, it is tempting to think that you can keep Google Messenger (for example) open while navigating
through the module. If you need to take a break while accessing a module, do it. The modules do not
need to be completed in one sitting.

eTrack your progress on Canvas. Students
should track their grades on Canvas regularly;
this way you can ensure that all of your

“What would happen if the autism gene was eliminated coursework is turned in and recorded on
from the gene pool? You would have a bunch of people Canvas.
standing around in a cave, chatting and socializing and

Contact Canvas Support Center for technical
not getting anything done.” Dr. Temple Grandin PP

support. If you need technical support, call the
Canvas Support Center [855-308-2494]. Do
not contact your instructors with technical
support. They cannot help you (beyond advising
you to restart your computer - that’s the limit of

 

 

their technical expertise. Seriously.)

¢ All communication will be through Piazza. We will use the Piazza Discussion board to ask/ answer
questions about content, course logistics, etc. This should be your first stop when you have a question; it
may be that it is already asked and answered. If you have a personal question, you may message
instructors privately through the Piazza Discussion Board.

e We will use the class Facebook Page to post articles, video clips, etc. You do not have to engage by
posting or commenting on the class Facebook page. However, if (and only if) you have made at least 3
contributions on the class FB page, we will bump your grade up by 1 percentage point, should you find
you have missed the cut off score by 1 point. This page will be private and only accessible to members of

SED 303 4SED 303 Summer Session 2 2020

the class. We aren't trying to be your friends; FB just has a good interface for online interaction that many
of us are familiar with using.

 

Module Topics Related Assignments

Module 1: Introduction and Course Review Module 1 Quiz, Module 1 Prompt
Module 2: What is Autism Spectrum Disorder? Module 2 Quiz, Module 2 Prompt
Module 3: Why is ASD a Fad Magnet? Module 3 Quiz, Module 3 Prompt
Module 4: Educational Research 101 Module 4 Quiz, Module 4 Prompt

Module 5: Survey Research and Adults with Autism Module 5 Quiz, Module 5 Prompt
Module 6: ASD and Sensory Perception Module 6 Quiz, Module 6 Prompt

Module 7: Experimental Research and Swimming Module 7 Quiz, Module 7 Prompt

Module 8: Horses and Single Subject Design Module 8 Quiz, Module 8 Prompt

Module 9: Neurodiversity and Qualititative Module 9 Quiz, Module 9 Prompt

Research

Module 10: Action Research and Education Module 10 Quiz, Module 10 Prompt; Research

Review Project

SED 303 5