NTR W374C — PRACTICUM IN COMMUNITY DIETETICS
NTR W374P — ADVANCED PRACTICUM IN DIETETICS
Summer, 2020

Course Description:
Supervised Practice in Community Nutrition Facilities

Students will gain experience in community nutrition practices, participate in the
development and completion of a business plan, develop nutrition products for a
community nutrition institute and complete the SNAP project.

Advanced Practicum in Dietetics

Culminating experience in the practice of dietetics in the specialty areas of nutrition.
Students will reflect on personal & professional development and prepare materials
(ePortfolio) that will assist in seeking an entry-level position in dietetics.

Instructors:

Monica Milonovich, MS, RD, LD
Office: GEA 313

Phone: 512-471-0637

Cell phone: 512-373-2798

Email: mmilonovich@utexas.edu

Ladia Hernandez PhD, RD
Office: GEA 313B

Phone: 512.471.0890

Cell phone: 713.205.2387

Email: ladia.hernandez@austin.utexas.edu

Objectives: Upon completion of these courses, students should demonstrate:

Professional standards of behavior

Personal and professional growth

Effective written and verbal communication
Appropriate positive attitude and service orientation
Cooperation as an effective team player

ak WN >6. Familiarity with community nutrition opportunities

7. Performance in accordance with the Code of Ethics for the Profession of
Dietetics.

8. Participation in professional activities.

9. Use of current technologies for information and communication activities.

10. Self-assessment used to evaluate interest in and aptitude for dietetic practice
in specialty area of interest.

Class Schedule:

Online Classroom: Classes will meet via Zoom (aka online classroom) during Weeks
1, 3-7 on Tuesday and Thursday, 9am - 11am CST. During Weeks 1,3-7, students will
complete weekly modules and assignments outside of the online classroom. Week 2
(6/15-6/18), students will attend SPHN 2020 Annual Meeting (Virtual).

Virtual Rotation Dates: Students will complete a virtual rotation during Week 8 and
Week 9 (7/27 - 8/7) with a preceptor. Each virtual rotation is different. On average,
students are expected to work 40-hour work weeks (similar to your preceptor’s
schedule). Your daily start and finish times will vary and are at the discretion of your
preceptor.

Week 10 (meet daily from 9-11am CST) - Students will meet with Dr. Meadows to
complete paperwork and end of rotation presentations

Monday (8/10) - Completion of CPD paperwork with Dr. Meadows
Tuesday (8/11) - End of rotation presentations

Wednesday (8/12) - End of rotation presentations

Thursday (8/13) - Focus groups with Dr. Meadows

Friday (8/14) - Last class day celebrationEvaluation: Will be based on successful completion of assigned rotations as well as
course assignments and activities.

Performance Evaluations and Reflections: (20%

Preceptor Evaluations - A formal evaluation of competency using the Summer
Rotation Evaluation Form will be scheduled for the last day of each rotation.

Self Evaluations - In preparation for your preceptor evaluation, complete the same
form and conduct a self evaluation using the Summer Rotation Evaluation Form.

Faculty Evaluation - The Professional Rubric will be used to evaluate your overall
performance this summer. This will be completed at the end of the summer course.

- Webinar Reflections - The class will collectively determine the 20 webinars that will be

discussed during the summer session. During each class day, we will participate in a
peer-lead conversation of two webinars. Each week, students will submit a brief
summary of your learnings and how you plan to apply the information gained from the
four webinars.

First Impression Reflection - Students will submit comments related to your first day of
your virtual rotation including expectations.

Assignments and Activities: (80%)

UTNI Nutrition Education Assignment: In this assignment, students will study,
define, and create new ways to apply nutrition knowledge and interventions to
healthcare delivery and patient practices in everyday life.

experience.

RDN Advocacy/Business Plan: Development and presentation of Business Plan to
support RDN Advocacy for target population.

 

. SNAP Challenge Assignment: Food diary, cost analysis and paper reflecting onePortfolio: Include examples of projects you have completed throughout your
educational experience preparing you to be a registered dietitian. Include recognition
of strengths and needs for continued learning. You are required to attend a minimum
of six professional meeting hours during your CPD experience (three semesters) and
have four hours of meaningful volunteer experiences throughout your CPD experience.
Include documentation and reflection of these experiences in your ePortfolio. You are
NOT required to comment on all the CRDs. The CRDs give you guidance into better
understanding that you are prepared to be a registered dietitian.

Special Topics Webinar Presentations: Moderate a 15-minute presentation on
assigned webinar topics. Students will deliver 1 webinar presentation during the

COUrSe.

End of the Semester Virtual Rotation Oral Reports: 10-minute presentation on your
virtual rotation. Students completing rotations with the same preceptor may present
their experience as a group.

Nutrition Focused Physical Exam Curriculum Evaluation: Students will participate
in a pre- and post-survey related to their comfort level conducting nutrition focused
physical exams before and after completing a nutrition focused physical exam
curriculum.

 

Coordinated Program Policies Students must be familiar with and follow both
program and practice facility policies. During the practicum students should pay
particular attention to the CPD policies regarding:

Requirements for Completion of Program
Eligibility/Availability for Supervised Practice (
Attendance

Academic and Professional Honesty
Confidentiality of Information
Non-discrimination

Dress Requirements

Attendance

Realizing that students may occasionally have an unavoidable absence, students are
allowed up to 4 hours of personal leave during the summer sessions. Personal leave
will be assessed in 1-hour blocks.Online Classroom Days: If the personal leave occurs during an on-line classroom
workshop day, all activities/assignments must be made-up as needed.

Virtual Rotation Days: Make-up time may be required for absence during assigned
time during week 8 and 9 virtual rotations. Regardless of make-up, a penalty of a letter
grade may be assessed to the course grade for each additional 4 hours of absence.

Last Class Week: No personal leave time can be used during the last days of class.

Absence due to illness will not result in a grade penalty provided the student seeks
medical care promptly. The need for make-up will be at the discretion of the course
instructor depending on the duration of absence and impact on achievement of required
competencies.

If you have questions about how the absence policy applies to you, please see the
course instructor or program director.