THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
SPN 367P

Business in Hispanic Life and Culture

SUMMER 2020

**This course will be taught in Spanish**

 

Instructor: Guillermina Ogando Lavin

Teacher Assistant: Amalia Merino

Unique Course Number: 82743

Time/ Place: MTWTHF 10:00-11:30am via Zoom Meetings

Instructor Office Hours: TA Office Hours:
Monday 11:30am-12:30pm Tuesday 11:30am-12:30pm
Wednesday 9:00am-10:00am Wednesday 11:30am-12:30pm
Thursday 12:00pm-1:00pm Friday 9:00am-10:00am
E-mail: mogando@austin.utexas.edu E-mail: amalia.merino@utexas.edu

1. Placement and pre-requisites
The prerequisite for this course is a passing grade (C or better) in SPN 327C or 327N.

2. Objectives of the course
In a globalized world, where multilingualism is highly valued, having economics and business

knowledge prepares students to widen their professional horizons in international market and to
improve their intercultural abilities in their own country.
The general objectives of the course are:
e To acquire essential vocabulary for the main concepts of the business world
e To attain a general overview of the economy of a variety of Spanish-speaking countries
e To become familiar with the business cultural environment of a variety of Spanish-
speaking countries, and to compare them with its American counterpart
e To become familiar with some local businesses from Spanish-speaking countries
e To improve confidence using Spanish in a professional setting
e To develop business writing
e To review the main grammar points to succeed in writing and oral performance
e To increase oral expression and interaction
e To advance creative skills and the ability to work collaboratively
e To develop the ability to make a formal business presentation in Spanish3. Course description

The course is structured in two interrelated parts: Independent and classroom activities. Students
will work in groups or individually to perform different tasks related with content studied in
class.

The course is designed to provide interactive, engaging, meaningful learning adaptable to the
specific needs of each student through a series of modules. Knowledge will be constructed and
advanced through discovery, interaction and cooperative work, as opposed to passive
explanations. Via Canvas, you will access listening and reading materials related to the field
work. In class, we will analyze and discuss the linguistic and cultural aspects of the material in
order to maximize the benefits of said field work.

For every course topic, there will be vocabulary and general content quizzes in class or on
Canvas. After each topic, you will be required to create, collaboratively or individually, a task
related to the materials studied in class. Guidance and instructions will be provided prior to the
assignments via Canvas.

At the end of the course, you will present a business project based on a specific subject of
interest of yours. The objective of this project is to become familiar with a specific business
environment and to focus on a specific aspect, i.e. advertising, marketing, production, legal
issues, sustainability or human resources. Detailed instructions will be provided through Canvas.

4. Materials and resources

No textbooks required. Materials will be provided via Canvas. Recommended: a hardcopy or
online Spanish-English dictionary such as Business Spanish (http://businessspanish.com). In
chapter 2, students must see the movie The Big Short (Available in Amazon or YouTube for
$2.99)

5. Global Cultures flag

This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed

to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices,
beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.6. Grading scale

There is no curve or extra credit in this course.
Final letter grades are assigned according to the following scale:

93-100 A 83-86.99 B 73-76.99 C 63-66.99 D

90-92.99 A- 80-82.99 B- 70-72.99 C- 60-62.99 D-
87-89.99 Bt 77-79.99 C+ 67-69.99 D+ 0-59.99 F

7. Grade distribution and course assessments

 

 

 

Vocabulary and content quizzes 25%
Collaborative or individual final tasks 30%
Homework 10%
Participation in class and groups interaction 5%
Portfolio 15%
Final Business Project 15%

e Presentation

e Format

e Content

 

 

 

Vocabulary and Content Quizzes: Two or more times per module, you will have a vocabulary
quiz via Canvas or in class on the vocabulary words and important contents that you have read,
listened, or studied in class. You will always be provided with the vocabulary list to study.
Quizzes will be no more than 15 minutes. There is no make-up for quizzes. Your lowest grade
will be dropped. Quizzes will be available on Canvas for one week. After this week, quizzes will
automatically close and will not be re-opened. Students who did not complete the quiz, will
receive a 0 for that missed assignment.

Individual or Collaborative Tasks: After every chapter you will create a writing or oral task
based on the content of the chapter. Below are the 4 tasks that you will have for each chapter:
Chapter I: Interview a Spanish speaker entrepreneur, write a report, and present it in class
Chapter 2: Record a simulation of a job interview

Chapter 3: Write a report about the stock market

Chapter 4: Present a marketing campaign

*More details will be provided through Canvas.

Participation: Participation is a vital component of this course. You are therefore expected to
participate regularly by attending each Zoom meeting (with your video turned on) and actively
engage in class discussions. You will be graded based on the quantity and quality of your
contributions (in Spanish). You will receive two participation grades in the course: one mid-semester and one during the last week of classes. The rubric used to determine your
participation grades will be posted on Canvas.

Homework: Homework is essential to succeed in this class. The online course is designed based
on the flipped class model. This means that you are introduced to content at home and practice it
during our synchronous class. Homework provides benefits that will help you succeed outside of
the classroom (i.e. time management, assessment of priorities, review and analysis, etc.).

Portfolio: Throughout the semester you will maintain a portfolio which will include a variety of
assignments, such as reflections on your vocabulary knowledge as well as your impressions or
reactions to research in companies, videos, audios, readings etc. As part of the portfolio, you will
collaboratively research a business topic in a Spanish-speaking country of your interest. The
purpose of this assignment is to relate the cultural aspects you discover to those learned in class.

Final Business Project: As part of this course, you will choose a business field or organization
and collaboratively create a business plan as part of a new company that you wish to implement.
Your instructor will provide you with the resources needed to complete your project. You will
present the project in class. This assignment will be graded based on originality, clarity, oral
fluency as well as technologies used for the presentation. Details will be provided via Canvas.

8. Policies

Canvas: This course uses Canvas as its course management system. I will post grades, as well
as all handouts, audios, videos and readings on Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/).

Attendance: Due to the nature of this course, regular class and field-work attendance are
required for successful completion. You are allowed 3 absences to our Zoom meetings with no
attendance penalty. For each additional absence, a full percentage point will be deducted from
your final semester average. In order to participate in class with your fellows and your instructor,
we ask that you have your camera on during each Zoom session.

Plagiarism: Submitting any assignment that is not your own original work may be considered
plagiarism and will be dealt with according to University policy. For more information, visit
Student Judicial Services (SJS) at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.

Accommodations: I will be available to discuss appropriate academic accommodations for
students with a disability. Before course accommodations can be made, you will be required to
provide documentation prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities Office (SSD):
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd.

Student conduct: Any student who, acting singly or in concert with others, obstructs, disrupts,
or interferes with any teaching, educational, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service,or other activity or public performance authorized to be held or conducted on campus or on
property or in a building or facility owned or controlled by the university is subject to discipline.

Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the
professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further investigation any information
concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking committed
by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also requires reporting
incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as
Title [X incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such incidents
that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality, please
contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and
Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these
services for any needed support and that you report any Title [IX incidents to the Title [X Office.Note: This calendar can be slightly modified. You will be advised in advance of any change.

BGT 109.0

I BTeoyeny years)
Las finanzas

Los modelos de negocios en paises hispanos

La responsabilidad social

Presentacion del curso
Explorando las
empresas: tipologia

Vocabulario de tipos de
empresas y

Unidad 1 (pp. 3, 4 y 5)

 

5 de junio

Emprendedores

Las oraciones de
relativo y el uso del
condicional

Quiz en Canvas
Escritura de un email a
una compafia en grupo

(pp.6-9)

 

8 de junio

Lo que nos hace
unicos: prevalencia de
negocios en México,
burocracia

Vocabulario sobre
microempresas y
burocracia

Quiz en Canvas
Unidad 1 (pp. 11-14)

 

9 de junio

10 de junio

11 de junio

12 de junio
15 de junio

Burocracia en la
creacion de un negocio

Las finanzas en los
negocios

Anticipo de la unidad
3: Log in La
bolsavirtual.com

La contabilidad y las
facturas

La ética empresarial en
la empresa

Preparacion de la tarea
final 1 (informe)

 

Los acentos en espafiol:
repaso de reglas y
practicas.

Vocabulario de dinero
y numeros

Repaso de reglas de
formacion de numeros

Vocabulario de la
contabilidad
Vocabulario de
responsabilidad social
empresarial

Vocabulario y guia para

el informe de la
entrevista de la tarea
final 1

Quiz en Canvas
Unidad 1 (pp.15-17)

Unidad 1 (pp. 18-20)

Preguntas para la
compania entrevistada

Creacion de una factura
Unidad 1 (pp.20-25)

Quiz en Canvas
Unidad 1| (28-30)
Entrevista a la
compania hispana
Unidad 1 (pp.30-31)

Portafolio entrada sobre
la unidad 1Unidad 2:

La entrevista de trabajo
La carta de presentacion
JS) mereewa(epytetee
El mercado laboral

Presentacion en clase
de la tarea final 1

Las ofertas de empleo

Vocabulario el mundo
laboral

Reflexiones para el
proyecto final. Paso 1
Unidad 2 (pp. 1-3)
Busqueda de una oferta
de empleo online
Entrega de la tarea
final 1

 

17 de junio El curriculum vitae

18 de junio La carta de
presentacion

19 de junio La entrevista laboral
consejos, trucos.

22 de junio TedxTalk: el mundo
laboral

23 de junio Entrevista laboral:
trabajo en grupo para
su grabacion

Unidad 3:

La banca y la bolsa

Los bancos en los paises de habla hispana
Las finanzas

La bolsa

24 de junio Los bancos en los
paises de habla hispana

25 de junio Los bancos, productos
y usuarios
Practica de
comparacion de 2
bancos y sus productos

 

Vocabulario del
curriculum

Estructura de una carta
formal

Vocabulario para una
entrevista de trabajo

Vocabulario del acceso
al mercado laboral

Expresiones para la
entrevista laboral

Vocabulario del banco
y los cargos de una
compania
Vocabulario de la
banca

Escribir un curriculum
en espanol
Unidad 2 (pp. 5-8

Unidad 2 (pp10-12)

Preparacion de la tarea
final 2: la entrevista
laboral

Unidad 2 (pp.13-16)

Quiz en Canvas

Portafolio: entrada
sobre la unidad 2
Entrega de la tarea
final 2: grabacion de
la entrevista y la
reflexion

Reflexiones para el
proyecto final: paso 2
Unidad 3 (pp.1-3)
Unidad 3 (pp. 3-6)

 

La banca ética

29 de junio La bolsa

 

Vocabulario de la
banca
Los conectores

Quiz en Canvas
Unidad 3 (pp.6-9
Unidad 3 (pp-9-12)
Visionado de la
pelicula The big shortComentario de la
pelicula The big short

30 de junio

Vocabulario del
mercado bursatil

Unidad 3 (pp. 13-17)

 

1 de julio La bolsa virtual

El uso del “‘se”’
impersonal

Quiz en Canvas
Preparacion de la tarea
final 3: el informe de la
bolsa

 

El informe de la bolsa:
modelo y explicacion
Trabajo en grupo sobre
el informe de la bolsa

2 de julio

Unidad 4:

El marketing y la publicidad
Tipos de marketing

La publicidad y sus estrategias

3 de julio El marketing tipos

La publicidad
estrategias y lenguaje

 

Las reglas de escritura
de un informe

Vocabulario del
marketing

Vocabulario y juegos
de palabras en la
publicidad

Entrega de la tarea
final 3: informe de la
bolsa virtual
Portafolio: entrada
sobre la unidad 3 e
investigacion de grupo
de un tema.

Reflexiones para el
proyecto final: paso 3
Unidad 4 (pp.1-4

Quiz en Canvas
Unidad 4 (pp. 4-8)

 

Trabajo de grupo de la
tarea 3: la campania de
marketing

La exposicion en
grupo: estructura y
vocabulario

Entrega de la tarea 3:
la campana de
marketing

 

Breve presentacion en
clase de la tarea final
3

Trabajo de grupo sobre
el proyecto final

Presentaciones en clase
sobre el proyecto final

 

La escritura del
proyecto final

Trabajo en grupo
sobre el proyecto
final: paso 4

 

Fin del curso: descanso
del verano ©