Environmental

CONTROL| SYSTEMS|

ARC 334L, Arc 385T, Arc 334L & ARI 384L: Environmental Controls Il
Instructor: Michael Garrison
Summer 2020

Course Description

Environmental Controls II considers the application of the thermal environment, the issues of
daylighting, vertical transportation systems, water systems, and the application of the fire code
and, to integrate these systems into the form making process of architectural design.

Course Objectives

The intent of this course is to learn to integrate environmental control systems into the form
making process of architectural design. This course is intended to be one of a series of building
science courses which describe the function of building in filtering the environment about their
occupants. Environmental Controls | considered the fundamentals of Lighting, Electrical
Systems and Acoustics. Environmental Controls Il considers the application of the thermal
environment, the issues of water systems and the application of the fire code as well as other
technical problems encountered in building design. We will focus on how the various human
sensory systems are supported by related building; mechanical, building and environmental
controls sub-systems:

1. Required fire protection and fire exits.

2. Review of elevator specifications.

3. Sizing heating, venting and air conditioning systems.
4. Servicing the water needs of plumbing.

Goals

The goal of this course is to develop a means by which designers can create energy-efficient
buildings. These means shall include both: (1) to understand the forms and components of a
building that provide efficiency and comfort; (2) processes for use in design that will encourage
the selection of the proper physical responses and facilitate the investigation of the likely
performance of these decisions. Successful completion of this course should give the student the
ability to:Student Performance Criterion/addressed

1. Determine building environmental controls needs for fostering comfort and performance
requirements.

2. To suggest building strategies to satisfy these needs.

3. To synthesize building solutions and environmental control schemes that promote the
design of efficient buildings.

4. To analytically and physically evaluate the performance of their environmental
control decisions.

Topical Outline

LEED case studies
Environmental Resources
Building Envelopes
Fire Code

Elevators

Heating & Cooling

. Daylighting and Glazing
Heat transfer

HVAC Case Studies
HVAC System Analysis
Plumbing

Solid waste & IAQ

FACT IONMIOD>D

Textbook:
By Grondzik, Kwok, Wiley Sons, New York, 2015.
Format

The course will have four components, including: (1) regularly scheduled lectures; (2) a series of
readings; (3) homework assignments (4) exams.

Note the four components complement each other. The lectures and readings are offered to
provide the basic “information of the course. The homework and case study assignments (team
of four) should be used by students to resolve any questions about the topics considered in the
lectures and readings and will serve as an opportunity to explore your sound building projects and
their solutions in greater depth. Finally, the exams are meant to encourage student synthesis of
the course material.

Evaluation Criteria

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. Homework No.1 Heat gain, heat loss, building load due: July1,2020 20 pts
2. Homework No. 2 HVAC duct sizing and integration due: July 1, 2020 20 pts
4. Exam No. 14 June 15, 2020 20 pts
5. Exam No. 2 June 29, 2020 20 pts

6. Exam No. 3 July 3, 2020 20 ptsHomework more than one (class) day late will be lowered one letter grade. Projects later than one
week late will be lowered one additional letter grade for each week the project continues to be
late. Projects more than three weeks late will not be accepted for class credit. There will not be
makeup tests. If you miss an exam with a medical excuse, the value of the other exams will be
increased.

All work done in this course will be evaluated according to the criteria outlined here. Each
student should develop a habit of generation of his or her own evaluation of the work by
testing it against these criteria. Grading is based on 60-69=D, 70-72=C-, 73-76=C, 77-
79=C+, 80-82=B-, 83-86=B, 87-89=B+, 90-92=A-, 93-96=A, 97-100=A+

ZOOM

1. We will hold classes via Zoom online starting the first day of clas, first summer term
2020 through the end of the term.

2. There is now a UT Canvas Site for the class as well as the UT Box Site for the class is
available on these sites, as well as chat rooms, discussion platforms and class
communication platforms. You will be able to access the class via of Zoom on Canvas.
You do not need to download Zoom or have a password to access Zoom. You will receive
an invite to access our Zoom Class meeting via email and will only have to clink on the
link to join the online class.

3. You are required to be on the Zoom online class at the same time as our regular meeting
time 1:00PM -4:30 PNMWFE.

4. The TA will have access to Box, Canvas and will be co-host on Zoom

5. For technical assistance the UTSOA help desk will remain available,
https: tex r rces/technology-lab/instructional-technology-tool

6. Ifyou have any technical problems including, email service you may reach me through
my cell phone 512-632-1972

7. Class recordings: Class recordings are reserved only for the use of members of this
class (students, TAs, and the instructor) and only for educational purposes. Recordings
should not be shared outside the class in any form. Violation of this restriction could lead
to Student Misconduct proceedings.

The exams will be [proctored as an online exam during the scheduled exam period for the class]
and [will be proctored remotely as an asynchronous online exam]: If you will be unable to take
your exam at the scheduled time (e.g., for child- or elder-care needs), please notify the instructor
before the scheduled date so alternate arrangements can be made.] Excellent resources about

use of Proctorio including how-to videos and a Trouble-shooting Guide for Students.

 

Class meetings will be devoted to lectures and discussions, so regular attendance and
active participation is essential. You may miss three classes— for any reason—without
penalty. Each additional absence will lower your course grade by 5%, and six or more
absences will result in a failing grade for the course. Will be reported to the Assistant
Dean. Because our time in class is limited, promptness is important. If you are late for
class, it is your responsibility to make sure you have not been marked absent.A student who misses classes or exams, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements
can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.

The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone)

Students are required to adhere to the UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics) and an
explanation or
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09- 10/ch01/index.html)

 

Please schedule a meeting with this instructor if you are not sure of your standing in the
course. My office hours are 12-1PM on W & F. Please send an email to
mgarrison@utexas.edu and | will schedule a Zoom meeting with you. It is up to the
student to ask questions about items that are unclear to the student. If you have questions
related to the course, please feel free to ask in class or contact one of the TA’s or myself
outside of class.

Reference
Books on 3-day reserve in the Architecture Library
Contact the library for ebook access portals

1. HCL Heating, Cooling, Lighting: Design Methods for Architects, 4th ed. Second Editio by Norbert
Lechner, Wiley & Sons, New York, 2014.

2. MEED Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for Buildings, 13th Edition
by Grondzik, Kwok, Stein and Reynolds, Wiley & Sons, New York, 2019.

3. TASC The Architect’s Studio Companion: Technical Guidelines for Preliminary Design, by
Edward Allen and Joseph lano, Wiley & Sons, New York, 2014

4.BSIH The Buildin tems Integration Han k, by Richard D. Rush, AIA Editor, The
American Institute of Architects, Wiley & Sons, New York, 1986.

5. SFA Sunlighting as Formgiver for Architecture, by William M. C. Lam, Van Nostrand, Reinhold,
New York, 1986.

6. PLFA Perception & Lighting As Formgivers For Architecture, by William M. C. Lam, Van
Nostrand, Reinhold, New York, 1992.

7. BCI Building Codes Illustrated, by Francis Ching and Steven Wionkel, FAIA, John Wiley &
Sons, New York, 2012.

8. IB Integrated Buildings: Th tems Basis of Architecture, by Leonard Bachman, John Wiley
& Sons, New York, 2003.9. PAEC Passive and Active Envir
Designing of Buildings, by Dean Heerwagen, McGraw Hill, New York, 2004.

10. NNZ The New Net Zero, by William Maclay and Maclay Architects, Chelsea Green Publishing
Co., White River Junction, VT, 2014.

11. EDH Energy Design Handbook, Donald Watson, editor, American Institute of Architects, AIA
Press, Washington, D.C., 1993.

12. AEECS The Architectural Expression of Environmental Control Systems, George Baird, Spoon
Press, London and New York, 2001. .

13. HVACAD Heating, Ventilating and Air Conditioning Analysis and Design, by Faye McQuiston, Jerald
Parker and Jeffrey Spitler, 6th Edition, Wiley & Sons, 2005.

14. CRD limate Responsive Design: A St f Buildings in Moderate and Hot Humid Climat
Richard Hyde, Spoon Press, London and New York, 2000.