First Summer Session 2020

The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Slavic and Eurasian Studies

http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/slavic

RUSSIAN THROUGH WRITING

 

Instructor: Evgenia Wilkins, Ph.D.

Class Meetings: MTWTHEF 11:30 -1 pm

Email: evimikha@utexas.edu

Office hours: T, Thu 1 pm to 2 pm and/or by appointment
TEXTBOOK

/Kueém u yuumca 6 Poccuu. Vueduoe nocodue no pyCCKOMy AZbIKY OJ UHOCMPAHHbIx VUAWUxCA
([ypoeenb)

/Kueém u yuumca 6 Poccuu. Pabouaa mempadb no epammamuKke
Audio Supplement (will be available in the next few days)
WHERE TO FIND: CANVAS -> FILES -> Yue0uuku
OPTIONAL MATERIALS
e Russian/English Dictionary, such as Katzner, or Oxford
e Gerhart, G., The Russian’s World(1994)
e Garza, T., Fundamentals of Russian Verbal Conjugation for Teachers and
Students(1993)
Some recommended online sources to be used in the course are
e Yandex Translate — Russian Analogue of Google Translate

e Academica - Translations with examples
e Multitran - An online Dictionary - An online dictionary

 

e Phonetic Keyboard - You MUST be able to type in Russian for this class. A phonetic
keyboard is recommended.

o Phonetic Keyboard for Mac
o Phonetic Keyboard for Windows

e Buknciopaps - A great reference site for grammatical and prosodic (sound) information
about Russian words.First Summer Session 2020

GENERAL OVERVIEW

JloOpo moxanoBatb! B 9TOM CeMecTpe MbI OyJIeEM MHOTO 4UTATH, IHCaTh, CIIylaTb U TOBOPHTB
Il0-pyCCKH UH M3y4aTb pyccKylo kybTypy! Welcome to third-year on-line Russian! This course is
designed to take students from the intermediate to the advanced level of proficiency in Russian
language with focus on writing. While developing all four skills (reading, writing, listening,
speaking), the students will tackle real-life tasks and significantly increase their cultural
expertise. Students will work with authentic, current textual, video, and audio materials to
develop their ability to understand and produce complex written discourse on a variety of topics,
including education, family, health, and many others. Significant amount of time will be spent
refining and deepening understanding of relevant grammar topics and expanding the vocabulary.

In order to achieve our proficiency goals, you are expected to work with the material on a
daily basis. Because language study is cumulative, you have to practice every day, taking care to
complete all daily assignments and activities and to learn the accompanying vocabulary.

In this course we will cover 5 topics. We will spend one weeks per topic marking the completion
of each with an essay. There will not be a final exam in the course.

The course will cover the following material

Week | Foreigners in Russia -MHoctpanupi B Poccnu
Week 2 City Living - Popoy u ropoxanHe

Week 3 Environment - Ueopek u npupoya

Week 4 Social Life - OOnulecTBo

Week 5 Leisure - OTabIx u yBuIedeHHA

You will receive daily schedule for the week on Friday for the following week.

Types of activities

This class follows blended learning model which implies that students complete all ‘passive’
components at home preparing to practice learned material in class. It is critical for you to come
prepared as many class sessions will build on homework for the day.

In class we will

Discuss, debate, state opinions about the readings, video materials and listening

Practice new vocabulary and grammar

Discuss grammar rules and examples of their functioning

Work in small groups

Complete short writing assignments

At home you will

Contribute to the discussion boardFirst Summer Session 2020

Read and watch authentic materials
Complete grammar exercises
Learn vocabulary (quizlet)

ONLINE DELIVERY

Classes will be recorded, and if you need to miss a class session due to an emergency you could
access it through Canvas.

5 absences will result in automatic grade reduction by one letter (A to B, B to C)

When you complete your homework, I am asking you to complete it on paper, take picture of it,
convert to pdf and submit it on canvas.

Tips on Zoom Sessions

e Come to ‘lab’ dressed as you would for a traditional face-to-face class. If your web-
cam is on, and it should be, we can see you. Dress appropriately.

e USE HEADPHONES if you are going to be in a noisy / shared environment. Be

respectful of your classmates and instructor. You will be asked to leave or be

removed from the meeting if your end is noisy / distracting.

Use Gallery View (recommended) to see everyone in your group at once.

Use the Chat function as needed.

Send a private message to your instructors when needed.

Ask for help when needed.

Help your classmates when needed.

Work together!

Speak Russian as much as you possibly can! DON’T EVER WORRY ABOUT

MAKING MISTAKES. IT’S THE ONLY WAY TO LEARN!

In breakout rooms initiate if you see that your partners are hesitant

Maximize your use of Russian (pronounce new vocabulary along with the instructor
with your mic muted; recycle the new vocabulary as much as possible)

e Refrain from chatting on unrelated subjects

e Engage as much as possible with what others are saying and provide comment

GRADING

Regular class attendance (attendance +1 pts; participation +2 pts) and extensive preparation at
home (discussion board post +10 pts; homework + 20 pts; essay + 50 pts; weekly quizlet +20
pts) are crucial to your success in this class. Language acquisition is a skill you must practice
daily, like playing a musical instrument. Failure to keep up with the daily assignments will result
in your falling behind very quickly. It is your responsibility to learn the vocabulary for each
chapter right away. Please plan to spend two hours of preparation at home for each hour in
class. Bring your textbook to class every day.First Summer Session 2020

1. 5 essays (50 pts each): At the end of each unit you produce an essay and submit it at the
end of the day on Friday — due 10 pm on June 12, June 19, June 26, July, July 9
(Thursday). Late essays will have 20pts subtracted from the grade for each class day they
are late, unless you have been absent due to verified illness, religious holy day, or
university-connected activity. In that case, the missing assignment must be turned
immediately upon your return to class.

2. Participation (attendance +1 each ; participation + 4 each): Your instructor
determines this component as a reflection of your overall preparedness and performance
in class; it is NOT merely an attendance grade. You are expected to a) attend class daily,
b) prepare assigned material in advance for each class, and c) respond in class with
reasonable accuracy and, of course, enthusiasm ©

3. Homework (20 pts each): You are responsible for completing all homework
assignments listed on Canvas. Your instructor may assign other homework in addition to
that listed on the schedule. Due to the intensive nature of the summer class, NO LATE
HOMEWORK assignments will be accepted, unless you have an emergency.

4. Quizlet Completion (20 pts each): Students have to complete 5 activities (1 each day of
the week) associated with vocabulary learning on Quizlet.

5. Discussion Board (10+10 pts each): Students will post and respond on discussion board
on each topic from the course. Russian peer tutors are going to be posting and responding
to your posts. Notice, on the first week you will post three times.

Discussion board is located on Piazza. Link should be in your email. Enrollment link
piazza.com/utexas/summer2020/rus322w/home
First post — O ceGe is due on Monday, June 8"

Posts are due on Wednesdays , at 9 am // answers are due on Thursdays, 9 pm

Conversation Hour (30 pts): 9 am on Fridays. You have to attend at least 3 meetings
throughout the course.

SRAS will be offering conversations “Poboltaem” with native speakers who have experience
teaching Russian and English which will be tailored to the topics we cover in class.

The result of these calculations will be on a number on a scale of 0-100. This numerical grade
will be converted to a letter grade as follows:First Summer Session 2020

78 — 79 = C+
98 — 100 = A+ 74—77 = C
94 —97 = A 70 — 73 = C-
90 — 93 = A- 68 — 69 = D+
88 — 89 = B+ 64 — 67 = D
84 — 87 = B 60 — 63 = D-
80 — 83 = B- 59 and below = F

OTHER ACTIVITIES AND EXTRA CREDIT

Please take advantage of all the Friday Russia Conversation Hour where Slavic Club hosts
speakers from all over Russia.

HONOR CODE
The University of Texas Honor Codes reads:

“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness and respect toward peers and
community.”

Students are expected to adhere to these principles throughout the course, in dealing with the
instructors, fellow students, and in completing all assignments for the course. Your instructors
will do the same.

Please, make sure that you use on-line translation tools in a meaningful way. Google translate
could easily hijack your learning by supplying you with too much. You are developing
proficiency which means you should be able to produce language on the spot. Also, using google
translate for essays breaks UT Honor Code.

Yoaun!

Please, not that the syllabus is the subject to change. As the course progresses, instructor might
add or remove some components.First Summer Session 2020

APPENDIX I Level Description

Reviewing speaker’s profile description will help you set your own goals and keep track of your
progress:

At the IH Speakers can

-create with the language when talking about familiar topics related to their daily life
-recombine learned material in order to express personal meaning

-ask simple questions

-handle a straightforward survival situation

produce sentence-level language, ranging from discrete sentences to strings of sentences,
typically in present time

- converse with ease and confidence when dealing with the routine tasks and social situations of
the Intermediate level

- handle uncomplicated tasks and social situations requiring an exchange of basic information
related to their work, school, recreation, particular interests, and areas of competence.

-can narrate and describe in all major time frames using connected discourse of paragraph length,
but not all the time

-be understood by native speakers unaccustomed to dealing with non-natives, although

At the AL Speakers can

-participate in most informal and some formal conversations on topics related to school, home,
and leisure activities. discuss employment, current events, and matters of public and community
interest

-narrate and describe in the major time frames of past, present, and future in paragraph-length
discourse with some control of aspect.

-combine and link sentences into connected discourse of paragraph length

- handle a complication or an unexpected turn of events linguistically

-produce a paragraph

- speech at times contains noticeable self-correction.

-use communicative strategies such as rephrasing and circumlocution

-contribute to the conversation with sufficient accuracy, clarity, and precision to convey their
intended message without misrepresentation or confusion

- be understood by native speakers unaccustomed to dealing with non-natives, even though this
may require some repetition or restatementFirst Summer Session 2020

APPENDIX II: FOR FLAS Recipients only

1) 2 ha week peer tutoring with SRAS (10 hours total = 22.5 remaining)
Schedule with the tutor

Record your session and upload it/share the link with your instructor
2) Weekly SRAS conversation hour (5 h total = 17.5 remaining) — Fri, 9 am (TBA)
3) Bilingual Discussion Board with Russian peers (2 h a week =7.5 remaining)

Each week students produce a post on a discussion board where participants ask each other
questions, express opinions and share experiences in writing

4) Independent Reading Assignment For Class Presentations (1.5 h a week)

Instructor assigns students authentic texts from contemporary media for reading and subsequent
class presentation