Expressive Culture Syllabus

Course Number: ANT 305F

Unique Number: 78529

Semester: Summer 2020 Session 1

Meeting Time: MTWTHF 1:00-2:30 pm

Instructor: Katherine Maddox

E-mail: via Canvas Inbox or katherinenora@gmail.com
Zoom Office Hours: By appointment

Course Description: Expressive culture is a broad area of study. Since it is part of our everyday
lives it is not a clearly defined set of practices. Because of this “Expressive Culture” gives us an
analytic that allows for a flexible investigation of the style and expression of our lives. The
purpose of this class is to develop a set of tools for analyzing and representing aesthetic forms
and performances such as dance, music, literature, visual media, and theater. Locating this in
broader anthropological conversations, “Expressive Culture” connects to critical world-shaping
forces such as colonization, globalization, politics, racism, and desire. Therefore, we will focus
in particular on themes — language, ideology, subjectivity, identity, race, ethnicity, nationality,
sex, and gender —that shape human society and expression.

Course Objectives:

e To develop not only a better understanding of culture but tools and vocabulary to analyze
the everday practices through which culture is expressed and subjects are produced as
part of historically bounded and geographically specific cultures

e To explore themes — language, ideology, subjectivity, identity, race, ethnicity, nationality,
sex, and gender — that enable us to engage critically with the range of classificatory
systems and symbolic means of expression that shape human life within a given culture
or society

e To learn to “polish” the lens through which we see others’ and our own culture

Required Texts: Students will be responsible for renting or purchasing a copy of Cultural
Studies: Theory and Practice, 5" ed (2016) by Chris Barker and Emma A. Jane. All other
required texts will be provided through Canvas.

Discussion Participation and Weekly Response Papers: Discussion of the assigned readings
will be an important element of this class: students will learn more effectively when they take an
active part in the analysis of the material to be covered. Consequently, students should expect to
read every reading assignment carefully and thoughtfully, as well as watching the assigned films.
Each week, they will be given a list of engagement questions to help direct their reading and film
viewing. Students should come to each weekly discussion class ready to discuss these questions
and contribute their observations. At the end of the discussion, they will be assigned one
question to answer thoroughly in a two-page double-spaced response paper due the following
day. Students should aim to engage all the material from the week in your response (though this
may not always be possible and does not guarantee a high grade). Reading responses will be
worth 10 points each and the lowest grade for the semester will be dropped.Final Paper and Writing Workshop: Students will write one five- to ten-page final research
paper that analyzes a text (film, work of art, piece of writing, performance, piece of music, etc.)
in relation to two of the core themes of the class. Students may choose their own text or use one
of the films from the class as long as they can show original thought and critical thinking. If
choosing a text from outside of class, students must write to the instructor for approval. Further
information and guidance will be given about this during Panopto lecture segments and
discussion. Additionally, prior to submitting their paper, students will attend a writing workshop
to work on paper topics and thesis statements. This workshop will be held during normal class
hours on July 8 where they will be asked to share the text they have chosen and the strategies
they intend to use to analyze it. Participation in this workshop will be part of their final
assessment.

Grading Distribution

Discussion attendance and participation: 10%
Weekly response papers: 40%

Final paper workshop: 15%

Final Paper: 35%

Course Etiquette and Attendance
While this course is largely asynchronous, there will be six live meetings via Zoom over the
course of the semester. Attendance and participation during discussion sessions and the writing
workshop will be part of the final grade. As such, students should be prepared to share their
thoughts and behave respectfully when others share theirs.
Course best-practice includes:
e Cameras should be turned on during all Zoom meetings, but microphones may remain
muted when students aren’t talking.
e Students will use their preferred first name as their Zoom username.
e The course will follow a “raised hand” policy at first. In order to speak, students should
raise their hands.
e Only university-recognized absences may be excused.

University Policies
Religious holy days: A student who misses classes or other required activities, including

examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in
advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence.

Students with Disabilities: Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you
may require to accommodate a disability-related need. You may find out more information on
the Services for Students with Disabilities website: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/ and/or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-register-with-ssd/

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, please visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at

http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students: All students should be familiar with
the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to
keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to
check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. The complete
text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html .

University of Texas Honor Code: “As A Student Of The University Of Texas At Austin, I Shall
Abide By The Core Values Of The University And Uphold Academic Integrity.”Course Schedule

Week 1

“Introduction to Culture(-al Studies)”

Text: Chapter 1, p. 9-28, 35-43

Additional reading: Benedict, Patterns of Culture “The Science of Custom”

6/4-6/5: Reading and Panopto modules
6/8: Discussion
6/9: Submit reading response |

Week 2

“Culture, Ideology, and Language”

Text: Chapter 2, p. 44-84; Chapter 3, p. 85-94

Additional reading: Geertz, “Notes on the Balinese Cockfight”
Film: Babakiueria

6/9-6/12: Reading, Panopto modules, and (short) film
6/15: Discussion
6/16/: Submit reading response 2

Week 3

“Subjectivity and Identity”

Text: Chapter 7, p. 257-294

Additional reading: Bourgois, “From Jibaro to Crack Dealer: Confronting the Restructuring of
Capitalism in El Barrio”

Film: OJ: Made in America Parts 1-2

6/16-6/19: Reading, Panopto modules, and film
6/22: Discussion
6/23: Submit reading response 3

Week 4

“Ethnicity, Race, and Nation”

Text: Chapter 8, p. 295-341

Additional reading: Memmi, The Colonizer and the Colonized “Part Two”
Film: Battle of Algiers

6/23-6/26: Reading, Panopto modules, and film
6/29: Discussion (last 15 minutes to discuss final paper)
6/30: Submit reading response 4

Week 5

“Sex, Subjectivity, and Representation”

Text: Chapter 9, p. 342-382

Additional reading: Kulick, Travesti “Introduction” and part of “Travesti Gendered Subjectivity”Film: Paris is Burning

6/30-7/3: Reading, Panopto modules, and film
7/6: Discussion
7/7: Submit reading response 5

Week 6
Writing workshop and course wrap-up

7/8: Writing workshop
7/12: Papers due