DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
SPN 328C/LAS 370S: Introduction to Literatures and Cultures
New World Sovereignties in Conflict
Professor César A. Salgado

Meets: MTUWTHF 1-2:15 Office Hours: TTh 2:15-3:30 or by appointment
Unique Numbers: 82789/80964 cslgd@austin.utexas.edu
DESCRIPTION

This course is organized to give you a panoramic view of the role of culture in disputes over
sovereignty in the Ibero-American world system.We want to see how the encounters between
discrepant cultures, populations, belief systems, and epistemologies from indigenous America,
Iberia, Europe, Africa, and Asia in the New World led to complex local and global struggles for
sovereignty from 1492 to the present day.

We will see how the colonial, postcolonial and modern experience in the New World has put
into question what sovereignty means throughout Western and non-Western history.

We will consider several scenarios of conflict over New World sovereignty throughout the
centuries: 1. Spanish colonizers vs. Taino inhabitants in the Caribbean of the late fifteenth
century; 2. Aztecs vs. Conquistadors in Mesoamerica between 1519 and 1521; 3. Incas vs.
Conquistadors in the Andes between 1532 and 1535; 4. European shipwreck survivors vs. First
Peoples in mid-sixteenth century Texas; 5. Mendicant friars vs. encomenderos in disputes over
the legality of the Conquest; 6. English pirates vs. criollo officials in the late seventh century
Spanish Philippines; 7. Early forms of feminism vs. the patriarchal Church in Baroque New
Spain; 8. independence rebels vs. royalists, conservatives vs. liberals in the new South American
republics from 1810 to 1854; 9. Criollo revolutionaries and Afro-descendant abolitionists vs.
slave owners and Spanish authorities in nineteenth century Cuba; 10. protests against United
States military intervention in the Spanish-American War of 1898; and 11. revolutionaries
leading uprisings against dictators in Mexico and Cuba in the twentieth century.

Discussion and analysis will focus on a selection of official and literary texts by influential
authors and figures of the colonial, independence, and contemporary periods. We will also
watch and discuss four Latin American films inspired by our texts and topics. The following
issues will be addressed: literary production in contexts of ethnic and cultural conflict; the
differentiation of New World literary expression in Spanish through the incorporation of
lexicon, idioms, metaphors, and other elements from native languages; the growing tension
and distancing between Peninsular and Spanish American criollo identities and ideals; the
relationship between writing, power, and social status in colonial and postcolonial contexts;
and the role of creative writing in the construction of new forms of national, community, and
personal sovereignty during independence and after.CLASS MATERIALS

Required documents and literary texts will be provided through Canvas Files.

Rolena Adorno & Roberto Gonzalez Echevarria, Breve historia de la literatura
hispanoamericana (ebook). Selected chapters will be provided through Canvas Files.

Films to be viewed online some Fridays at home:

1. Cabeza de Vaca (Nicolas Echevarria, dir., México 1991)

2. Yo, la peor de todas (Maria Luisa Bemberg, dir., Argentina 1990)

3. Caudillos: Juan Manuel de Rosas, El Restaurador; La Generacion de’ 37 (Gabriel Di Meglio,
Argentina 2013)

4. Cuba Libre (Jorge Luis Sanchez, dir., 2015)

GRADING CRITERIA

Five 2-page weekly compositions 60%
Canvas Daily Homework 24%
Attendance and Participation 16 %

Compositions:

Five 2-page essays based on a provided list of topics covered in class each week will be the main
writing requirement for this class. | will mark grammar mistakes, evaluate soundness of
argument and analysis, and make stylistic annotations and suggestions on each of these. Each
of these papers will receive a letter grade. You will have the opportunity to rewrite two of these
short essays to improve your grade.

Homework:

You will be expected to respond briefly to daily informal questionnaires. Each questionnaire will
consist of three or more questions. You only need to answer at least two in two or three
sentences each.

This exercise is meant to confirm reading and film comprehension and inspire class discussion.

| will post questionnaires under Canvas Discussions at the end of each class meeting. Answer
are due the next class day at noon except on those Fridays when films are scheduled.

These assignments will not be evaluated with a letter grade, but will count for homework
points.

COURSE OUTINE

Week 1

June 4 Th: Introduction to the Course: The Question of Sovereignty during the "Discovery" of
the New World

Primary document: Cristobal Coldn, "Diario de a bordo" (first paragraphs)
https://www.elhistoriador.com.ar/documentos/conquista_y colonia/diario de a bordo de cr
istobal_colon.php

Critical reading: "A Definition of Sovereignty (first part)" Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
onlinehttps://plato.stanford.edu/entries/sovereignty/June 5 F: Discovering and Occupying the New World: Columbus’ Carta a Santangel
Primary document:

Capitulaciones de Santa Fe (April 17, 1492)

Cristébal Colon, Diario de a bordo (entries for October 12 & 13)

Cristobal Colén, Carta a Santdngel (1943)

Critical reading:

Rolena Adorno, sections on Coldén y Fray Ramon Pané from Breve historia

Week 2

June 8 M: Indigenous Sovereignty and Culture: The Belief System of the Tainos, First Peoples
of the Caribbean

Primary document:

Ramon Pané, Relacion acerca de las antiguedades de los indios (1500). Brief individual
comments on single chapters (sections I- XXVIII) will be assigned.

Recommended critical readings (optional):

José Arrom, "Fray Ramon, Pané, autor del primer libro escrito en las Indias"

Francisco Scarano, ‘Los tainos: Sociedad y cultura“

June 9 T: Aztec vs. Iberian Imperial Sovereignties: Hernan Cortés' 1519 Arrival in Tenochtitlan
Primary document:

Hernan Cortés, selections from Segunda carta de relacion (1520)

Critical readings:

Rolena Adorno, chapter "La conquista de México" from Breve historia, focus on sections on
Cortés (pgs. 56-59) and Bernal Diaz del Castillo (pgs. 62-65)

June 10 W: Accounts of the Conquest of Tenochtitlan by a Former Foot Soldier and a Mestizo
Writer

Primary documents:

Bernal Diaz del Castillo, selections from Historia verdadera de la Conquista de la Nueva
Espana (1632), chapters |, XXIX, XXXVII, LXXXVIII, LXXXIX, XC

Fernando de Alva Ixtlixochitl’s, chapter from Historia de la nacion chichimeca (1600-1610),
chapters LXXX, LXXXV

June 11 Th: First Mestizo Writers Evoke the Fall of Inca Sovereignty in the Andes Region
Watch at home before class online documentary "Sucedio en el Peru: El Tahuantinsuyo"
Primary texts:

El Inca Garcilaso de la Vega, selections from Comentarios reales (1609): "Proemio al lector,"
“Leyendas sobre el origen de los Incas," "Fuentes histdricas", "La fortaleza del Cuzco"

(Brief individual comments on single chapters--from sections I- XXVIII--will be assigned.)
Guaman Poma de Ayala, Cronica y buen gobierno (1615/1616), pgs. 279, 280, 282, 289
Critical reading:

Rolena Adorno, sections on el Inca Garcilaso de la Vega and Guaman Poma de Ayala from Breve
historia,

Topics for Essay #1 distributed.June 12 F: Tales of Shipwreck and Captivity in the American Southwest
Asynchronic home viewing of Cabeza de Vaca, a film by Nicolas Echevarria (1991)
http://peliculasmaniac.com/video/nYpCoauwNV/Cabeza+de+vaca/ (Links to an external site.

Week 3

June 15 M: Tales of Shipwreck and Captivity in the American Southwest

Primary text:

Alvar Nufiez Cabeza de Vaca, selections from Naufragios (1542). Excepts, chapters XIII-XXVI
Secondary:

Rolena Adorno, chapter "Una odisea espafola en Norteamérica" from Breve historia

First essay due at 5PM (no extensions)

June 16 T: Mendicant Friars Fight the Encomienda System: The Legal Battle Over the Custody
of Indigenous Peoples

Primary text:

Fray Bartolomé de las Casas, Brevisima relacion de la destruccion de las Indias (1542)

Critical readings:

Rolena Adorno, pages on Bartolomé de las Casas in Breve historia

June 17 W: The Splendors of the Baroque in 17th Century New Spain /Virtual online visit to
THE BENSON LATIN AMERICAN COLLECTION hosted by Adrian Johnson

Primary text:

Bernardo de Balbuena, selections from La grandeza mexicana (1604)

Critical reading:

Rolena Adorno, "Plenitud barroca", pages 109-22 in Breve historia

June 18 Th: Piracy as a Challenge to Spanish Sovereignty: Alonso Ramirez's Tales of
Misfortunes in Puerto Rico, Mexico and the Philippines

Primary text:

Carlos de Siguenza y Gongora, Los infortunios de Alonso Ramirez (1680). Read intro and
chapters 1-5.

Topics for Essay #2 distributed

June 19 F: Presenting Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz

Asynchronic home viewing of Yo, /a peor de todas, Maria Luisa Bemberg's 1995 film on Sor
Juana

Week 4

June 22 M: A Poet Nun Defends Her Intellectual Sovereignty in Viceregal Mexico: Discussion of
Texts and Film

Primary documents:

Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz, poems: "Hombres necios que acusais," "En perseguirme, mundo"

Sor Filotea de la Cruz, "Amonestacion a Sor Juana Inés de la Cruz"

Sor Juana, Respuesta a Sor Filotea de la Cruz (1691)Critical reading:
Rolena Adorno, "Barroco urbano" pages 91-94; “Plenitud barroca," 113-117
Second essay due at 5PM (no extensions)

June 23 T: Revolution and Enlightened Sovereignty: The Independence Wars in South America
Primary document:
Simon Bolivar, Carta de Jamaica (1815), first part

June 24 W: Sublime Words from E/ Libertador. Romanticism as the Other Face of Bolivar’s
New World Republicanism
Primary Texts:
Simon Bolivar, Carta de Jamaica, second part
, Mi delirio en el Chimborazo"(1819)
June 25: Neoclassical vs. Romantic Ideals during the Early Independence
Primary texts:
Andrés Bello, "Silva a agricultura de la zona torrida" (first fifty verses)
José Maria Heredia, *"En una tempestad
Critical reading:
Roberto Gonzalez-Echevarria, "La poesia del Romanticismo" from Breve historia
Topics for Paper #3 Distributed

June 26 F: The Rise of Dictatorships After Independence: The Case of Juan Manuel Rosas in
Argentina

Asynchronic home viewing of two documentaries by Gabriel Di Meglio (Argentina 2013):

1. Caudillos: Juan Manuel de Rosas El Retaurador 2. La Generacion del '37

Week 5

June 29 M: Argentina’s 19th Century Romantic Writers Denounce Juan Manuel Rosas
Primary text:

Esteban Echevarria, “El matadero” (1839, 1871)

Paper #3 Due by 5PM (no extensions)

June 30 T: Demonizing Rosas’ Power Base: Domingo F. Sarmiento on Gaucho Culture
Primary text:
D. F. Sarmiento, Facundo o Civilizacion y barbarie (1845), introduction and chapter II

July 1 W: Slavery, Plantation Society, and Abolitionist Literature in Cuba after the Haitian
Revolution

Primary text:

Juan Francisco Manzano, Autobiografia de un esclavo (1840)

July 2 Th: José Marti, Exile and Freedom Advocate in the First Cuban War of Independence
(1868-78)Primary text:
José Marti, *"El presidio politico en Cuba" (1870)
Topics for Essay #4 distributed

July 3 F: U.S. Intervention in Cuba's Struggle for National Sovereignty, 1895-1898
Asynchronic home viewing of Cuba Libre (2015), a film by Jorge Luis Sanchez

Week 6

July 6 M: Writers of the Latin American Modernismo Movement Respond to the Spanish
American War

Primary texts:

José Marti, “Nuestra América,” “La verdad sobre los Estados Unidos”

Rubén Dario, poems: El cisne” (1888), “Yo persigo una forma” (1896) “A Rooselvelt “(1905)
Critical reading:

Roberto Gonzalez Echevarria, "La poesia del modernismo" from Breve historia

nll

Fourth composition due at 5PM (no extensions)

July 7 T: Rural Revolt and the Manifestos of the Mexican Revolution. Francisco Madero
challenges the Porfiriato.

Primary text:

Plan de San Luis Potosi (1910)

July 8 W: Rural Revolt and Land Sovereignty According to Emiliano Zapata and Pancho Villa
Primary text: Plan de Ayala (1911)

July 9 Th: Origins of The Cuban Revolution: Fidel Castro’s First Manifesto
Primary text: Fidel Castro, selections from La historia me absolverd (1953)
Topics for Essay #5 Distributed

Course Evaluations Online
Fifth Paper Due on Saturday June 11 at 5:00 PM

Make-up Policy. If you fail to turn in homework and essays on the dates due, you lose the full
points, regardless of reason or cause. Only serious illness or accident or a fully documented
family emergency will count as a valid excuse.

Students with Disabilities. The instructor will make himself available to discuss appropriate
academic accommodations for students with a disability. These students may be required to
provide documentation from the Office of the Dean of Students-Services for Students with
Disabilities.

Religious Holidays. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holiday. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holiday, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.Emergency Situations (not applicable to online instruction): Familiarize yourself when you can
with the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuations from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/

Academic Honesty: UT expects its students to abide to an Honors Code that forbids any mode
of plagiarism in written assignments submitted as original work. You can familiarize yourself
with these expectations by consulting this link: http://catalog.utexas.edu/archive/2012-
13/general-information/student- services/discipline/