University of Texas at Austin
Moody College of Communication
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders
Course Syllabus

Semester: Summer 2020
Department, Course Number, Title and Credit Hours: CSD F113P, Hearing Science Lab, 1 credit

Unique number: 72705
Class time: 8:30-9pm Mon. and Thu., web-based lab

Instructor: Chang Liu, PhD
Email Address: changliu @utexas.edu
Office Hours: 11:00am — 12:00pm on Tue. or by appointment

Catalog Description: This is a lab course for CSD F313L Hearing Science. This lab course will be focused on three projects
assigned in CSD F313L Hearing Science that range from sine wave generation, to speech acoustics and speech perception.

Prerequisite(s): None
Textbook(s) and Related Material (recommended):
William A. Yost (2006). Fundamental of hearing: an introduction, 5“ Edition, by Brill Publisher.
Norman J. Lass and Charles M. Woodford (2006) Hearing Science Fundamentals, 1*t Edition by Mosby
The textbooks will be supplemented with notes and readings.
Format of lectures: The primary format of this laboratory class is group discussion and presentation.
Technology Expectations: PowerPoint presentation will be used in most of the labs.
Learner Outcomes:
There are two major areas in this class. The learner outcomes are listed in the three areas in which students will be able to

1. Acoustics
a. Synthesize and analyze sine wave and complex sounds
b. Analyze acoustic features of speech and musical sounds
2. Auditory processing
a. Measure behavioral response of auditory perception
b. Analyze the data of auditory perception

Project: There will be three projects, most of which are group projects. Project details and requirement including the
deadline will be provided in a timely manner. The project deadline should be strictly followed. All project files and reports
are required to be submitted electronically. For the group project, each group will be composed of five to six students and
only one project submission is needed with everyone in the same group receiving the same project grade.

Attendance Policy: Attendance on the time-synchronous (live) online sessions using Zoom is required for this course. The
online laboratory will be held by Zoom on Monday and Thursday evening 8:30-9:00pm. The lab content and assignment
will be released one week in advance. You NEED to contact the instructor at least three days before the class that you are
going to miss. If any emergency, contact the instructor immediately when you are able to. In addition to the Mon. and Thu.
online meetings, there may be some other online meetings for the purpose of sectional reviews and these additional meetings
are not required, but highly recommended if needed. If needed, the time/date of the additional sessions will be informed at
least three days in advance.

Grading: The labs are tightly associated with the contents of CSD 313L Hearing Science. There will be four lab projects
for this laboratory course. For the final grade, each lab project contributes 25%. Your FINAL grade follows the formula
below:

Final = the average of the four lab projectsThe overall cutoff scale is as follows (total points: 100):
94.0—100 A, 89.0—93.9 A-, 84.0— 88.9 B+, 80.0— 83.9 B, 77.0—79.9 B-, 73.0 — 76.9 C+, 70.0 — 72.9 C,
67.0 — 69.9 C-, 63 - 66.9D+, 60-—62.9D, 57.0 — 59.9 D-, and below 57 F.

Group lab project grading: Each lab project is based on group work. Students will be assigned into one group at the
beginning of the class and this group assignment is fixed throughout the entire class. The grade of each lab for every student
is based on three things: group lab report/ppt (50%), peer evaluation (20% with presentation and 50% with presentation), and
lab presentation (30% if applicable).

Academic Honesty: A standard of honesty, fairly applied to all students, is essential to a learning environment. Students
abridging a standard of honesty must accept the consequences; penalties are assessed by appropriate classroom instructors or
other designated people. Serious cases may result in discipline at the college or University level and may result in suspension
or dismissal. Dismissal from a college for academic dishonesty, constitutes dismissal from the University.

Special Needs: In case you have a physical, perceptual, psychiatric/emotional, medical, or learning disability that may
impact your ability to carry out assigned course work, contact the Service for Students with Disability (SSD), Student
Services Building 4.104. (Voice 512-471-6259 or 512-471-TTY for users with hard of hearing) at the Office of the Dean of
Students. SSD will review your concerns, confirm your disability, and determine, with you, what accommodations are
necessary. All information and documentation of your disability is confidential and will not be released by SSD without your
written permission. A letter that documents the disability from the SSD should be presented to the instructor in each course at
the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an
exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed.

See website below for more information: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/

Campus Safety: Emergency Preparedness and Emergency Plan Instructions: Although this is a web-based class,
emergency may occur. Emergencies may range from inclement weather, to building evacuations, to campus closures, and
the university has a variety of tools to communicate with the public in the event of these and other possible emergencies.
There is a monthly emergency communications test (every first Wednesday at 11:50 a.m.)) and there are several
communications channels the university uses during emergencies like siren system, emergency website, local press and
social media, text alert, university group email and etc. All occupants of university buildings are required to evacuate a
building when a fire alarm and/ or an official announcement is made indicating a potentially dangerous situation within
the building. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. If you require assistance in evacuation, inform
your instructor in writing during the first week of class. Please call Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL: 512-232-
5050) if you have concerns regarding the attitude or actions of students, staff, or other faculty. If you would like more
information regarding emergency preparedness, visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/.

Counseling and Mental Health Services

Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing
thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.

For immediate support:

- Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, Sth floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu

- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html

CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- |CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)

FREE Services at CMHC:

- Brief assessments and referral services

- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html

- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.htmlRequirement and suggestion:

1. Pre-reading the textbook or related readings is helpful for your class. Also, the review of the textbook and/or notes can
help you understand the lectures and prepare for quizzes and exams.

2. Canvas will be frequently used for the class, mainly for general course information, class notes, discussion,
communication and etc.

3. Contact your group members frequently and be prepared for each lab.

4. If you have any difficulty or concern for the course, come to talk with me AS SOON AS POSSIBLE!

Tentative Course Schedule: NOTE — This schedule is tentative and may be changed during the summer session.

 

 

 

 

 

Date Schedule

Jun. 4 Overview of the lab course

Jun. 8, 11 Lab 1: culture-related sound environment
Jun. 15, 18 Lab 2: vowel acoustics

Jun. 22, 25 Lab 3: auditory perception measures

Jun. 29, Jul. 2 Lab 4: pitch discrimination

Jul. 9 Exam on CSD 313L, no class