NTR 306: Fundamentals of Nutrition
Summer 2020 | Unique Course Number: 85088
Department of Nutritional Sciences | University of Texas at Austin

Lecturer: Michele Hockett Cooper, MS
email: mhcooper@utexas.edu

TAs: Rachel Rickman: rrickman@utexas.edu
Bryan McClellan: bb m682@utexas.edu

Time: Mon/Wed/Fri: 9:30-10:45am

Location: Online - live (synchronous) and pre-recorded lectures
Instructor’s Office Hours: Online Zoom meetings by appointment

TA’s Office Hours: Online Zoom meetings by appointment

Course Description
Fundamentals of Nutrition provides an overview of the science of nutrition. It is an introductory course

that covers food and its relationship to health, development, and disease. Topics covered include
components of food (carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins and minerals), their digestion, absorption,
transport, and metabolism, their sources in foods, effects of deficiency or excess, and the biological
roles they play in the body. Students learn the vital role of scientific inquiry in addressing currently
pressing problems such as the growing epidemic of obesity and chronic illnesses, including diabetes,
coronary heart disease, and cancer. Other nutrition-related conditions, such as eating disorders and
osteoporosis are also covered. This course conveys knowledge and skills that are relevant and applicable
to students’ lives both now and in the future. One example is the application of current nutritional
research findings to making informed choices about dietary supplements.

This course may be used to fulfill the Natural Science and Technology (Part II) component of the
Common Core Curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and
empirical and quantitative skills.

The content of this course will be communicated by online synchronous and pre-recorded lectures,
assigned readings, videos, projects, activities, and online discussion groups. In addition, the instructor
will engage the class in discussions of current theories and empirical research in nutrition, and will
answer questions raised by students. Quantitative methods are widely used in a variety of contexts.
Students will learn formulas for determining major constructs in nutrition such as body mass index,
basal metabolic rate, and total energy needs. Students will become familiar with making calculations
related to nutrient proportions in their diet and in the foods they eat. A major class assignment is to
perform an analysis of students’ own diet, evaluate the degree to which it meets established dietary
guidelines, and determine how it could be improved.

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20Course Objectives

Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
1. Demonstrate fundamental nutrition knowledge related to macronutrients, micronutrients,

digestion and absorption, nutrient function, dietary recommendations, food composition, and
nutritional health.

2. Apply basic dietary principles of adequacy, balance, variety, and moderation in planning healthy
menus.

3. Critically evaluate food and nutrition information in the popular media and scientific literature.

4. Assess nutritional status and make recommendations to improve dietary habits and promote
health of self and other individuals.

Required Texts:
Textbook: Whitney, EN, Rolfes SR. Understanding Nutrition, 14th or 15th edition

Electronic version of the text is available for rental or purchase at:
https://www.cengage.com/unlimited (unlimited access to all Cengage textbooks and resources) or
https://www.cengage.com/c/understanding-nutrition-15e-whitney (eBook only)

Note: Students are required to use a dietary analysis tool (such as software, online website or an app) to
complete the Dietary Analysis Project (See “Assignments” below). You may use one of the following to
complete the assignment:

e Option 1: Diet & Wellness Plus (Cengage) online tool. This accompanies the e-textbook, which
must be purchased. Subscription options and steps to access the dietary analysis software can
be found on Canvas. This software comes with a mobile app. To access the e-textbook and Diet
& Wellness Plus software online, use the URL below:
https://www.cengage.com/dashboard/#/course-confirmation/MTPQGKXPTPWV/initialcourse-
confirmation

e Option 2: www.MyFoodRecord.com (free)
e Option 3: www.cronometer.com (free)

Technical Requirements:
Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled

laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should have
enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:
e Laptop or desktop computer
Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox
5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
Ensure your microphone and webcam work properly if your course requires them

Tips for the best class experience:
e Close all unnecessary browser windows and tabs and programs:
Oo Streaming music (Pandora, Spotify, etc.)
O Social media sites
O Youtube or other video sites

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20Oo Online/Offline Gaming
e Clear the browser's cache before class (here's how)
e Check your computer is free of viruses, malware, and spyware (UT recommendations)

Need additional help? Look for "Online Course Tech Support" in the left navigation menu of your Canvas
course.

Grades:

Evaluative Criteria Points Each Total Points
6 Content Quizzes 50 300
Midterm and Final Exam 100 200

Dietary Analysis Project 50 50

3 Discussion Boards 10 30

Fad Diet Poster 20 20

TOTAL 600

Grading Scale:

Points Numerical Grade (% Letter Grade
555 - 600 92.5 - 100 A
537 - 554 89.5 - 92.4 A-
519 - 536 86.5 - 89.4 B+
495 - 518 82.5 - 86.4 B
477 - 494 79.5 - 82.4 B-
459 - 476 76.5 - 79.4 C+
435 - 458 72.5 - 76.4 C
417 - 434 69.5- 72.4 C-
399 - 416 66.5 - 69.4 D+
375 - 398 62.5 - 66.4 D
357-374 59.5 - 62.4 D-
0-356 0-59.4 F

Extra Credit Opportunities: There may be extra credit opportunities throughout the session (e.g. pop
quizzes, attendance points for synchronous lectures, etc.), but no “gift points” will be awarded at the
end of the course for borderline grades. Please be proactive in addressing your class performance and
ask for help early, if needed.

Religious Holy Day and Other Accommodations: By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor
of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
Should an assignment be due on one of these days, it must be submitted prior to your absence.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of

Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities. Visit

http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/ or call (512) 471-6259.

University Health Services Nutrition Services: This course may present material that prompts you to
feel the need to speak with a professional about your personal nutrition or to explore your dietary
lifestyle further. Please take advantage of the University’s on-campus nutrition services available to you,
including individual appointments with a registered dietitian, the Mindful Eating Program, and peer

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus

Version 5/30/20education workshops on a variety of wellness topics. Visit

https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/dietitian.html or call (512) 475-8010.

“Classroom” Courtesy: Given the online format of this course, it is tempting to multitask and allow
yourself to be otherwise distracted during lectures. For your own benefit, please limit distractions in
your environment and on your devices during class time. Disrespectful and disruptive behavior will not
be tolerated during synchronous lectures or via electronic communications with the course instructor or
your fellow students. Non-compliance with classroom policies will lead to your removal from the online
class period, and a record of “absent” attendance for that day. Persistent offenses will lead to dismissal
from the course and referral to the Office of the Dean of Students for counseling.

Academic Integrity: All students are expected to conduct themselves in an ethical manner and to have
read and understood the sections of the General Information Catalogue on scholastic dishonesty.
Penalties for instances of scholastic dishonesty in this course will be as outlined in the General
Information Catalogue. The least severe penalty in this course shall be failure. Taking an article and
using it as the basis for one’s original work by tweaking small components is not a satisfactory effort
because it does not represent your original work. Questions or concerns about this issue can be
addressed with the instructor.

No quiz/exam questions or assignment answers should be preserved through any means whatsoever.
Sharing quiz/exam questions, assignments, lecture slides, or any other course material via personal
interactions, email, Facebook (or other social media platforms), Google Docs, photographs, course
sharing websites (e.g. Course Hero) or any other means is strictly prohibited. No photographs or copies
of anything presented on the screen may be made; nor can any material be recorded without consent of
the instructor. Violations of these policies will be considered a breach of scholastic honesty and will be
penalized as outlined in the General Information Catalogue, with the least severe penalty being failure in
the course.

Absolute honesty must be practiced in all assignments and activities. Cheating in its various forms such
as copying or sharing information on individually assigned projects or examinations, plagiarism or
falsification of information or data will not be tolerated and may be grounds for dismissal from the class.
Students are encouraged to become familiar with the University policy on academic honesty. Suspected
violations of the policy will be reported to the Dean of Students and will appear on your official record.

Electronic Course Management: Canvas is the online learning portal through which this course will be
administered. Students will find lecture recordings, quizzes, exams, supplementary readings,
assignments, and this syllabus posted on Canvas. Grades will also be posted regularly on Canvas.

E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence. Therefore, you are responsible for
reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the University informed about changes to your e-mail address. You can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/email/1564.

Please utilize email, Canvas messaging, online office hours, or separate, scheduled appointments as the
main means of communicating with the course instructor and TA(s).

Course Policy and Procedures
1. Students are expected to attend synchronous classes regularly, unless previously discussed with the

course instructor.

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/202. Students are expected to keep pace with pre-recorded lectures (and recordings of missed
synchronous Classes) according to the course schedule as outlined below.

3. All students are expected to read the UT Student Handbook regarding plagiarism and its possible
consequences.

4. Assignments are due by the beginning of class on the date listed on the course schedule below. For
each day that an assignment is late past the due date, a minimum of 10% will be deducted from the
final assignment grade.

5. Quizzes will not reopen after the close date for any reason. No make-up exams will be offered.

6. Any documented personal or family emergency or health problem will be considered as an
exception to the above policy.

7. Personal emergencies or serious health problems are the only reasons for granting an incomplete in
the course. In general, a grade of incomplete will not be given in the course.

8. Grades will be posted on Canvas.

9. Questions regarding grades should initially be directed to the TA over email or online during the
TA’s office hours. If any questions need additional follow-up, they should be addressed with the
instructor during online office hours.

Coursework

Quizzes: There will be 6 total quizzes (50 points each) over the course material throughout the
semester, administered via Canvas.
@ Quizzes will be available from 12:01am to 11:59pm on their scheduled day. They will be closed
thereafter.
e Content quizzes will take place on Thursdays, and you will be reminded of an upcoming quiz on
Wednesday in class.
You will be allowed ONE 45-minute attempt at each quiz.
No make-up or early quizzes will be offered.
You are expected to work alone on the quizzes.
Quiz responses may be reviewed with the TA during online office hours for ONE WEEK ONLY
following the close of the quiz.
@ Quizzes may not be preserved in any way; multiple windows are not allowed. See academic
integrity section for penalties should this policy be broken.

Midterm and Final Exams: Cumulative midterm and final exams (100 points each) will be held during
class time as indicated on the schedule below. Material will be presented in a combination of formats
including multiple choice and short answer questions, and case studies where students will apply their
knowledge to ‘real life’ scenarios. Exams will be administered via Canvas.
e Exams will take place on the specified day and time as indicated on the course schedule below.
You will be allowed ONE 75-minute attempt at each exam.
No make-up or early exams will be offered.
You are expected to work alone on exams.
Exams will be available for review for ONE WEEK ONLY in online office hours or by appointment
following the grade posting on Canvas.
Exam results will not be discussed with the course instructors or TAs via email.
e@ Exams may not be preserved in any way; multiple windows are not allowed. See academic
integrity section for penalties should this policy be broken.
e To maintain the security of exam content, students may not make any notes during exams.

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20Assignments: This course includes several assignments that are designed to enhance the educational
experience, provide more in-depth information for students about their individual dietary habits, utilize
peer collaboration as a resource to broaden the scope of their experience, and gain appreciation for the
larger role of nutrition in society. All assignments are due on Canvas by the beginning of class on the due
date listed in the course schedule below. Please find information about late submissions in the Course
Policies and Procedures section above. More information about the projects, including the rubrics used
for grading, can be found on Canvas.

e Dietary Analysis Project:

O Objectives: The purpose of this exercise is to provide students with experience in
collecting and analyzing data, as well as provide useful information about their own (or
someone else’s) dietary intake.

O Expectations: Each student will keep a food diary for 3 days and then run a quantitative
analysis of his/her diet for a variety of nutrients using dietary analysis (see “Course
Materials” for allowable options). The results of the 3-day dietary analysis will be
compared to established guidelines to assess the adequacy of the student’s diet in
providing the necessary macro- and micro-ingredients to support good health. Based on
this assessment, students will calculate changes that could be made to achieve a
healthier diet, including which food options (and in what amount) would remedy
deficiencies, and which foods should be reduced or eliminated.

m If astudent does not wish to analyze their own dietary intake, they may analyze
the dietary intake of a friend or family member as a “client”. In this scenario, the
client would need to record their food intake for 3 days and grant the student
access to their data. The student would then run quantitative analysis of this
data, and calculate changes that could be made to achieve a healthier diet (as
outlined above) for their client. The student would then present these findings
to their client in a professional, anonymized report (i.e. client name should be
changed or removed).

O Submission: Students will submit a report that summarizes their discoveries from this
analysis. There will be an online class discussion forum on what students learned from
the assignment.

e Discussion Boards:

O Objectives: Throughout the course there will be three online discussions (via Canvas
discussion boards) around the following topics: preconceptions of a healthy diet; the
obesity epidemic in the US; the GMO debate. These discussion boards will give students
experience in synthesizing information, expressing personal opinions, and responding to
the opinions of others.

O Expectations: For each discussion board topic, students will create a thoughtful and
informed discussion post. Posts should be based on a combination of students’ own
opinions and/or the critical analysis of relevant videos/articles. After creating their own
post, students will respond to TWO of their classmates’ discussion posts. All posts and
responses should be succinct and respectful.

O Submission: Original posts and responses will be submitted via Canvas discussion
boards. More information for each discussion topic can be found on Canvas.

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20e Fad Diet Poster:

O Objectives: Students will apply course concepts and critical analysis to identify and
discredit (or support) the claims of a fad diet.

O Expectations: Students will choose a fad diet that is currently (e.g. Keto) or formerly
(e.g. Atkins) popular among the general public. Students will identify three alleged
nutritional outcomes made by proponents of this diet, and they will apply scientifically
proven nutritional concepts, as learned throughout the course, to critically analyze (i.e.
discredit or support) the claims of the diet.

O Submission: Students will create an advertisement-type poster for their chosen fad diet.
The poster should include the three major claims of the fad diet, along with the
students’ assessment of those claims: providing evidence to either support or discredit
each claim. Flyers will be submitted on Canvas as PDFs.

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20Course Outline:

Fri Course Introduction; Mythbusters:

Syllabus Review; Chapter 1
6/5 Nutrition Edition y P

Chapter 1

Mon ; ; . Assign: Discussion Board -
Overview of Nutrition ;
6/8 Preconceptions of a Healthy

Diet

Wed
Pre-recorded |Planning a Healthy Diet Chapter 2
6/10
Thurs Quiz #1 Chapters 1 - 2
uiz apters 1 -
6/11 P

Eri Chapter 3
ri
6/12 Pre-recorded |Digestion, Absorption, and Transport Assign: Dietary Analysis
Project
Chapter 3
Mon DUE: Discussion Board -
Pre-recorded |Digestion, Absorption, and Transport
6/15 Preconceptions of a Healthy
Diet

Wed

Live Carbohydrates Chapter 4
6/17

Fri ;

Live Carbohydrates Chapter 4
6/19
Mon . oe

Live Lipids Chapter 5
6/22
Wed .

Live Lipids Chapter 5
6/24
Thurs 12:01am -

Chapters 3 - 4
6/25 11:59pm
Fri ;
Pre-recorded |Proteins Chapter 6
6/26
Mon Chapter 6
Pre-recorded |Proteins

6/29 Assign: Fad Diet Poster

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20Pre-recorded |Energy Metabolism Chapter 7

12:01am -
11:59pm

Chapter 7
Pre-recorded |Energy Metabolism Assign: Discussion Board -
Obesity in the US
Energy Balance and Body Composition Chapter 8
Weight Management Chapter 9
12:01am -
Chapters 8 - 9
11:59pm
Chapters 1-9
No class Study day for mid-term DUE: Discussion Board -
Obesity in the US
12:01am - .
Mid-term Exam Chapters 1 - 9
11:59pm
Water Soluble Vitamins Chapter 10
Fat Soluble Vitamins Chapter 11
Water and Major Minerals Chapter 12
wee Minerals Chapter 13

Life Cycle Nutrition: Pregnancy and Chapter 15
Lactation DUE: Fad Diet Poster

Chapters 5 - 6

Pre-recorded

 

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20Wed
7/29

; Life Cycle Nutrition: Infancy, Childhood, and
Live Chapter 16
Adolescence

cri Chapter 17
ri
7/31 Live Life Cycle Nutrition: Adults Assign: Discussion Board -
The GMO Debate
Mon .
Pre-recorded |Diet and Health Chapter 18

Wed

 

Consumer Concerns: Food and Water Chapter 19

Chapters 15 - 17

12:01am -
11:59pm

Chapter 20
Hunger and the Global Environment DUE: Discussion Board - The
GMO Debate

Ethical Consumerism Discussion Chapter 19 - 20

Dietary Analysis Project Discussion DUE: Dietary Analysis Project

Review Session Chapters 1 - 20

Important Dates:

June 4th: Summer session classes begin (first-term, nine-week, and whole-session)

June 5th: Last day of the official add/drop period for first-term, nine-week, and whole-session
classes

June 9th: Fourth class day for first-term, nine-week, and whole-session classes; last day an
undergraduate student may add a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session class except for rare
and extenuating circumstances. Last day to drop a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session class
for a possible refund.

June 24th: Last day a student may change registration in a first-term, nine-week, or whole-
session class to or from the pass/fail or credit/no credit basis.

August 14th: Last class day for second-term and whole-session classes.

NTR 306 Summer ‘20 Syllabus
Version 5/30/20