The University of Texas at Austin

McCombs School of Business

Marketing 366 Special Projects in Marketing Practicum Syllabus

MKT 366P Marketing Practicum

Classroom: https: xas.zoom.us/j/7755733222

Days/time: Tu/Th 2:00 to 4:45

Instructor Information

Name: Chris Aarons

Phone: 512-573-3222

Email: hris.Aarons@mccombs.utexas.

Office hours: By appointment via email to ensure I am available and give you the time needed

TA Information

Name: Andrea Lloyd

Phone: 713-823-7429 (text or call)

Email: aclloyd@utexas.edu

Office hours: By appointment via email to ensure I am available and give you the time needed

Overview and Objectives

MKT366P, Special Projects in Marketing Practicum, affords students the opportunity to apply their marketing
knowledge to an actual business situation, working to solve a marketing problem in an experience similar to an
internship.

This course addresses the question: "How do I develop the professional marketing and business skills that will
enable me to develop marketing strategies for a for-profit or not-for-profit enterprise?"

While some of the learning in this course will be through lectures and activities in class, much of the work, and
therefore the learning, will happen outside of the classroom: in team meetings; meetings with the client;
meetings with the instructor; and individual work.

The course is designed to help you:
e Gain additional marketing insight and experience by applying marketing concepts to an actual business
situation
e Gain experience acting as a marketing consultant, experiencing the triumphs and challenges of working
as part of a team to address a marketing problem
e Make subsequent marketing studies more meaningful by providing a real-life experience.
e Develop insights and networking contacts that may prove useful in your career

With some exceptions noted in the class schedule below, class sessions will generally consist of:
e Lecture/class discussions, there will typically be a short exercise due before the beginning of class
e 15-minute meetings for each team to meet the instructor in the classroom
e Project work time for teams to meet as a group and with clients.

Students will work to understand your organizations goals and objectives, plan and implement marketing research,
and develop a marketing strategy. Student activities will include interviewing you and others in your organization,
review research from secondary sources that you provide to them and industry data and completing one or more

primary market research projects (customer interview, competitive analysis, focus group, survey, interviews, etc.).

Page 1 of 11Project deliverables will consist of a one-page executive summary and a 15-minute PowerPoint presentation which will
be presented in class. Students will provide you with all secondary market research, primary research raw data and
analysis, and all other working papers and materials developed during the project.

Expectations
You are expected to be thorough, diligent, timely, and careful in completing their work for your project.
McCombs sets a very high standard for conscientiousness to help students prepare for their professional
careers. In your work on the project, you are expected to:

e Meet deadlines

e Beon time for meetings

e Listen carefully to understand your organization’s needs, goals, and objectives

e Analyze marketing problems quantitatively and provide quantitative measures of success

Communication Is Essential In Marketing
Everyone wants you to wildly succeed. As a student or when your hired as an intern or employee, here are a
few key points to help you blow them away:

Ask questions.

It can be uncomfortable to ask your instructor or managers questions. However, it is highly encouraged that
you speak up whenever you are confused or need help. In digital marketing, we are used to speaking in
industry jargon and can sometimes forget that you may or may not understand certain acronyms or terms.
Also, do not be afraid to ask questions about your assignments. We assume you know exactly what we mean
and want. If you don’t, you will fail. So, ask before running off as the more questions you ask, the more
equipped you will be to handle the task or project effectively and efficiently.

Fail fast.

Mistakes are inevitable and will happen no matter how hard you try. The important thing to note is that the
earlier you fail, the easier it is to move forward. It is much easier to take care of mistakes when we find them
earlier, so you do not have to spend as much time going back to fix them after you have finished the project.
A helpful tip for you to fail fast is to ask people to review your work in its early stages. Make sure that they
can see where you are headed with the project as a whole, so they can point out any errors or issues. By
asking for an initial check-up, you can be sure to fail sooner and succeed more with your assignments.

Take on challenges.

There can be times where you are given projects or assignments that stretch your abilities. Do not be afraid to
tackle those challenges because they have great potential in helping you grow. Sometimes, the best learning
experiences come from these opportunities because they require you to do more and to think more. If you
want more of a challenge in your work, talk to your manager and let them know. Often times, they can
provide you with an assignment that will provide that extra challenge for you and help you learn.

Go beyond what Is asked.

The nature of most jobs to help the organization achieve a goal or set of goals. Your work, no matter what it
is, contributes to our goals. When your manager assigns you to a project, there are often things that they are
unaware of and do not include in the job you are asked to do. If you notice something that should be included
or is missing, you absolutely should bring it up with your manager. Many students, employees and interns will
only do the minimum requirements of a project or only what they are asked to do. By going beyond what is
asked of you, you are able to contribute more to the success of the project and show that you are capable of
thinking outside the box.

Page 2 of 11Keys to having a successful experience and outcome in this class

e Treat it like a job and commit yourself and your team to providing the best client service and doing the
best job possible.

e Commit yourself to learn the concepts presented in this class.

e Be fully prepared for each class in order to: a) understand the class discussion, and b) be prepared for
our discussions.

e Participate in class discussions. Vibrant interaction in class not only provides a rich learning
environment, but also helps to develop one of the most critical abilities any businessperson can have:
verbal persuasion.

e Be fully present at every class.

e Review materials before class as they will be available on Canvas by 10pm the day before each
scheduled class.

e Take notes during class on everything.

e Do not get behind. The material in this class builds on itself. You will find yourself struggling if you do
not prepare for each class, attend each class, and commit yourself to learning the material. Be
proactive — do not wait until the day before an exam for clarification.

e If you have questions, ask a classmate, a TA, or the instructor. Don’t tolerate not understanding the
material.

Expectations of your clients
Clients are providing you with a valuable educational experience and receiving in return research and analyses
from the student teams. To ensure that student and client expectations are met, clients are expected to:

e Meet with the student group at least three times during the semester, more often if needed

e Help students understand your organization's goals and objectives

e Provide students with secondary research such as previous company research, within the bounds of

your need for confidentiality

e Work with the students and course instructor to plan a project that can be reasonably completed
during the semester
Not require students to sign a confidentiality agreement
Identify a primary client contact within your organization
Respond to student questions and requests on a timely basis
Notify the course instructor if the student group appears to be having difficulty in delivering on one or
more of the items agreed in the project engagement letter or is not living up to your expectations

The University of Texas at Austin Honor Code:

The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.

Course Feedback
Marketing is about feedback, insights and experimentation. Much like the survey you took before class, I will
send out another one during the middle of semester as well.

Required Course Texts & Materials
There is not a required textbook for this class. I will provide readings and handouts as needed and as
indicated in the course overview below.

Grading Policy

 

Final Project (included class grade, client evaluation and peer evaluations 40%

Team Project Status Updates 10%

Individual Class Exercises 50%
100%

Page 3 of 11Course grading will be plus/minus and will be curved to roughly achieve McCombs target for undergraduate
elective courses:

e A15%

e A- 20%

e B+ 25%

e B35%

e B- lower 5%

Final grades will be established by rank in class. There is no predetermined letter-grade distribution and the
class’s overall performance will be used to set cut-offs for the letter grades.

Final Grades
Final grades will be assigned as follows:

Some [en [some
Average Points
93-100 A 4.00
oe
87-89 B+ 3.33
(83-86 |B (300

80-82 B- 2.67
77-79 C+ 2.33

 

 

 

 

70-72 C- 1.67
63-66 |D {1.00

60-62 D-
59 or less

 

 

e Consistent with the guidelines suggested by the Undergraduate Program Office, the average grade for
this course will be between 3.2 and 3.6 (or 85-86%).

e To avoid any misunderstanding regarding rounding methodology, grades will NOT be rounded up — an
89.99 (as close as it is to 90), will still be a B+.

e Note that the grade calculations shown on Canvas are occasionally in error. The official grades for this
class will be calculated as described in this syllabus and may be different than the grade averages
shown on Canvas.

Appealing a Grade: If you believe there is a grading error which is cause for review, you may make an
appeal. All appeals must be submitted via email (not Canvas) and must be received no later than 11:59pm on
the 7tn calendar day after the grade is posted on Canvas or otherwise communicated to you. Your appeal
must include a detailed, fact-based explanation of why you think the grade is in error (passage from a reading,
lecture slide, etc.) and must include the section number of your class in the subject line. A maximum of two
questions per exam, one question per quiz, and four questions per semester may be appealed. Note that an
appeal is not an opportunity to provide new information, explain an answer, or grovel for points, but instead to
correct a genuine grading error on the answer submitted. Your grade may be increased or decreased as a
result of the appeal. Due to tight grading timelines at the end of the semester, no appeals for the Final Exam
will be considered.

Attendance at class sessions and instructor meetings is important due to the interactive nature of the course.
You may miss one class session for any reason and a second- or third-class session for a documented
Page 4 of 11recruiting event or family emergency. You must be present for more than half the class to be counted as in
attendance. If you miss four class sessions for any reason, you will not receive credit for this
course.

Additional details for course requirements will be provided in class, but the following guidelines will give you a
sense of what to expect:

Class/session Overview
Each class or session will be divided into 4 parts:

1. Lecture and review where we discuss best practices around the topic as described in the class
schedule.

2. Group project status updates where each group will give a 5-minute update on their project,
challenges and next steps.

3. Working group sessions where the reminder of the time will be spent with your group (and me, if
needed, working on your project. Don’t rely on this time solely for your group work. You will
need to meet outside of class time as well.

4. Weekly instructor group meetings which your team will need to schedule with me outside of class
time.

Marketing Project Presentation and Materials (40%)

Each student will participate in a marketing project presentation related to marketing strategy evaluation and
analysis for their client. Project details will be available on Canvas. Scoring for your final presentation will be a
combination of feedback from your client, peer feedback, and an instructor score.

At the end of the semester each team member will evaluate the peers on their team. Peer feedback will be
combined with instructor scoring for individual contributions to the team project. 7ake this seriously and be
a great team member. Anyone receiving poor feedback from their team should expect to lose a

minimum of one letter grade!

e Marketing Project Timeline: Points will be deducted from a team’s marketing project score for not
meeting deadlines for intermediate project milestones or for not following instructions for a project
milestone. Points will be deducted from an individual's marketing project score for missing a peer
critique for other team's presentations. Teams must post all marketing project materials to your team’s
Team > Files section on Canvas.

e Project Status Updates: For each instructor meeting, the project team prepares a written status
update using the template provided. Status updates should include current status; key
accomplishments since the last report (including the deliverables suggested in the previous class &
previous instructor meeting,); notes from client meetings or discussions; work plan for the next two
weeks; any issues with making progress on the project. Status updates will be discussed during 15-
minute meetings with the instructor in class.

Individual Class Exercises (50%)

For most class sessions, each student will prepare an online exercise before class. The purpose of these
exercises is to give students the opportunity to consider material prior to the discussion in class. For each
assignment, you will be required to submit responses online through Canvas and/or using the web link in the
exercise. You must save a copy of your exercise submissions along with any readings and cases assigned for
the class session.

Each exercise will be worth up to 10 points. Since the purpose of the exercises is to give you an opportunity to
consider concepts, grading of the exercises will be gentle. If you show that you have made a reasonable

attempt at the assignment you will receive at least 7 points. Scores above 7 points will reserved for exercise
Page 5 of 11submission that show exceptional keenness on a given assignment (for example: exceptional accuracy,
completeness, or thoughtful analysis, depending on the assignment).

For input into calculating your final grade, we will drop your lowest exercise score. This gives students
flexibility should they happen to miss an assignment due to external constraints or demands. Late assignments
will not be accepted.

Individual Class Contribution (Extra Credit)
Your individual contribution will be evaluated by the instructor based on your pre-class survey, participation
during class discussions and instructor meetings.

Some of general criteria for evaluating effective class contribution during class discussions include but are not
limited to the following:

e Does the student make qua/ity points? Note that your grade will not be a function solely of the amount
of airtime you consume. Concise and insightful comments backed by analysis are required for higher
scores.

e Does the student participate? For others to learn from your experience, you must participate - which
means actively offering your insights and constructive criticism.

e At the end of the course you will have the opportunity to provide feedback on your own class
contribution and that of your classmates.

Canvas Discussion Board Contribution: You may feel that you had an important comment that you were not
able to bring up in class may or you may need to miss a class because of interviewing or other obligations.
You can earn partial class contribution credit for sharing your ideas/discussing the topic on the Discussion
Board.

The thread for this discussion will be titled “Session # Additional Discussion”.

This discussion thread has two purposes:

1. It can be used by students who miss a class session. If you miss class, you can receive contribution
credit for the day by discussing, in some depth, what you saw as key concepts from the
lecture/readings/case discussion that you missed and perhaps bring in additional material from another
article you have found that addresses similar content.

2. It can be used by students who were in class but would like to add to the discussion. For example, you
may feel that you had an important comment that you were not able to bring up in class. In this case,
you can earn up to an additional contribution credit for the session.

Note that in order to receive credit, your contributions must be completed before the start of the
following class.

Removing A Team Member
The team may feel that efforts below the minimum acceptable by a team member are negatively impacting
the learning experience or is negatively impacting the quality of the work for the client. If this occurs, the team
can consider removing the offending team member. The process for removing a team member is as follows:
e If ateam is having an issue with a team member that cannot be resolved internally, the team must
first meet with the instructor and present a proposed “Performance Improvement Plan” (PIP) for the
offending team member. The PIP must detail the performance issues and the specific improvements
which are required based on consensus between the other team members. If approved by the
instructor, the offending individual has one week to comply with the PIP.
e Seven calendar days after the PIP is delivered, and if the performance improvement plan has not
motivated adequate improvements, the team can propose to remove the individual. This requires
unanimous consent of the remaining team members and approval of the instructor.

Page 6 of 11e For the remaining team members: The team will be held accountable for completing the work of the
student removed. In other words, the team workload is not reduced because the team has one fewer

members.

e For the student removed: The student removed will independently complete a project like the one
assigned to the team (to be defined by the instructor), but which will be evaluated completely

separately and will involve no client interaction.

Tentative Class Schedule

This is a £entative class schedule. Readings and assignments will be posted as modules on Canvas. Use
Canvas as your guide to readings and assignments. A key to the readings follows this schedule.

DATE Class #

 

Pre-class survey

oO

aE! Introduction
- Projects overview
- Digital Mindset for Success
1 - Overview of key marketing frameworks
- Structure of marketing consulting project

6/9 Marketing Strategy

- Fundamentals of developing a marketing
strategy

- The psychology of marketing
- Formation of project teams

yee How to effectively work with clients
- How Marketing has changed

- Situation Analysis / Team Meetings
3 - Brand onboarding

- Writing a client engagement letter

6/16 Framing the Problem

- Framing a marketing
problem

- Setting SMART objectives

- Key questions to address in setting
marketing strategy

6/18 Secondary Research / Team Meetings
- Finding and using secondary sources
- Moments That Matter in marketing

- Writing a secondary research memo

&

Due 6/1: Pre-Class Survey Online
Read : Critical Thinking Skills

Read: How To Be The Person Who Never Misses A Deadline

Read Online: Successful Group Projects

Submit Top Project Selections For Your Group By 6/6

Read: Using The Stages Of Team Development

Read: Digital Marketing Playbook

 

Due Exercise 1: Creating a Desktop Website using free Wix
account. Choose a site you hate and redesign/re-image it. This is
not a content exercise. Cut and paste the text from at least 3 pages
and create a new site using best practices.

Due Project: Project selections, initial meeting with client, request
secondary research sources

Read: Best Practices In Working With Clients

Read: Marketing In The Age The Pandemic

Read: How To Create A Situation Analysis

Due Project: Draft engagement letter posted to Canvas

Read: How To Frame A Problem

Due Exercise 2: Adapting for a Mobile Website. Using the same
desktop site you created on Wix, mobile optimize your site. Pay
attention to formatting and details and check across multiple

devices.

Due Project: Send engagement email to client with project goals
(cc: me), draft secondary research

Read: Research Using Secondary Data Sources
Read: How Bad Research Undermines Your Business

Due Project: Draft secondary research memo and materials posted
to Canvas

Page 7 of 11oy Px}
;
Cy PA)
;

6/30
8
ye

10

 

Planning Process / Instructor Meetings

- Understanding the customer
buying process

- Using the buying process to
generate profitable sales

- The Skyscraper method of SEO

Primary Research

- Planning and implementing
customer interviews

- They ask, you answer

- How to avoid common pitfalls in primary
research

Segmentation, Targeting, Positioning & Mid-
class survey results

- The 5 keys for every brand to succeed
- Dollar Shave Club

Formulating Strategy
- How to Ace your value propositions

- Making strategy about customers, not
competitors

- Benefits of approaches to retaining
customers

Writing a Marketing Plan

- Best practices in writing
marketing plans

- Inbound marketing

Read: The Consumer Decision Journey
Read: Know Your Customers’ “Jobs To Be Done”
Read: Building The Machine

Due Exercise 3: Complete SEO Training Certification from HubSpot
and optimize the SEO on your Wix Website (about 1.5 hours using
only the Free Wix account/steps that require a premium account
are not required)

Due Project: All secondary research complete and posted to
Canvas

Read: An Overview Of Market Research Methods
Read: The Ultimate List Of Customer Development Questions

Read: 12 Tips For Early Customer Development Interviews

Read: Find Your First Customers For Customer Development

 

Read: Focus Groups Fall Out Of Favor

Due Project: Draft primary research plan posted to Canvas
Due: Mid-class Survey

Read: Segmentation, Targeting And Positioning (STP) Model
Read The STP Model

Read: How To Brand Your Brand

Due Exercise 4: Dollar Shave Club (DSC) Marketing Situational
Analysis: Research and discuss in a minimum 2-page paper (bullet
points are fine) how and why DSC marketing was so successful and
beat larger competitors, specifics on what tactics they used to
drive growth since launch and what should they be doing now to
continue to grow.

Due Project: Complete second meeting with client to review
findings and obtain client feedback and agreement on approach

Read: Loyalty Programs!?! We Don’t Need No Stinkin’ Loyalty
Programs!!!

Read: How To Gain The Ultimate Competitive Advantage By Not
Losing Customers

Read: Strategy Is Not About The Competition
Due Project: Deadline to begin fielding primary search, post final

questionnaire(s)/interview guide(s) Complete fielding primary
research

Read: The Only 10 Slides You Need In A Pitch

 

Read: Politics And The English Language
Read: The 10 Questions You Need To Create A Marketing Plan
How To Create A Marketing Plan

Page 8 of 117/9 Marketing Metrics
1 - 5 Critical Marketing Metrics to Follow
- Calculating a marketing ROI

rR! Plan Implementation
- The Power of Noticing
- Applying the GOST framework

- The difference between
strategy and tactics

bE
N

7/16 Great Presentations and Marketing Success
- Selling ideas through marketing plans

- Using data visualizations for persuasive

impact
vx Instructor and Group Meetings
14
vA Px Instructor Meetings/No Class Session
15 - Final opportunity for feedback before

presentations

7/28

Tae mM aaeetaleeh elas

b
Ww

Class Format And Policies

Due Exercise 5: Complete Inbound Marketing Certification from
HubSpot (about two hours)

Due Project: Complete third meeting with client to review results

of primary research and obtain client feedback on your preliminary
recommendations.

Read Online: Marketing ROI: From Art To Science

Read: The Difference Between Strategy And Tactics

Sorting Out GOST

Due Exercise 6: Best Practices Guide: Create best practices
PowerPoint guide on an area of marketing of your interest and be
a minimum of 5 slides.

Due Project: Provide client and instructor with all secondary

market research, primary research raw data and analysis, and all
other working papers and materials

Read: Why Most People's Charts & Graphs Look Like Crap

Read: This 10 Minute Ted Talk By Bill Gates Will Teach You
Everything You Need To Know About Presenting

 

Watch: Nancy Duarte: The Secret Structure Of Great Talks

Due Exercise 7: Find an article, podcast, or TED talk (not including
the ones in the syllabus) that you like that talks about how to give
effective and engaging marketing presentations. Please be sure to
include the source for the content, summarize your key takeaways,
and discuss which of the takeaways you will incorporate into your
personal presentation. Length should be between one and two
pages.

Draft Presentation Due

Group Presentations Due In Class: To include one-page executive
summary and a 15-minute PowerPoint presentation in class.

 

= Class sessions will include lecture, discussion and other group activities as assigned.

» Students are expected to fully apply themselves and be prepared for each class. Generally, it is expected
that students will spend an average of not less than two hours outside of class for each hour in class
(i.e. an average of six hours outside of class each week).

» Preparation for class will consist of reading of handouts and multiple articles (available on the internet or
posted on Canvas) as well as research and group work.

» All students in MKT366P are businesspeople, as is the instructor. Correspondingly, businesslike conduct is
expected in class and we are all expected to conduct ourselves professionally. This includes arriving to class
on time, silencing and putting away your mobile phones, refraining from surfing and being distracted during
class, and being respectful of your classmates, guest speakers, the TA, and your instructor. Students not
conducting themselves in a businesslike manner will be asked to leave for the remainder of the class period

Page 9 of 11and may therefore miss any key sections. Additionally, for each subsequent instance of un-businesslike
conduct, students will have their semester grade lowered by one letter grade.

BBA Recruiting Conflicts

Conflicts occasionally arise between classes and the search for employment. We understand how important
the job search process is to you, and McCombs provides many resources in support of career exploration and
search. However, UT is first and foremost an educational institution and your BBA degree will be the credential
that certifies your education. As such, education will take precedent whenever such a conflict arises.

All companies that recruit at McCombs are informed of this fact. Should a conflict arise, we recommend the

following steps:

# Check the syllabus to see if an exception is provided that would allow you to satisfy class obligations while
still attending the job event (e.g., paper instead of quiz, allowed quiz drops, etc.).

= Note that a job-related conflict, whether a current job or a potential one, is usually not an acceptable reason
for missing an exam or taking a make-up and may not be acceptable in other circumstances either. If any
doubt exists, check with your professor.

= If no exception is provided, inform the company that an academic conflict exists and request an
accommodation.

= If no accommodation is provided by the company, and you have done everything within your power to
resolve the situation, contact BBA Career Services and request their assistance in resolving the situation.

Note that while we do have influence with the companies that recruit at McCombs, not all conflicts can be
resolved, and we have little or no influence with companies that do not recruit through the Recruit McCombs
system.

Finally, be aware that it is not unreasonable for an employer to expect you to go to some lengths to show your
interest in them. In a recent example, several students completed an exam at 9 pm and were expected to
attend an on-site interview in Houston the next morning at 8:00 am. A 5:30 am flight from Austin was
available and the students were expected to be on it. This is reasonable, and such sacrifices are sometimes
expected in a good job and career in business.

Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,

http: //diversity.utexas. isability/.

Diversity and Inclusion

It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives will be well served by this course,
that students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit. Please let me know right away if
this ever is not the case.

Religious Holy Days

By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project
in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.

Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program's

Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this

Page 10 of 11course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you
have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me
for clarification.

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic

Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and

procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.

Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of

Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.

= Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings and
assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.

= Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.

= If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.

= In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.

= Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.

Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or online.

In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.

Page 11 of 11