SYLLABUS
ARC|ARI 311K: VISUAL COMMUNICATIONS 1 | SUMMER 2020
MTWThF 1pm-4pm

ONLINE USING ZOOM

INSTRUCTOR

Joyce Rosner jrosner@austin.utexas.edu

Appointments for office hours should be setup by emailing instructor(s).

TEACHING ASSISTANT

Stefan Brits sbrits@utexas.edu

 

 

 

 

 

Alex Clayborn Intersecting Volumes

INTRODUCTION

Visual Communication | is a technique-based course with the focus on conventions of architectural representation
and their relationship to one’s design process. We will explore digital and analogue modes of drawing and
modeling and do so not only for their potential to represent that which we already know, but also as a generator
of discoveries, ideas, and insights that may be new to us. The intent is to begin each problem with a question
rather than an answer — with outcomes that you may not have been able to envision at the outset.

In this course we value the discipline, patience, and amount of time it takes to construct precisely crafted, carefully
measured and conceptually clear models, drawings and images. It is important for you to gain the understanding
and ability to execute the major conventions of representation in design as well as attain the ability to learn
through drawing. Design is an iterative process that privileges multiple trials, repeated takes, and incremental
development based on sustained practice. Investigations will inevitably build upon one another and each student
will produce an interrelated body of work that will be evaluated as a whole.

This course is closely linked to Design I. It is organized into 3 modules:

Module 1 — Introduction to Digital Modeling

This module covers the basics of using Rhinoceros 6.0, with a focus on solid objects modeling and includes output
in the form of digital drawings with possibilities for physical modeling. Students will learn how to model
architectural volumes defined by developable surfaces and ways in which digital models can be a part of an
expanded workflow from idea to realization.Module 2 — Advanced Drawing

This module introduces students to the principles of orthographic projection and representation in the digital
modeling environment as well as in the analogue realm, with a focus on the interaction between the two ways of
working. It will also introduce you to digital camera work and lighting. Rather than only focusing on the production
of presentation images, students are encouraged to use drawing as an iterative design tool.

Module 3 — Final Design Drawings

This module focuses on advanced uses of Rhinoceros 6.0 as a way to communicate design process and design
intentions of your final project. Because your work will be primarily digital, this module will focus on bringing
together everything that you have done over the course of the semester and presenting your final design project
from diagrams to orthographic projections to perspectives.

Most of your work will be done digitally and submitted for review through our UT Box. What isn’t done digitally —
such as drawings in your sketchbook - will be photographed or scanned and also uploaded to box. This will allow
all of you to view all of the work that is being produced.

Class time will take place online using Zoom through Canvas. You will be expected to be present at those meeting
during which we will discuss any new assignments, tutorials, answer questions, and talk about specific projects.
Class time is intended for the exchange of ideas and approaches. You will also be given time during class to work
and for us to review work individually as necessary.

Software
The course will require extensive use of the following software to be installed on your personal PC laptops by the
second day of class. YOU MUST HAVE A MOUSE WHEN WORKING ON YOUR COMPUTER.

Rhinoceros 6.0

You can purchase a full, single-user, Rhino 6 for Windows license available to students:
http://www.rhino3d.com/sales/north-america/United_States

A limited number of discounted copies of student licenses may also be available at the UTSOA IT office.

Temporary evaluation licenses are available for free download online (Saving and plug-ins stop working after 90
days unless you make a full license purchase):

http://www.rhino3d.com/download/rhino/6/latest

Copies of this software are available for Mac, but currently Mac laptops do not conform to UTSOA minimum laptop
requirements; as a result all instruction is based on PC/Windows versions of the software.

Adobe Creative Cloud

We will primarily use Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop in this course, though students are encouraged to have
access to the whole suite of Adobe software, such as InDesign, and Acrobat.

You can download free trial software and find out more about online subscription licensing for Adobe products
here:

http://www.adobe.com/downloads.html

READING

The recommended (not required) textbook and desk companion for this course and beyond in your visual studies
is:

Yee, Rendow. Architectural Drawing: A Visual Compendium of Types and Methods.

Frank, Ching Design Drawing

These books are available in the library and much of the information can be found online.EVALUATION CRITERIA

While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is
derived from broader and more subjective criteria.

Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to
deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.

Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:

Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.

e = The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of
inquiry

e = The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
models, etc.) in the development of the design

e Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic — Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is
asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?

Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in
companion courses.

e Astrong and clearly stated design objective

e Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan — including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements —
and sectional development

e Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through
creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and
environmental system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in
support of the design objective

e Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and
assembly

Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final
design presentation.

e Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation

Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and
reviews.

A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of
Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirementsGRADE DESCRIPTIONS

A/A-

B+/B/B-

Cc+/C

C-/D+/D/D-

ATTENDANCE

Excellent

Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.

Above Average

Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.

Average

Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.

Poor

Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.

Fail

Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.

Excused Incomplete

Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date.
Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is
enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.

Incomplete coursework must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester. ALL
GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.

Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full
letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused
with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing
work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.

If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused
absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students
must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not

acceptable.RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES

A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this
subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.

By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.

ACADEMIC INTEGRITY

Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the
Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic

integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:

http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/Huniversitycodeofconduct

HONOR CODE

"As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, | shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
academic integrity.”

UNIVERSITY CODE OF CONDUCT

"The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect towards peers and community."

MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES

Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:

e In-house CARE counselor (see below)
e For immediate support
o -Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5*" floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
Oo CMHC Crisis Line:
24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
e Free services at CMHC:
o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
o  MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.htmlSTUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-
4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each
course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.

http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/

BCAL

Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be
reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If
something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.