Health Economics: Eco F325K- Summer 2020
Unique Number: 79470

Instructor: Dr. Helen Schneider Class Time: MTWTHF
Class Location: Lectures Online
Office Hours: Mondays: 1:30-2:30
E-mail: h.schneider@eco.utexas.edu Wednesdays: 1:30-2:30
or by appointment
TA: Akiva Yonah Meiselman

yonah.meiselman@gmail.com
TA Zoom Office Hours: Tuesdays, 9-11

INTRODUCTION

Health care is an exciting and evolving field in which government policies play a vital role. The
course is designed for undergraduate students who seek an understanding of how to apply basic
microeconomic tools to the study of health and medical care issues. This course will examine the
special features of medical care as a commodity, the demand for health and medical care services,
the economic explanations for the behavior of medical care providers, the functioning of insurance
markets, federal health insurance programs, and regulation. Finally, this course will examine ideas
for health care reform. Empirical results, current issues, and policy applications will be discussed
throughout the course. JkoS A

Prerequisites: Intermediate Microeconomics (420K) is an essential prerequisite for this course.
If it’s been a while since you took intermediate microeconomics, the textbook provides a review in
Chapter 2. Chapter 3 reviews statistical tools for health economics.

COURSE MATERRIALS

Required Reading: The Economics of Health and Health Care, Folland, Goodman and Stano, 8"
Edition (Taylor & Francis, 2017)

Additional Reading: Additional required and optional readings from sources other than the
textbook will be posted on the course website (see below).

The course outline gives the chapters and articles that correspond to the lectures. For better
understanding of the course material the assigned reading must be finished before the class
recording.

Website: Course material will be on the university’s Canvas system. Lectures will be recorded
daily and posted on Lectures Online tab. All assignments will be posted on Canvas and discussed
in lecture recordings. This class will also use the Grades feature on Canvas so that students can
keep track of their scores on assignments and exams.

POLICY ON STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon receipt appropriate academic adjustments for

qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students—Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY POLICY

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.

Writing Flag: This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from
your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one
or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.

Writing Center: | strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211,
471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free,
individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-
in basis. Any undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any
writing project. The consultants there work with students from every department on campus, for
both academic and non-academic writing. Their services are not just for writing that has
"problems." Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing
project. This summer zoom consultations are available to all students.

EVALUATION AND GRADING

I. Writing Assignments. Note that the total for all writing assignments 1s 50% of your grade. The
course outline provides the relevant dates for all writing assignments. Each is due on the due date.
Lateness at any stage results in a loss of at least one letter grade on that assignment.

Research Paper. This course is a substantial writing component for undergraduates. Thus, a
significant paper is due at the end of the semester. For us to discuss how to do that research, you
will have to submit a first draft and final paper. You must choose a proposed or legislated health
care policy to write about. The paper must describe the policy and provide an economic analysis
that draws upon economic models discussed in class.

I would like you to start thinking early of a research topic. Feel free to talk to me about your topic,
your sources and approaches you can take in doing your research. Due dates along the way will
help guarantee progress.

There are several sources you could use to find a topic. One is simply to follow the policy debates
in the newspapers and magazines. Second is to look at the policies discussed in the class. A third
way is to browse through recent issues of economic policy journals, or the web pages of research
and policy institutions. I will be posting current articles on health economics topics on Canvas that
will guide you through the current health care issues.

The first draft should state the question you want to address, discuss the importance of your study
(i.e. why it is an important public policy issue) and it should include some literature review. It
should also develop a theoretical model. [lustrate your analysis with a graphical presentation ifappropriate. If your graphs are not incorporated into the text of your paper, please provide a clear
connection between graphs and text. You will upload your first draft on Canvas and comments
will be provided electronically. Each of you will then revise your first draft and submit final paper.

Short Paper. One assignment will count for 10% of your final grade. Short paper will be strictly
limited to 3 typed double-spaced pages in order to encourage succinct and incisive reasoning. Topic
will be announced in class.

II. Tests. There will be one midterm and a comprehensive final exam. If you have an emergency
that prevents you from taking an exam, I need to be notified by e-mail no later than the day of the
exam. There will be no make-up exams for the midterm. Should dire circumstances (e.g. illness)
prevent you from taking this test, its weight will be added to your final exam.

III. Problem Sets. Three problem sets will count towards your final grade. All assignments may
be obtained at the class web page. Collaboration among students in working out problem sets is
encouraged, but you must write up your own homework. Questions very similar to the problem
sets will appear on the exams. It behooves you to make sure that you understand and can present
the solutions to problems on your own in spite of working on the material with one another.
Turning in identical problem sets will result in a zero for both parties. Problem Sets will be
electronically uploaded on Canvas. Problem sets WILL NOT be accepted late. This is an absolute
policy. Please do not ask for extensions. Answer keys will be posted after the due date.

Grading Policy:
Approximate _ Percentage of

Requirement Paper Length Final Grade
Problem Sets 5
Midterm 20
Short Paper 2-3 pages 10
First Draft 4-5 pages 20
Final Paper 5-7 pages 15
Final Exam 30

100COURSE OUTLINE AND READING LIST

This is only a suggested outline and is subject to change, unlike the exam dates, which are fixed.
Any readings that are not from the textbook are posted on Canvas.

FGS=Folland, Goodman and Stano, 8" edition

Date | | Topic

6/4 TH | Introduction

Reading Assignment

FGS, Chapter 1

 

6/5 F The Production of Health
Demand for Health Capital

6/8 Demand for Health Capital

6/9 Government Policy Towards
Health Behavior
Special Topic:

Economics of Obesity

Special Topic:
Demand for Medical Care

e Newhouse, Joseph P. “Medical Care Costs:

How Much Welfare Loss?” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 6(3), 1992, 3-21.
FSG, Chapter 5

FGS, Chapter 7

Corman, et al. “Birth Outcome Production
Function in the United States.” Journal of
Human Resources 22, 1987 339-60

Sommers et al. “Changes in Mortality after
Massachusetts Health Care Reform.” Annals of
Internal Medicine 160(9), 585-593.

FSG, Chapter 23

Cutler, et al. “Why Have Americans Become
More Obese?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 17(3), 2004, 93-118.

Phelps, Chapter 4

 

Risk and Insurance

Elasticity
Problem Set I Posted

FGS, Chapter 8

Pauly, Mark. “The Economics of Moral
Hazard,” American Economics Review 58:3,
March 1968, 531-537.

FGS, Chapter 9

Manning et al. “Health Insurance and the
Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a
Randomized Experiment.” American
Economic Review 77:3, June 1987, 251-277.
Finkelstein et al. "The Oregon Health
Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the First
Year.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
127(3), 2012, 1057-1106.

 

Asymmetric Information and
Health Insurance
Short Paper Assignment Posted

 

6/16

Employer Provision of Health
Insurance and Its Implications

The Uninsured

W

TH

F The Economics of Moral Hazard
Measuring Health Care Demand

M

 

FGS, Chapter 10

Graves and Gruber. “How Did Health Care
Reform in Massachusetts Impact Insurance
Premiums?” American Economics Review
102(3), 2012.

FGS, Chapter 11

Abraham and Royalty. “How Has the
Affordable Care Act Affected Work and
Wages?” LDI Issue Briefs 21(3), 2017.
Kuttner, R. “The American Health Care
System-Health Insurance Coverage.” NEJM,
344(14), April 5 2001.Short Paper Discussion
Managed Care
Problem Set 1 due

FGS, Chapter 12

 

Health Care Reform in the US

 

6/19 F

Supply of Medical Care:
Hospitals

Short Paper due

Paper Discussion!

6/22 | M_| Review

6/23 -6/23_{ 7 Midterm

6/24 Supply of Medical Care:
Physicians

FSG, Chapter 22

Chandra, et al. “The Importance of the
Individual Mandate-Evidence from
Massachusetts.” NEJM January 12, 2011.
FSG, Chapter 13

Reinhardt, Uwe. “The Economics of For-Profit
and Not-For-Profit Hospitals.” Health Affairs,
19:6, 178-185.

FGS, Chapter 15

FSG, Chapter 16

 

6/25 TH | Health Care Labor Markets and
Professional Training

6/26 Special Topic:
Technology in Medicine
First Draft Due
Problem Set 2 posted

29M The Pharmaceutical Industry:

Drug Pricing and Profits

6/30 T Special Topic: Direct to
Consumer Advertising

7/1 W_ | Equity, Efficiency, and Need
Government Regulation &
Government Failure
Problem Set 2 due

Cutler, David M and Mark McClellan. “Is

Technological Change in Medicine Worth It?”
Health Affairs, 20(5), 2001, 11-29.
Hamilton and McManus. “The effect of
Insurance Mandates on Choices and Outcomes
in Infertility Treatments Markets.” Health
Economics, Sep 9, 2011.

FSG, Chapter 17

Atherly and Rubin. The Cost-Effectiveness of
DTCA for Prescription Drugs. Medical Care
Research and Review, 66(6), 2009, 639-657.
FSG, Chapter 18

FSG, Chapter 19

FSG, Chapter 20

 

7/2 TH | Social Insurance: Medicaid and
Medicare

7/3 F Comparative Health Care
Systems
Problem Set 3 posted
Comparative Health Care
Systems

/T | Special topics

FSG, Chapter 21

Lu, Jui-Fen Rachel and William C. Hsiao.
“Does Universal Health Insurance Make Health
Care Unaffordable? Lessons From Taiwan.”
Health Affairs, 22(3), 2003, pp. 77-88.

 

aT : Catch-up and Review
Problem Set 3 due
Review
Final Paper Due

7/10 |F | Final Exam, take home (9-5)