EDC F 382S — Methods of Teaching English as a Second Language Unique
# 73765

Summer 2020

Dates/Times M-F 8:30-11:30 June 4 — 22, 2020

Instructor Dr. Haydée Marie Rodriguez Office of Bilingual Education, SZB 440D
Phone: 382-9343 E-mail: taina@mail.utexas.edu
Off. Hours: M-F 12:00-1:00 by appointment

 

Required Levine, L. & McCloskey, M. L. (2013). Teaching English Language and
Texts Content in Mainstream Classes/One Class Many Paths (Second Edition). New
York, N.Y.:
Pearson.

Herrell, A. & Jordan, M. (2020). 50 Strategies for Teaching English Language
Learners (Sixth Edition). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education,
Inc.

Course

Description This course will enrich the participants’ practice and expand their knowledge by
making connections between theory and methodology for teaching English
Language Learners (ELLs) in public school classrooms. The course will
emphasize the needs of ELLs in academic instruction, with a focus on language
and literacy integration throughout the curriculum, content ESL, and reading and
writing strategies for English language learners. The course will provide in-depth
exploration of how to make connections from research to effective and successful
classroom practice. The highly interactive and experiential nature of the course
will provide opportunities to expand instructional strategies and content
integration skills. Furthermore, purposeful reflection is required to better equip
participants with tools for relevant instruction of English language learners that
demonstrates exemplary practice.

Objectives —_ Participants will gain an understanding of the theory and practice of English as a
Second Language instruction by:

o Making first and second language acquisition connections

o Exploring a number of classroom practices for English language
learner (ELL) instruction

o Examining oral language development and literacy development in
ELLs

o Exploring how to infuse culturally relevant instruction across the
curriculum

o Planning content reading and writing strategies for ELLso Planning for on-going authentic assessment

Becoming familiar with SBEC standards for ESL

o Becoming familiar with the national, state (ELPS), and local ESL
standards

O

Attendance

PDS Policy: The recommended PDS policy for attendance is as follows: Attendance is

mandatory and arriving on time and staying the full length of the class is required.
¢ There are no unexcused absences.
¢ You are allowed one excused absence for the semester (see below).
¢ Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor
¢ Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of *% letter grade in your final
grade.
¢ More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing
grade for the class.
[Insert your policy about students contacting you, providing letters from doctors,
make up work, etc.]
¢ A pattern of tardiness or early departures will affect your grade.
¢ Excessive tardies or early departures (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused
absence.
Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of religious
holidays that fall on our scheduled class day; please give me advance notice of these
absences (see below for more detailed info).

Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious
holidays or extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to
observance of a religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You
will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be responsible for any work
you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.

If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your classmates to get a run-down
and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you
were gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting
to discuss. Email specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of
our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.

Laptop Laptops must only be used in appropriate ways and at appropriate times.
Etiquette Please refrain from surfing the net, IM-ing, checking e-mail, shopping,
doing research, downloading pictures or videos, or completing assignments for
other classes at times when you need to be participating in class and taking
responsibility for your learning and professional development.

Students with
special needs At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special
accommodations should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared byAcademic
Honesty

Course
Evaluations

Care
Counseling

the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) Office. To ensure that the most
appropriate accommodation can be provided, students should contact the SSD
Office at 471-5259 or 471-4641 TTY.

Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. All assignments should be the
original work of the student.

The course will be evaluated by using the short version of the Course
Instructor Survey from the UT office of Measurement and Evaluations

CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health

Center. It is common to need support when dealing with feelings and problems
that seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are available to help with a
variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your
CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her
office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an
appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you
leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in
hours are also available on Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 — 2 PM. You will check-
in at the College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let
Danie know you’re waiting. All services are confidential. None of your
information will be shared without your written consent. Come by and see us, we
are here to listen.

Student Rights and Responsibilities

You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical
wellness.

You have a right to respect.

You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.

You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.

You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.

You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
improve your learning environment.

You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No
student shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.

With these rights come responsibilities:

You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
communicating with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of
control or overwhelming.

You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always
respectful of others.e Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy
that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.

e You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up
when someone is excluded.

e You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding
each other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.

Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the
student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and
Sexuality Center. http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-
resources/). I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from
what appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze,
etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate
updates to my records.

University Resources for Students

Services for Students with Disabilities

This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you
have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed
to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you
discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of
these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice)
or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information,
visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.

Counseling and Mental Health
Counselors in Academic Residence Program (CARE)
CARE is the university's Counseling and Mental Health Center program that was created in
collaboration with the Office of the Provost. CARE’s primary mission is to provide access
to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
The College of Education CARE counselor, Danie White, has regular office hours 1-2p.m.
T/F in SZB 212E, 512.232.6862 or dlwhite@austin.utexas.edu.

Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising,
avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is
learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.

If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings
like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek
support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html

The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger
Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are
welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in
15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).

Other Resources
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/

BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have
the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the
power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to
build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.

Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your
call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right — it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns.

The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/

Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.

e Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used
when entering the building.

e Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in
writing during the first week of class.e Inthe event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the
following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.

e Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency

Title [X Reporting

Title [X is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct
occurs in our community, the university can:

1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.

2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced

harm or have become involved in a Title [IX investigation.

3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.

Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title [IX
to the Title [IX Coordinator. Iam a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX
related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking
with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title [IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title [X Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.

Cross-Cutting Themes and Creed

The teacher preparation program at The University of Texas at Austin is committed to creating a
society that is more just, caring, inclusive, and democratic through transformation of educational
practices. Too often, universities and schools have engaged in racist and other oppressive
practices that replicate and perpetuate the status quo in our society, rather than working against
inequities. We believe there is a more powerful path. Following The University of Texas motto,
“What starts here changes the world,” we teach to change the world.

Schools, districts and universities are located within oppressive social, economic and political
systems. Teachers must recognize the oppressive conditions that many families and communities
experience related to their identities—racial, ethnic, linguistic, social class, religious, gender,
sexual orientation, immigrant status, abilities, and other positions in society. At the same time,
teachers must recognize the cultural and linguistic wealth that exists in these communities, along
with their histories of resilience and resistance in the pursuit of justice. Understanding these
critical perspectives on society, culture and schooling is critical for teachers’ development and
enactment of curricular and pedagogical knowledge across school subjects, such as reading,
language arts, social studies, science and mathematics.We practice vision, courage, and determination because these stances and practices require a
lifelong commitment and ongoing, critical inquiries in our personal and professional lives. As
teachers, we serve our students well by cultivating in them these same commitments and
capacities.

As educators we are committed to educational change that allows us to enact our vision for
teacher preparation. Identities, Values, and Practices serve as our guide, as we are always in
process. While listed separately the themes are deeply connected, so to work on one is to work
on many.

Theme Statement Creed Statement

Who are We are continuously examining how our I am self-aware. I recognize who
we? identities! sometimes afford us privileges I am and who I am becoming in
Identities | and other times, result in oppression. We terms of my multiple identities.

recognize that our personal identities are

deeply connected to our professional

identities, and contribute to how we work

with our students, communities and

colleagues.

We research and inquire to better IT am a learner. | will grow my
understand our students, curriculum and teaching into more powerful

teaching across school subjects’, and our practices and share them with
own dispositions and practices as teachers. | others.

We continue to grow our professional

identities to support our work of building

inclusive and anti-oppressive classrooms,

schools, and local and global communities.

What do We value educational justice, inclusiveness | I value courage and

we value? | and continuous learning, and we are determination. I will view all

Values committed to being teachers who take on the | challenges that confront me as
challenges and risks associated with opportunities to grow and change.
teaching in service of these values.We value the multiple cultures, languages, | I value learners’ differences as

knowledges, and experiences of our students | strengths. I will respect and

and the communities we work alongside, engage with differences and will

and we see these as essential to a healthy craft my teaching to build upon

and productive society. and sustain the abilities, cultures
and languages my students bring
to school.

We value shared responsibility over I value shared responsibility. I
individual accountability within educational | will hold myself responsible for
systems. As teachers, we are committed all my teaching and will share in
to working collaboratively with our this responsibility with others to
students, teacher colleagues, families, and build a community that
communities in the pursuit of our collective | contributes to the growth and
growth and well-being. well-being of students.

What do We continuously reflect on how our diverse | I practice reflection on action. I

we perspectives and identities! matter when will build humanizing practices
practice? working with others, including students, and trusting relationships through
Practice families and colleagues. This continual my ongoing critical reflection.

reflection allows us to build trusting

relationships and engage in humanizing

practices.

We recognize students’ identities! and I practice imaginative change. I
strengths and honor the resources they will imagine the possibilities of a
bring. We question the materials, student-centered curriculum that
curriculum, and instructional methods that is transformative for students and
are in place. We continually adapt and our collective communities.
redesign our teaching practices in response

to changing opportunities and demands in

our transnational society. We dream of

possibilities for students’ educational

futures.

 

We will be the teachers who, working with families, communities and our colleagues, teach to
change the world.

‘racial, ethnic, linguistic, religious, gender, sexual orientation, social class, immigrant status,
abilities, and other positions in society.

*reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics anchored in critical perspectives
on society, culture and schoolingCourse The course will be evaluated by using the Course Instructor Survey
Evaluations from the UT office of Measurement & Evaluation on the last day of class.

Grades Grades will be based on accumulation of points and according to the following
scale based on possible points for course assignments, attendance, and in-class
participation.

A- (450-467) A (467-500)

B- (400-417) B(418-435) B+ (436-449)
C- (350-367) C(368-385) C+ (386-399)
D (300-349)

F (0-299)

Course Requirements

In order for you to explore how theoretical frameworks for the instruction of English language
learners and research-based methodology shape your practice, several assignments focus on
exploring strategies used in ESL contexts for the instruction of ELLs. The required documents
you will prepare should demonstrate acquisition of knowledge and reflection upon class topics.
Please note that 10 points will be deducted for each late day in turning in work. Course
requirements are as follow:

I. Class Participation

The highly interactive nature of the in-class activities will require your active participation on a
daily basis. You must be in attendance and you must have read the assigned readings to
contribute effectively in class. Please refer to the classroom participation rubric below: (100

pts.)

Class Participation Rubric
Attendance (5 points daily x 12 days= 60 points): Daily attendance and punctuality will
be expected and recorded on class sign-in sheets. Two absences will automatically drop
your grade one letter grade. It is your responsibility to review the material from the
missed class and find out from your peers or Canvas about announcements or changes to
the syllabus. The instructor will not be able to catch you up with missed work.
Participation (40 pts.): Your participation grade will be evaluated at the end of the
course and will be based on the quality of your contributions in whole class discussions
and group activities. Given the subjectivity of this requirement, make your contributions
memorable, relevant, well informed, and thoughtful.

Class Participation Rubric

| Ogi c-a(e)a) 10 points 8 points 6 points 0 points
Integration of class often cites from occasionally cites from | rarely able to cite from unable to cite from readings;

readings into readings; uses readings; sometimes readings; rarely uses readings | cannot use readings to
participation readings to support uses readings to to support points; rarely support points; cannot
points; often support points; articulates critical points from | articulate critical points fromInteraction/participation
in classroom discussions

Interaction/participation
in classroom and group
learning activities

Demonstration of
professional aptitude
professional attitude

articulates critical
points from readings
relevant to topic at
hand

always a willing
participant, responds
frequently to
questions; routinely
volunteers point of
view

always a willing
participant; always
acts appropriately;
responds frequently
to questions;
routinely volunteers
point of view; always
makes meaningful
contributions to the

group

always well prepared
for class; always
arrives on time;
always listens
attentively; always
communicates well
with instructors and
team members

occasionally
articulates critical
points from readings
relevant to topic at
hand

often a willing
participant, responds
occasionally to
questions;
occasionally
volunteers point of
view

often a willing
participant; acts
appropriately;
responds occasionally
to questions;
occasionally
volunteers point of
view, occasionally
makes meaningful
contributions to the
group

rarely unprepared;
rarely arrives late;
rarely distracted
during class; listens
attentively most of the
time, usually
communicates well
with instructors and
team members

II. Language Development Plan

readings relevant to topic at
hand

rarely a willing participant,
rarely able to respond to
questions; rarely volunteers
point of view

rarely a willing participant,
occasionally acts
inappropriately; rarely able to
respond to direct questions;
rarely volunteers point of
view, rarely makes
meaningful contributions to
the group

often unprepared;
occasionally arrives late;
occasionally distracted or
sleeps during class;
occasionally uses laptop or
other electronic devices
inappropriately during class;
often fails to communicate
with instructors or team
members

readings relevant to topic at
hand

never a willing participant,
never able to respond to
questions; never volunteers
point of view

never a willing participant,
often acts inappropriately
during role plays; etc., never
able to respond to direct
questions; never volunteers
point of view, never makes
meaningful contributions to
the group

rarely prepared; often
arrives late; often distracted
or sleeping during class;
often uses laptop or other
electronic devices
inappropriately during class;
almost never communicates
effectively with instructors
or team members

 

You will develop an English Language Development Plan for your classroom. The plan must
make reference to specific relevant factors when planning for the instruction of English
Language Learners in your content area. Please use these guidelines as you begin to develop
your thoughts for your classroom language plan. Note that these are guidelines intended to
facilitate your thought process and you should use what is relevant to your unique situation.
Language Development Plan Guidelines
¢ What type of education program design does your campus/district ascribe to? How does it
determine/shape what you do in the classroom?
¢ How will you plan for a positive language learning environment?
--Think of strategies, materials and activities.
--Consider the routines and procedures in your classroom.
--Consider the physical organization of your classroom.
¢ How will you handle errors?
--Will you have a classroom routine/procedure/policy to address errors?
¢ How will you integrate culture in your classroom?
--Think of strategies, activities, materials

10¢ How will you become a cultural mediator?

--How will you connect to the homes/families of your students?

--How can your campus support the education of ELLs?

--How can the community support the education of ELLs?
¢ How will you plan for classroom management that builds community?

--Social integration

--Grouping

--Match Learning Styles
¢ What are your “teacher tools” to promote oral language development in your classroom? How
will you use these tools to scaffold your ELL students?
¢ How will you assess oral language to determine the oral language development stages of your
ELLs and plan instruction accordingly for the demands of the content areas?
¢ How will you use reading and writing to develop language and literacy?

--What approaches will you use?

--What strategies will you use (consider the language and literacy stages of

your ELLs)?

--Think about how you will use the physical space in the classroom.
¢ How will you use what you know about your ELLs in planning, reading and writing activities?
¢ How will you assess the progress of your ELLs?

--What classroom performance-based tools will you use?

--How often will you assess and what?

--How will you use assessments to inform your planning?

Please refer to the evaluation rubric below: (100 pts.)

*The Language Development Plan should be presented as a paper with sections/subtitles for the
topic discussed. A detailed rubric is provided for you in the Appendix. The following is the
expected structure:

Plan components: Comments: Points:

 

1. Description of the
classroom and students. (5)
fromthe) |
w/ rationale for ELLs. (5)
3. Description of how
language and content are
integrated in instructional
activities with rationale for
ELLs. (20)
4. Culture and funds of
knowledge of the ELLs
addressed in the social and

instructional aspects of the
plan. (20)

5. Description of oral
language development

 

 

11activities w/rationale for
ELLs. (30)

 

6. Assessments planned for
ELLs. (20)

 

 

Ill. Modified Lessons

You will modify two lessons (50 points each) you have planned in previous semesters to make it
relevant for ELLs in your classroom. You can use any lesson plan format as long as you include
the basic elements of a lesson (please refer to rubric below). Your lessons will be shared with a
peer in class to present you with an opportunity for evaluation/reflection.
Lessons’ Rubric
Content Comments
Focus — Establishes importance of
lesson and makes connections to prior
knowledge. Secures students’
attention. (5 pts.)
Learning Objectives —
TEKS/ELPS and expectations for
demonstration of learning (2 pts.)
Vocabulary- Identifies vocabulary
and how it will be addressed (5
Instructional Strategies — Makes
use of a variety of instructional
strategies (for language/literacy and
content development
Guided Practice — Provides
explanations, demonstrations, and
models during the lesson. Provides
opportunities for students to practice
while providing feedback and support.

 

 

Independent Practice — Provides
opportunities for individual practice of
skills. (5 pts.)

Assessment — Uses a variety of
alternative assessments with the learner
at the center (5

 

Closure - Summarizes/ Reviews
important concepts and ideas. Repeats
learning objectives and makes
connections to future learning.

 

 

 

12IV. Modeling a Strategy

Based on the required text, Herrell, A. & Jordan, M. (2012). 50 Strategies for Teaching English
Language Learners (Fourth Edition). Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Education, Inc.,
you will model the assigned strategy in class by conducting a brief activity. The activity used to
model the strategy is planned and implemented in pairs. You should also highlight why the
particular strategy is helpful to ELLs. The modeling of a strategy in class should not take longer
than 10 minutes. (100 pts.)

Modeling a Strategy Rubric

Category Excellent (10) Good (8) Fair (6) Poor (4) Points
(50)

Organization Well Mostly Somewhat Unstructured/No
structured/Used structured structured logical
time wisely order/Goes over
time limit
Comprehensibility | Clear and easy to Mostly Somewhat Unclear and
follow clear/Some clear confusing.
confusion in Listener unable
the to follow
presentation
Presentation Shows depth of Limited Shows some Shows surface
thought development | understanding | knowledge only
of ideas of strategy
Use and Variety Useful and Mostly Somewhat Inadequate and
of Materials attractive/engaging | useful inadequate not engaging
Pair work Both individuals Both Individual Pair did not
contributed individuals contributions seem as a
equally/Both contributed | did not flow team/somewhat
offered relevant somewhat smoothly/some | disconnected
comments equall confusion

 

 

 

 

 

 

VI. Photo essay

Using your smart phone, digital camera, iPad, etc. you will develop a photo essay based on a
neighborhood walk of the school community of a school you have been placed at in the past two
semesters and you will present it in class. You should have a student in mind that you can make
connections to in your presentation. You should have at least 10 pictures and offer a reflection
and comments while you display your essay. You will have a maximum of 10 minutes for your
presentation (100 points). The following is the rubric:

Excellent (20) | Good (18) _| Fair (16) | Poor (12) | Points

Presentation/How well is
the story told?

 

 

 

Appeal/Are the pictures
engaging?
Information/Does it
convey information about
the community?

13Creativity/Organized in a
way that fosters thoughts

about community
issues/uniqueness
Impact/Makes connections
to possible funds of
knowledge of students who
reside in the community

 

 

 

* TENTATIVE CALENDAR OF READINGS AND ACTIVITIES

Date Topics/Readings/Due Dates

June 4 | Welcome/Introductions/Course Overview
ESL Supplemental/Certification/State & National Standards
Becoming Familiar with the ELPS / Levine & McCloskey- Chapter 1/ELPS
Resource Supplement
Second Language Acquisition in the Classroom
Levine & McCloskey- Chapter 2
Who are your English Language Learners? Culture/Funds of Knowledge-
Home and Community- Levine & McCloskey-Chapter 3/Garcia
/Strategy Presentation-Vocabulary Role Play

June 9 | Content Vocabulary Development in ESL/Levine/McCloskey-Chapter 7/
Strategy Presentation-Leveled Questions

June 10 | Language Development Plan Workshop/ Classroom Management and ESL
Levine & McCloskey- Chapter 4 /Strategy Presentation-Story
Reenactment/Lesson 1 Due

June 11 | Literacy Development and ELLs/ Levine/McCloskey- Chapter 8 & 9/
Strategy Presentation-Culture Studies

June 12 | Content Area Instruction/ Chamot- Chapter 11(Social Studies) Chamot-
Chapter 8 (Language Arts)-Strategy Presentation-Attribute Charting

June 15 | Content-Language Integrated Lessons/ Levine/McCloskey- Chapter 10-
Strategy Presentation-GIST: Exploring Tough Text

June 16 | Neighborhood Walk (Outside Lies Magic on Canvas)Lesson 2 Due

Assessment in the ESL Integrated Classroom/ Chapter 11/ Levine/McCloskey/

 

 

 

 

 

 

Chapter 6-Chamot-Strategy Presentation-Preview/Review
June 18 | Thematic Instruction/ Chapter 12 - Levine/McCloskey

 

Photo Essay Presentations

June 22 | ESL Supplemental # 154 Mock Test/Wrap-up/Course Evaluation/Language
Development Plan Due

 

*Please note that this is a tentative calendar. Changes to the calendar are possible due to the
pace at which material is discussed satisfactorily in class. It is the participant’s responsibility to
keep up with readings and due dates of assignments.

**Indicates a reading found on our Canvas site under the Files section.

14Appendix A

 

Plan components and
Points Value:

1. Description of the
classroom and students.

(5)

CONTENT YOU MUST HAVE

You must describe the language

practices in your classroom (what

languages do students speak or
can speak).

Who are the students in your
classroom- their backgrounds,
gender, race and academic level.

You must include a description of

your school population.

You must describe the language
model being used in the
classroom (sheltered instruction,
pull-out, etc.).

Minimum
Page #

No page
limitation but
at least 1 page,
double spaced

 

2. Organizational
diagram w/ rationale for
ELLs. (5)

3. Description of how
language and content are
integrated in instructional
activities with rationale
for ELLs. (20)

You must have a visual diagram.
Rationale must explain
specifically how the room is set
up for English Language
Learners.

Provide a description of 3
classroom activities (specific to
your content area) and how the
activity addresses both content

and language development. Each

activity should include sentence
stems for language development.

1 page for
diagram

At least 1 page
for rationale,
double spaced
No page
limitation, but
three activities
must be
explained in
detail.

 

4. Culture and funds of
knowledge of the ELLs
addressed in the social
and instructional aspects
of the plan. (20)

5. Description of oral
language development
and content area
strategies w/rationale for
ELLs. (30)

What are you doing or going to
do in the classroom to tap into
your students Funds of
Knowledge.

Include strategies, activities and
specific examples.

Draw on students in your
classroom.

Provide specific activities. You
can take these activities from the
50 strategies book, your

Levine/McCloskey text, and your

classroom experiences.

Every activity must include WHY

this is good for ELLs.

At least 2
pages

No page limit
but must
describe 10
activities

 

6. Assessments planned
for ELLs. (20)

 

Please include at least 3
descriptions of assessments and
how you would use them in your
classroom.

Include an explanation as to why
these assessments are helpful to
accurately assess ELLs.

At least 2
pages double
spaced

 

15