ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
 & McCOMBS SCHOOL OF BUSINESS

Department of Accounting
ACC 311 - Fundamentals of Financial Accounting

Syllabus

Instructor: Minjae Kim, CPA
E-mail: minjae.kim @mccombs.utexas.edu
Office: Zoom (details to follow)
Office Hours: Monday-Thursday: 1-2pm

or by appointment
Unique #: 71015
Class time: Monday-Thursday: 2-4pm
Class location: Zoom (details to follow)

Why should you take this class?

The goal of this class is to help you learn and understand accounting, from the very basics to the
creation and use of financial statements. Accounting is the language of business: a solid knowledge
of it will ensure your understanding of the ways that businesses communicate economic
transactions. Therefore, this class is important for any student who aspires to a career in
business, including those not pursuing specific accounting-related careers.

COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, you should have a strong understanding of:
A. The process of financial statement preparation
B. The fundamentals of interpreting companies’ financial statements
C. How accounting information is used in decision-making processes within an organization
and by present and potential investors

PREREQUISITE

The prerequisite for this course is twenty-four semester hours of (prior) college credit. I cannot
waive this requirement. If you do not satisfy this prerequisite, you should drop ACC 311, or the
Office of the Dean of Undergraduate Programs will drop you from the course.

Syllabus 1ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

REQUIRED MATERIALS

> Textbook: Financial Accounting, 10th Edition, by Libby, Libby, and Hodge, (ISBN:
9781260936087, McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2020). Note: Connect access is not required.

e If you are interested in purchasing/renting the ebook, you should be able to do so here:
https://www.mheducation.com/highered/product/financial-accounting-libby-
libby/M9781259964947 html#textbookCollapse

> Accounting Cycle Supplement: Solid Footing: Building an Accounting Foundation, 12th
edition, by Dan Wiegand, (Micro Solve, Inc., 2019) (SBN: 978-0-9973812-8-3). This is a
textbook with accompanying software and files. You can purchase this book online by following
these steps:

1. Use the following browser: (Windows: Microsoft Edge or Internet Explorer; Mac: Safari)

2. Goto solidfootingaccounting.com and use the “BUY NOW?” button to pay for the software.

3. After payment, you will receive an email with an 8-digit code — follow the directions on
the accompanying email to download the material.

> A basic financial calculator: A financial calculator is one that has dedicated keys for
convenience in working problems involving the time-value of money. The keys typically are
labeled N (number of periods), I/Yr (required interest rate per period), PV (present value), PMT
(payment per period), and FV (single future payment amount). If you already have such a
calculator, you do not need to buy a new one. However, if you do not already have such a
calculator, you should buy an HP 10bII+. This calculator is recommended by both the accounting
and finance faculty of the McCombs School of Business.

Supplemental Material available on Canvas
> Lecture slides

> Homework solutions
> Sample ACC 311 exams

COURSE POLICIES

As college students who willingly pay a considerable amount of tuition to attend classes, you
should naturally have incentives to learn and excel in this class. The most important rule in this
classroom is that you should never distract your fellow classmates or disrupt their opportunity to
learn in this class.

Accounting 311 is a fast paced class where each chapter builds on the chapter before. Attendance
and participation in this class are mandatory if a student wishes to fully understand the topic. “Cold
calls” on any reading or assignment are to be expected. If you arrive late, please quietly join the
Zoom meeting. In addition, if you need to leave early, please notify me in advance.

COURSE FORMAT

The format of the course is organized around the following model:

(1) The students read the new material before coming to class to better understand the class
discussion.
(2) The instructor teaches the new material with class participation.

Syllabus 2ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

(3) The students practice by completing the related assignment(s).
(4) The instructor and students review the solution to the assignment(s) in class, providing
feedback on what was taught and further clarifying the material.

Following the first day of class, please ensure that: 1) you can access the class site on Canvas,
and 2) the email account you use is correctly recorded in the UT-Austin Registrar system. In case
you cannot access the class site on Canvas, let me know so I can provide you access.

Given the fast-paced nature of the course, you should check your email and Canvas account at
least once a day. Any outside-of-class announcements that I make (e.g. corrections or clarifications
of items discussed in class, syllabus changes, etc.) will be sent to you via email. I will try to
post/email any important announcements or new material by 5pm every day.

CLASS ON ZOOM

Classes will be hosted on Zoom at our regular meeting time, Monday — Thursday from 2 to 4 pm.
The expectation is that you attend every class, as the summer semester will be fast paced and it
will be in your best interest to keep up with the materials presented in class. Although I will not
keep attendance, attending the live Zoom class sessions should be considered mandatory, as it
will give you opportunities to ask questions and interact with fellow students, and as you would
otherwise miss out on valuable materials covered in class.

I will also record each lecture but keep it private, to be accessible to you only when you have a
valid excuse for missing class (1.e., conflicts with other UT classes or UT exams, medical or
other documented emergencies and special needs). I do this for two reasons: 1) if the recordings
were made readily available, the incentives for attending class will be lowered, and students may
be more likely to not keep up with the course schedule; 2) however, I see the importance of
being lenient and having a safety net for your benefit as this is a difficult time for many of us. If
you miss a class with a valid excuse, please email me if you want access to the class recording. If
you are provided with a recording, please note that class recordings are reserved only for
students in this class for educational purposes. The recordings should not be shared outside the
class in any form or with anyone else within the class who has not received permission.
Violation of this restriction could lead to Student Misconduct proceedings.

The University has taken some security measures for classes using Zoom. Specifically, you will
only be able to join the class if you are signed into Zoom using your UT Zoom account, and you
must also download and register the Zoom app onto your devices. If you have had experience
taking Zoom classes in the previous spring semester, then you likely are already familiar with
this policy and how to follow it. If you are not familiar with this policy, please follow the

instructions provided at https://zoom.its.utexas.edu/protecting-classes-zoom prior to the first
class session and email me if you have any questions.

In class, I expect everyone to have the same level of professionalism that we would in a normal

classroom. Additional details on our Zoom class policies will be provided prior to and discussed
during the first class session.

Syllabus 3ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

COURSE ASSESSMENT

Semester grades will be determined using the following factors and relative weights:

 

Assignment Weight
25%
Exam 2 25%
Cumulative Final Exam 30%
In-Class Quizzes (Best 5 out of 6) | 15%

Solid Footing Homework (3) 5%

Total 100%

 

 

 

 

 

Grades will be such that the class average will be approximately 3.0 — 3.2 (where 3.0 = B and
3.333 = B+). No letter grades will be associated with scores on exams or quizzes during the
semester. At the end of the semester, I will calculate composite scores and assign grades in
accordance with the above guidelines. I may curve the final grades if necessary, based on the class
average and the academic standards for the course. Incompletes will be given only in the RAREST

of circumstances and only in accordance with university policy. There will be no opportunity to
raise your course grade by doing “extra credit” work during or after the end of the semester—that
would violate University policy.

EXAMINATIONS

There will be three exams in this course, and the tentative dates for the exams are listed on the
attached Class Schedule. The two midterms will take place on Canvas during our scheduled class
time on examination days. The final exam will also take place on Canvas, and the time for the final
exam will be provided at a later date. Further details on test logistics will be provided prior to the
exams. Exams will be open book and open note but must be individually completed (i.e., you may
not contact anyone else during the examination period, nor discuss exam content with other
students who have not finished the exam). I reserve the right to use Zoom or a 3rd party monitoring
system during the exam. The questions will be designed to test your ability to apply the accounting
rules and concepts that we discuss in class. The two midterms (Exam 1 and 2) are not cumulative;
however, certain fundamental aspects of accounting that you learn for Exam | may be needed for
Exam 2, although they will not be explicitly tested. The final examination will be cumulative.

I understand that there are legitimate reasons (e.g., illness) for a student to be unable to attend an
exam. Only students with conflicts with other UT classes or UT exams, medical or other
documented emergencies and special needs will be given exams at times other than the uniform
exams. Thus, if you have a job, job interview, or other extra-curricular activity at the time of the
exam, this is notice that you are responsible to be excused, miss, or work around those other
activities.

If you have an excused absence from a midterm exam, you should inform me before the originally
scheduled exam and a make-up exam will be scheduled for within two days of the original
scheduled exam. The reason for the two-day window is so no student will have an advantage over
other students in terms of having much more time to study. The make-up policy is also applicable

Syllabus 4ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

to the final exam. In the event that you have an excused absence from a mid-term exam and I
cannot give you a make-up exam in the required time, you will receive extra weight on your final
exam (“lowest midterm” weight) to compensate for the missed examination.

HOMEWORK

To supplement the assigned readings, there are two types of homework in the course, Solid Footing
homework and homework from the textbook.

> Solid Footing homework:

During the first two weeks of the course, you will be learning about the accounting cycle, the
process with which companies capture transaction data, record them, summarize them, and
transform them into financial statements that comply with Generally Accepted Accounting
Principles (GAAP). It is essential that you develop a solid understanding and ability to do
accounting cycle tasks because these accomplishments early in the course are the foundation for
learning the remaining course content. Accordingly, the department faculty adopted Solid Footing,
a semi-interactive tool for learning the accounting cycle. To be sure that everyone keeps up with
the lessons during this phase of the course, Solid Footing homework assignments must be turned
in on Canvas and will be graded. Working with fellow students on this homework is fine, although
I strongly encourage you to work through the problems on your own first. Ultimately, you will be
tested on this material, so use the homework as an opportunity to find out what you know and ask
questions about what you do not know. See the attached Class Schedule for the assignments and
dates on which they must be uploaded to Canvas before the start of class. If you need help,
please come see me in office hours or by appointment before the due date. I will ask you to briefly
describe what you have attempted and what the issue is and we will work together from there.

> Textbook homework:

Prior to each class, I will provide a selected list of textbook exercises and problems for each chapter.
These questions will be picked to best reflect what I believe to be the most important concepts and
materials covered in each class. Although your solutions to these problems will neither be turned
in nor graded, I recommend that you do them, as they will help you both digest the material and
prepare for the exams. Further, solutions to these questions will be made available on Canvas so
that you can check whether you got the correct answer. As with the Solid Footing homework,
please let me know if you need any help.

QUIZZES

There will be 6 in-class quizzes beginning after the first exam. Quizzes will be completed at the
beginning of class via Canvas. Tentative quiz dates are listed on the attached Class Schedule. The
quizzes will be similar to homework problems and examples covered in class. There will be no
make-up quizzes; however, I will drop your lowest quiz score. As with exams, quizzes will be
open book and open note but must be individually completed (1.e., you may not contact anyone
else during the quiz period). I reserve the right to use Zoom or a 3rd party monitoring system
during the quizzes. Further details on quiz logistics will be provided prior to the quizzes. You will

not be able to take the quiz at the end of (or during) class after the quiz period has ended.

Syllabus 5ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

The main reason for the quizzes is to help you keep up with the readings and also to give me a
sense of whether you understand the concepts presented in class or if I should go over certain
concepts again. Once all quizzes have been submitted to Canvas, I will go over the solutions. This
is why I require that you attend class live and why no one will be allowed to take the quiz at a later
point.

GRADE DISPUTE

For all graded assignments except the final, I will entertain requests for re-grades. To request a re-
grade, you must submit a written request to me over email within a week from the date the
grade is posted on Canvas or the graded item is redistributed back to the class (whichever is earlier).
The request must be accompanied by the graded original and must state the area of dispute, your
recommendation for change in grade, and an explanation or justification for your recommendation.

Note that with a request for re-grade, I will re-grade the entire assignment. This means that over
the course of re-grading your assignment, I may encounter accidentally overlooked issues that
result in a deduction of points if corrected. To maximize the accuracy of the re-grade, I will make
all corrections required to arrive at an accurate grade for the assignment. This means that after a
re-grade, your grade on that assignment may increase, remain the same, or decrease. All regrades
are final.

OFFICE HOURS

I encourage each of you to take advantage of my regularly scheduled office hours to discuss
problems and seek assistance when needed throughout the semester. The office hours are
scheduled for an hour prior to each class so that you can ask questions about the prior or upcoming
lectures. I also will stay on and answer questions after class, should you feel the need to clarify
something that we discussed in class. I would like to talk to each of you at least once. If you cannot
make it to my regularly-scheduled office hours, please feel free to schedule an individual
appointment with me.

In an effort to make the class successful for all students, please provide me feedback on how the
course is going and how you feel you are doing in the course. I can make this class more successful
if I hear from you about what you do and do not understand. I welcome your feedback during
office hours and via e-mail.

DROPPING THE COURSE

You must go through the official procedures to drop the course. If you stop attending the class and
fail to officially drop, you will receive a grade of F. Consult the Academic Calendar on the
Registrar’s website (http://www.registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/index.html) for specific deadlines.

SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY

The McCombs School of Business and the department of accounting have no tolerance for acts
of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic

Syllabus 6ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

dishonesty are described in detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the
McCombs School of Business.

By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all of the faculty responsibilities described in
that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class
and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Policy
on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.

Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: copying tests or assignments, representing
(copying) the work of another person as one's own or allowing another person to represent your

work as their own, collaborating without authority with another student during an exam or in
preparing academic work, using unauthorized materials or aids to complete a quiz or exam,
continuing work on an exam after a stop time has been announced, sharing without authority quiz
or exam materials with other students, etc.

Students are expected to adhere to a strict ethical standard in this course. You should refer to the
Student Judicial Services website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/depts/sjs/ or the General
Information catalog to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.

STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES

The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. If you need any accommodations, please let me know as soon
as possible. I am committed to taking any necessary steps to help you learn and succeed in the
class.

If you would like to get more information relating to this matter, please contact the Office of the
Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY or online at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php

RELIGIOUS DAYS

By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious day. If you must miss an examination, a work assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. If you inform me in a shorter timeframe,
I will still try to arrange make-ups, but that limits the potential alternative solutions that I may be
able to offer.

Syllabus 7ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting Summer 2020

ELECTRONIC CLASS ROSTERS

A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must inform
students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster.

Since Fall 2001, web-based, password-protected class sites have been available for all accredited
courses taught at The University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of
information that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-
mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters
will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic
class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building,
Room 1. For information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-0 1/app/appc09. html

UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS FLAG COURSE

This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed
to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments
you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world
problems.

CHANGES AND NOTIFICATION

The information included in this handout, including the tentative course schedule below, is
subject to change but I will try not to do so. I will notify you during class time and via Canvas or
email if I make any changes.

CAMPUS SAFETY

Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:

¢ Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.

¢ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.

¢ Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform me during week 1.

¢ In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions.

¢ Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.

¢ Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050

¢ Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.

Syllabus 8ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting

Summer 2020

The University of Texas at Austin Department of Accounting
Tentative Course Schedule for ACC 311--Fundamentals of Financial Accounting, Summer 2020

 

 

 

6/4 Th Introduction, Financial Statements and Business Decisions
6/8 M Investing and Financial Decisions and the Accounting System
Solid Footing 1-1, 2-1
6/9 T 3 Operating Decisions and the Accounting Statement one FOOHNE
due before class
6/10 | W Adjustments, Financial Statements, and the Quality of Earnings Solid Footing 3-1, 4-1
due before class
6/11 | Th Review for Exam 1 Solid Footing 5-1, 7-1, 7-2, 7-3
due before class
po Exam 1 (Chapters 1-4) Exam 1 (Chapters 1-4)
6 Reporting and Interpreting Sales Revenue, Receivables, and Cash

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Continued

Reporting and Interpreting Cost of Goods Sold and Inventory Quiz 1
Continued

Reporting and Interpreting PP&E; Intangibles; and Natural Resources | Quiz 2
Continued

Reporting and Interpreting Liabilities Quiz 3
Continued, Reporting and Interpreting Bond Securities

Continued Quiz 4

 

Review for Exam 2

 

   

Exam 2 (Chapters 6-10)

 

E

po Cumulative Final Exam

7/10

Syllabus

Exam 2 (Chapters 6-10)

Quiz 5

Quiz 6

Cumulative Final Exam