BIO 325 Genetics -Summer 2020
10:00 AM — 11:15 AM Zoom

Instructors: Dr. Sibum Sung (Associate Professor of Molecular Biosciences)

NMS 5.110; sbsung@austin.utexas.edu

Zoom url: This is for Lecture and my office hour

https://utexas.zoom.us/j/92388530570
Meeting ID: 923 8853 0570

Lecture & Office hour by me will be at this zoom meeting room.

You should be able to access to zoom through htips://utexas.zoom.us/

Browser:
It is necessary for you to use “Chrome web browser” with “Proctorio extension” installed.

https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/proctorio/fomapakogndmenjcfoajifaaonnkpkei

OFFICE HOURS
M/W 2PM- 3PM: Please email me to arrange an appointment, if possible.
If you cannot make this time, you can email me to arrange alternative times.

Text Books: Genetics (From Genes to Genomes); 6" edition by Hartwell et al.
Leland Hartwell and colleagues have written a superb genetics textbook, now in its 6" edition.
It is lively, current, weaves in the new and exciting frontier of genomics and systems biology.

Additional materials:
| will provide either URL link for the on-line material (I will use some on-line textbooks, which are
free of charge; and some other web resources) or pdf files for any additional material that |
will cover in the class.

Synopsis:

Learning genetics is usually very time-consuming! Genetics has earned a reputation as a
stumbling block to some students at universities all over the world. There are several
reasons for this. One of the most important reasons is that doing well in a Genetics class
requires very different skills than doing well in an anatomy class or a microbiology class.
Analytical thinking is the most important skill mecessary for understanding genetics.
Memorization skills will help you, but you will have to really understand the material to do
well in Genetics class. Best way to improve your analytical skill is to practice as many problems
as possible. That’s why | encourage you to work on problems (before class/ in-class quizzes,
homework, Learnsmart and etc.)

Correspondence: All announcements/scores/answers/ will be made available through Canvas.
So check the site often. | will also use group email through Canvas. So please make sure
that your official University email address is an address at which you actually read mail.

Lectures & Readings:

Lecture handouts will be posted on Canvas by 6pm the evening prior to the corresponding lecture.
Lecture handouts are drafts until given, and perhaps a little afterwards (they can be revised at
any time). Each lectures, you will be given corresponding chapters in the textbook (See schedule).
| will try to stay with the textbook. But from time to time, | will use material from other sources.
Additional readings from the literature or available on the internet may be assigned and will
be made available through Canvas.It is 100% on-line through zoom class meeting. All lectures will be recorded and posted after class
on canvas. But you will have to join zoom meeting on time not to miss points you will earn during
class (see below).

Attendance:

There will be “in-class” quizzes using instapoll on canvas, which will be used for your grade (see
below for grading policy). These quizzes will be given anytime during the class. Participation
will be counted toward your grade (not for correct answer).

not answer), you will lose 5 points, There will be a trial-period during first two classes.

Lecture recording:
“Lecture will be recorded and posted on canvas” after the lecture is given.

Discussion Sections: Attendance at discussion section is not required but it would help you
keep up with material that we cover during class and in your reading. A total of “20 extra
points” can be earned during discussion section.

Di . i lL begi 5

Mr. Lu’s zoom office for discussion and office hour

https://utexas.zoom.us/j/2439584356
Office hours: Tuesday, Thursday, Friday from 2-3pm

Periodic “on your own” quizzes

| will periodically post quizzes on Canvas for you to work on. You will have 24 hours to
submit your answers. Questions are designed to review material from the previous lectures or
to review basic knowledge for upcoming lectures. Participation/scores will be counted toward
your grade. These scores will directly affect your grade (see grading policy), \t is a good idea
to review what you know and what you do not know through this quiz series. And make sure that
you understand concept related with questions.

Group Activities in breakout room on zoom or through Canvas groups:

In-class breakroom quizzes/group activity will be given anytime during the class. You can
earn 25 points from quizzes and group activities that will be used to calculate your final
grade!

Homework:

Homework will be assigned 48 hours before the due date. The idea of assigning homework is
to help you learn the material. There will be 4 homework assignments. Late homework will not
be accepted. Homework should be turned in by 5:00. pm on due date (through gradescope). You
are encouraged to work together for homework, but you should come up with your own answer

(copied answers will not be graded).
Your answer shoud be converted to pdf file before submission.

Formal Exams:

There will be one midterm exam and a final exam (ON-LINE). The final exam will emphasize
the material since the midterm, but will also include topics from earlier in the semester. Each
exam will have a maximum score 100 points.

There will be no makeup exams, [f you cannot take exams on scheduled date/time, you
should not take this class. |t is your responsibility to login at exams on time. Students who login
late will not be given additional time.

Midterm exam: Monday, June 22, 10:00 am — 11:00 am
Final exam schedule: Wednesday, Jul 8, 10:00 am — 11:30 amPrevious exams will also be posted on Canvas which will be helpful to be familiar with questions.
Note that course schedule has been changed from previous years, thus coverage of old tests are
different from current ones. Also, the difficulty will be adjusted to accommodate online testing.
Formats will be slightly different from previous paper exams as | will have to make it work for
online testing platform.

Grading: Please note that the grading policy may change later depending on feedback |

 

would get.
Grading Summary
Category Points Notes
Midterm exam foot will be on canvas (1 hour exam)

Final exam 100 It will be on canvas (1 72 hour exam)

 

Class participation 75 you will lose 5 points/ea. miss

Piscussion section to 20 points (if you attend them all)

(On your own quizzes 100 _|24 hours to answer questions
Homework 100 4 homework with 25 points each
Group activity 29 Google doc assignments (breakroom/Canvas groups)

Total 500 +aFollowing grade scales are “guaranteed”. Therefore, it is possible that all of you get “A” if you
do well.

A 465-500 + a points C+ 355-374 points
A- 440-464 points C 335-354 points
B+ 415-439 points C- 325-334 points
B 390-414 points D 275-324 points
B- 375-389 points F < 274 points

Cut-offs can be lower (but will not be higher) depending on overall performance of the class.

University Policies

It is your responsibility to keep track of the deadlines for dropping the course, changing to
Pass/Fail, and etc. Please do not ask me to sign letters permitting you to break the rules of the
University. If you need special treatment for religious or other reasons, it is your
responsibility to inform me of these matters in_a_ timely manner and strictly according to
University guidelines.

A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-
6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ However, please arrange the accommodation as
soon as possible. Last minute request may not be honored.

A notice regarding accommodations for religious holidays. (By UT Austin policy, you must
notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holyday. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.")

During class: Mute voice unless asked to speak. You don’t have to show yourself unless asked
to. Sometimes, | will ask you to turn off video feed if the connection becomes unstable. We
are all adults. Be considerate to your classmates and instructor. Please use your common sense.
Please be considerate in chat box. Only class-related conversation is allowed in zoom chat box.
If not, | may ask you to leave my class.

Academic misconduct (cheating): DON’T DO IT! Don’t ruin your career over a couple of
scores. Incidents will be reported to the Dean of Students and will be strictly dealt with according
to the University policy. No exception. A notice regarding academic dishonesty. UT Honor
Code (or statement of ethics) and an explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism

(https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php).

Note that you are required to use “chrome browser with proctorio extension” when you take
online exams.Schedule (Note: course schedule is subject to change based on your
(and also my performance) — BIO f325; Summer 2020 by Sung

Lecture

Jun 4
Jun 5
Jun 8
Jun 9
Jun 10
Jun 11
Jun 12
.Jun 15
Jun 16
10. Jun 17
11. Jun 18
12. Jun 19

Oo MP ND BF WN

Jun 22 Exam |
13. Jun 23

14. Jun 24
15. Jun 25
16. Jun 26
17. Jun 29
18. Jun 30
19. Jul 1
20. Jul 2
21. Jul 3
22. Jul 6
23. Jul 7
24. Jul 8

Title

Course Overview/Introduction to Genetics

Principles of heredity —- Mendelian Genetics

Principles of heredity — Extensions to Mendel’s Law

Probability in Genetics

Chromosome Theory/Linkage Mapping - |
Linkage and mapping — Il

Linkage and mapping — Ill

Overview on DNA as a genetic material
Dissection through mutation |
Dissection through mutation I
Dissection through mutation Ill;Gene expression |
Gene expression || / Catch-up & Review
(in-class exam)

Analysis of genome |

Analysis of genome |!

Analysis of genome Il

Variation in genome |

Variation in genome ||

Eukaryotic Chromosome

Chromosome variations

Bacterial Genetics/Organelle

Gene regulation in prokaryotes |

Gene regulation in eukaryotes |

Gene regulation in eukaryotes I|

Final Exam

Reading
Ch 1
Ch 2
Ch 3
Ch 2/3
Ch 4
Ch 5
Ch 5
Ch 6
Ch 7
Ch 7
Ch 7/8
Ch 8

Ch 9

Ch 9

Ch 10

Ch 11

Ch 11

Ch 12

Ch 13

Ch 14/15
Ch 16

Ch 17

Ch 17/18