Communication and Leadership CLD 351
Internship - Online
Summer 2020

Dr. Jones Barbour
Office: CMA 7.122B
Office Hours: Via Zoom/By Appointment

Email: jonesbarbour@utexas.edu or through Canvas messenger

Hello CLD 351 student. Congratulations on your internship! You are in for an exciting and
interesting time this semester. My role as instructor for this course is to support you in getting the
most out of this important experience. In particular, I am here to help you navigate your internship.
Please use me as a resource - anytime you have questions, concerns, cool things that happened, etc.
- let me know.

One thing to remember too is that while there are certainly exciting and wonderful experiences
ahead of you, there are also a variety of challenges that may arise to prevent you from getting as
much as possible out of the experience. For example, you might experience:
1) Lack of supervision, either through lack of regular meetings with a supervisor or being
given assignments without proper guidance or information;
2) Unreasonable working requests that violate your internship job description, such as
number of hours, travel, etc;
3) Sexual harassment, or any uncomfortable or abusive situation;
4) Witnessing or being asked to do something that is unethical;
5) Anything that concerns you or feels wrong at a gut level.

Please know that you are not in this internship alone, if you have any questions or concerns about
any issue that might arise in your internship please contact me. This is why you have my mobile
number and my email address.

COURSE OBJECTIVES:
1) Provide an inside exposure to the structure, operations, and decision process within an
organization without a commitment to permanent employment.
2) Increase confidence in dealing with supervisors and colleagues.
3) Gain experience performing as a leader in an organization.

INTERNSHIP REQUIREMENTS:
1) No more than 25% of interns’ time should be spent doing clerical work.
2) Students must intern at least 150 hours per semester
3) Intern supervisors must meet with and work with interns on a regular basis.
4) Intern supervisors must complete a mid-semester and end of semester performance
evaluation of the intern.

COURSE INFORMATION:
1) Ifyou have difficulties, questions, concerns, etc., on your internship, please contact me as
early as possible.
2) Ifyou need to consult with me regarding an urgent matter, please call my mobile number
(listed above).3) While this course is a pass/fail course, in order to receive a passing grade for this
course, you need to earn at least a C on each component of the course. Additionally,
all assignments must be completed in order to pass the course.

4) Assignments are due on the date and time indicated on Canvas. All assignments will be
turned in on Canvas. Remember that sometimes Canvas fails so be sure to give yourself
plenty of time to turn in assignments. I do not accept late papers, nor do I accept papers
turned into my mailbox or sent via e-mail. Anticipate problems in advance and
communicate with me to avoid misunderstandings. Always keep a copy of your work.

5) Being fired from an internship position due to performance problems or receiving a poor
evaluation could result in a failing grade for the course.

6) You will not fail the course for leaving an internship due to an unsafe, unethical, or
harassing environment. Please contact Dr. JB as soon as possible should you be concerned
about abuses of any kind.

COURSE POLICIES

Use of Canvas and Email

This is an online course so be sure to check Canvas regularly. You will receive course information
as well as submit assignments through Canvas. Additionally, email is recognized as an official mode
of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your email for university
and course-related information and announcements. Emails will be sent to the address listed for
you in Canvas. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your email address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.

Plagiarism, the intentional or unintentional misrepresentation of someone else’s work as your own,
will not be tolerated. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community. I take academic integrity very seriously. If you violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty, you are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. The University defines academic dishonesty as
cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records (including attendance
sheets), and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on an assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this
syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.

For more information see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint student.php.

Students with Disabilities

Any students with disability-related needs or questions are invited to speak with us as early in the
semester as possible so that we may accommodate you according to the University’s disability
services procedures. You must provide documentation to the Dean of Student’s Office so that the
most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Upon request, specialized services are
available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities: 512-471-6259 (voice), 512-

232-2937 (video phone), or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.

GRADES:
The instructor does not give grades; rather, students earn their grade according to the quality of
their work. Your course grade is based on the following assignments:SYLLABUS REVIEW FORM /INTERNSHIP COURSE CONTRACT: You will complete an online form
and sign electronically via a link on Canvas.

INTERNSHIP JOURNAL: You should keep a daily or weekly journal about your internship
experience. Your journal entries will be turned in weekly (each week Sunday by 11:59pm) on
Canvas. You may write formally or informally. Make sure to address the following issues (as they
are relevant) at least each week (if not on a daily basis):

New skills learned

Any training you received

Important work/career contacts made

Projects/Activities begun and completed

Your enjoyment or dislike/boredom with the industry

Your enjoyment or dislike of the company

Concerns about or satisfaction level with the internship

Questions you have about what you are learning/doing, the company, the industry

Anything else you think is relevant
I respond to each of your journal entries each week so be sure to check back on Canvas as you submit
the following weeks journal entry to see my responses. The journal is just one way that we have
conversations about your internship experience.

REFLECTION ESSAY: You will write two reflection essays over the course of the semester. These
reflection essays will draw on your internship journal to answer a series of questions about your
internship. Due dates and descriptions of the essays will be posted on Canvas.

ORGANIZATIONAL CLIMATE SURVEY: To be completed online by you at the end of the semester.
I will send you the link via email.

SUPERVISOR EVALUATIONS: | will contact your internship supervisor to complete an online
evaluation of your work during the internship twice, at midterm and at the end of the semester.

Additional University of Texas Policies:

Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):

If you are worried about the behavior of a member of the UT community, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about the individual. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http: //www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.

Emergency Evacuation Policy:
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside
when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following
policies regarding evacuation:
1) Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
2) If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
3) In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions.
Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office. Additional information about
emergency procedures can be found at www.utexas.edu/emergency.Q drop Policy:

The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to
six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of
higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped
courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”

Writing Resources Undergraduate Writing Center

The Undergraduate Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone 471-

6222, http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc/ offers individualized assistance to students who
want to improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students may come in on a drop-in or
appointment basis.

The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance
without charge to undergraduates seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of
communication. We have student specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, Communication &
Leadership and PR & Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen core writing skills
in each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may guarantee their time by
booking half-hour appointments on our website for assistance during all stages of the writing
process. Writing coaches also will take drop-ins if they are not working with appointments.

Counseling and Mental Health Services

Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are
options available for support.

For immediate support:
-  Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
| 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu

- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html

CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- M-F 8-5p | BMC 3.390 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message” if she is unavailable)

Other Services at CMHC:
- Brief assessments and referral services

- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html

- Tips on self-care - cmhc.utexas.edu/selfcare.html

Other Helpful Offices at UT

- Student Emergency Services (SES) - deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
- Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) - diversity.utexas.edu/disability

- Office of the Student Ombuds - ombuds.utexas.edu/student