HIS 315K (38750)
T/TH 9:30-11 am
JES A121A

Professor
Steven Mintz

Office Hours
T/TH 11-12 noon
and available by
appointment.

GAR 3.312

Email
smintz@utexas.edu

Teaching Assistants
Marsha Black
Kathleen Conti

Fei Guo

Jared Wait

Course Description

Too many students spell history
b-o-r-i-n-g. They regard history
as a jumble of disconnected
facts. The word they use to
describe history is "irrelevant."

High school history too often
consists of little more than
lectures, textbooks, worksheets,
and memorization of names and
dates. In fact, history need not be
dull.

In this class, you will be a
detective, a myth buster, a
problem solver, and a forensic
scientist. You will debunk or
confirm legends and folklore.
You will investigate some of
history’s most gripping
mysteries and take part in some
of history’s biggest debates.

You will uncover the hidden
history behind front-page

headlines as well as the roots of a host
of everyday rituals and customs.

You will examine Hollywood’s version
of the past and separate fact from
fiction. You will re-fight past battles,
re-live key episodes in the past, and ask
what-might-have-been.

You will also explore the uneasy
relationship between academic history
and popular memory—those legends
and traditions that exert a much more
powerful grip on our imagination.

This class offers an innovative
perspective on U.S. history. Its
approach is global, comparative, and
multicultural, and it ties past events to
contemporary issues.

Divided into modules that must be
completed weekly, the course includes
a wealth of sources including
gravestones, maps, film clips, and

1

 

 

What Is in This
Syllabus

Course Structure...2
Learning Objectives...2
Course Communication...2
Course Evaluation...2
Grading Scale...2
Important Notes...3
Schedule...4

 

 

music—that bring the past to life and
allow you to understand the key issues
and controversies of U.S. history from
a fresh perspective.

Grading is based on multiple choice
questions, short-answer exercises, and
interactive activities.-
- Learning Objectives

_ By the end of the semester a student should be able to:

- 1. Demonstrate mastery of essential facts, chronology, and periodization. These include the sequence of
major events and the division of history into meaningful categories.

_ 2. Demonstrate familiarity with historical controversies and conflicting interpretations.

_ 3. Explain how historians are able to reconstruct certain significant facts about the past.

_ 4. Formulate meaningful and research-able historical questions and construct concise, sophisticated,
compelling theses.

| 5. Exhibit the methodological skills characteristic of history as a discipline. These include the ability to
: locate, weigh and evaluate evidence, assess arguments, and construct convincing interpretations.

_ 6. Demonstrate historical thinking. This includes the ability to describe how institutions, customs, or
social roles evolved over time.

7. Analyze the connections between past and present in a nuanced, balanced manner.

Course Structure

Although we will meet twice a week, all the should consult the schedule below. You will complete
instructional materials are in online modules your assignments by logging into the course on
accessed through Canvas. These will serve as Canvas, selecting the weekly module, and completing
your readings and graded activities. all activities found within the module.

Although you will work through the online You are required to have access to an internet-enabled
modules at the convenience of your own schedule, laptop or desktop computer. We recommend that you
there are mandatory weekly deadlines and you use Chrome when accessing the modules.

 

Course Communication

settings, update your email and include other
forms of contact that you check daily. Once
completed, navigate to “Notifications” and edit
To edit your notification preferences, login to appropriately.

Canvas and navigate to your “Account.” Under

To ensure that you receive class announcements,
sign up for Canvas notifications.

Course Evaluation

Unlike a conventional history class, in which grades depend on quizzes, a midterm, and a final exam,
your grade in this class depends on your performance on activities distributed across the weeks. You
will not have a mid-term or final in this course.

You will have access to two modules per week, which must be
completed before its due date. Each module is worth 100 points. 60
points are from multiple choice questions and 60 points from essay | UShlaenes will soccer o>
questions. There is a minimum character requirement for most essay | GiGeuEr SSmone

. . . . A = 93-100%, A- = 90-92%
questions of 1200 characters including spaces. For details about how [yy reer circ

your short answer responses will be graded, see Canvas. B- = 80-83%, C+= 78-79
. C= 73-77%, C- = 70-72%
Class Essentials D+ = 68-69%, D=63-67%

D- = 60-62%, F=0-59%

Read Carefully: Your modules are due on the date and time specified

on the syllabus. Please be aware that for the work to be graded, you

need to submit your answers via Canvas. We will not accept late work

and we will not accept work emailed to your professor or TA. If you're having trouble, please email

gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu and cc your professor and TA. This address is staffed during

normal business hours, so please do not wait to the last minute to submit your work. We are not
2responsible for technical errors related to your individual equipment (e.g. home wi-fi or laptop) and
such problems are not grounds for an extension of the due date.

To ensure that you have completed the entire module and all your work was submitted, please check
the table of contents page for your module. Completed items will display a green check mark next to
them. Always access your modules through the course homepage or the Assignments tab in Canvas.
Accessing your module through the Grade tab provides a read-only view of your work."

Extra credit opportunities: In most class sessions, you will have an opportunity to respond to
questions and earn extra credit. To respond to these questions, you must bring an internet connected
device - a smart phone, a tablet, or laptop - to class and connect to our class in Canvas.

Primary source packet: You will need to have available during class the primary source packet
located on the FAQ page. You can print it out or display it on your tablet or laptop.

Know your TA: At your earliest opportunity, go to the FAQ page and identify the name, contact
information, and office hours of your teaching assistant. Your TA is not only responsible for grading
your written work, but is a valuable resource who can help you succeed in this class by improving your
writing and study skills.

 

Objectionable Materials Warning

Many will find topics covered in this class to be disturbing. Topics such as, war,
inequality, and episodes of violence are aspects of U.S. history that cannot be erased.
Our readings and audio-visual sources contain depictions of explicit violence, sexual
brutality, ethnic and gender stereotyping, obscenity, profanity, offensive language, and
endorse views that many will consider immoral. Students are advised that we will touch
on mature subject matter regarding politics, economics, foreign policy, class conflict,
racism, sexism, and sexuality, in U.S. history, in a scholarly and critical manner. These
sources were in wide circulation in the culture at large, and are, in the instructor's
opinion, essential to understanding this country's history.

Academic Integrity

Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.

The online course format allows us to monitor and detect issues involving identity
verification, collusion and plagiarism. A violation of the course policy may include (but
is not limited to) the following:

¢ Providing your UT EID and password to another person,

* Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format,

¢ Failing to properly cite ideas, data, or arguments that are not originally yours.

Please be aware that we are using a software system that automatically detects behavior
that violates course rules. As part of this effort, we will occasionally send students email
notifications when any problematic behaviors are detected. These emails are intended

ol OW An i Al dle OMemainly to remind students of the course code of conduct, and carry absolutely no
implications for a student’s grade in this course. We will only investigate cases where
our system determines that there is a considerable amount of evidence that the code of
conduct is not being followed. Regardless of the results, the faculty member, in
consultation with Student Judicial Services, will make the final determination as to
whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.

Students with Disabilities

Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students. It is the student’s responsibility, to make the
instructor aware of any special accommodations or needs in a timely manner. Students
with disabilities may request appropriate accommodations from the Services for
Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (audio) or 512-232-2937 (audiovisual) or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-register-with-ssd/. As soon as you have
received your letter of accommodation, please send a scanned copy to your professor.

 

Religious Holidays

The instructor complies with University policy regarding religious holidays. Students
must inform the instructor at least 14 days prior to any assignments that they will miss.
Students will be given a reasonable time to make up any items. It remains the student’s
responsibility to complete the modules in a timely fashion.

This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history part of the university
core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking
skills, personal responsibility, and social responsibility. This course carries a cultural
diversity flag.

Geographical Literacy

This class will participate in a new History department initiative to improve student
geographical literacy. Geographical literacy helps us to deepen our understanding of
the complex processes of the past when we have a better grasp of time, space and
place. You will do a series of map exercises this semester that reinforce your key
conceptual issues and content knowledge, and you will access those exercises through
Canvas.

 

Assignment Schedule

Module Due Date
(Fridays at 7am)3: The World in 1492 June 15
4: The Colonial Era June 15
5: The American Revolution June 22
6: The Constitution & Bill of Rights June 22
7: The First New Nation June 29
8: The Jacksonian Era June 29
9: Slavery July 6

11: Age of Reform July 6

13: The Impending Crisis July 10

14: The Civil War

July 10