                            Cultural Geographies of Israel
                               A two-way interactive/hybrid course
                                              FALL 2019
                                   JS 365D * MES 341 * ANT 322
                                     38680       39920     31075
                                                  ***
                                       M/W/F 1:00pm-1:45pm
                                Dates in yellow = Meet in MEZ 2.122
                        All other classes online at my Zoom meeting room:
                                   https://zoom.us/j/3202806665
                                              Instructor:
                                   Dr. Amelia Rosenberg Weinreb
                                 amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu
                                      WhatsApp: 737-781-2539
                               Office hours: scheduled upon request
                              Campus technical/pedagogical support:
Dr. Matthew Russell                                                                     Dr. Amy Vidor
matthew.russell@austin.utexas.edu                                              amyvidor@utexas.edu
SZB 405                                                                                     RLP 4.412
512-232-6053                                                                            512-232-6053
I. COURSE OVERVIEW
In this hybrid seminar, students will virtually join me in various locations in Israel to learn about
spatial theory in a socially complex and geographically diverse country using Zoom technology
to livestream lessons, and a GoPro camera for recording action while being immersed in it. The
course is designed to bring Israel’s contemporary spaces, places and landscapes to life visually --
from well-known religious sites, to open-air markets, to residential streets -- see how they are
                                                                                                     1


used, and hear what they mean to local people, by observing and through interviews and
conversations based directly on student projects and research questions. Each reading is paired
with GoPro video to encourage students to make critical observations and reach new insights.
The interactive format fosters conversation and creative thinking between upper-division
students with interests in Jewish studies, Middle Eastern studies, anthropology, and geography.
        This course is for students who want to see Israel in new ways, experience a
pedagogically innovative and collaborative learning environment, gain a set of cross-disciplinary
analytic skills, and interact both with fellow students and Israeli citizens who hold a variety of
personal, political or disciplinary viewpoints. Some of the core conceptual questions we address
include: How is culture spatialized? What is the relationship between landscape, culture, power,
and memory? How do various social actors in Israel experience public spaces, holy sites,
monuments, commercial centers, and borders? What do various spatial narratives and maps
reveal, conceal, or distort?
        With these questions in mind, reading responses, journal entries, in-class workshops, a
student co-designed exam, and a final group project using Scalar, a digital publishing platform,
will challenge students to illustrate not only what they have learned, but also how they can
apply their newly-acquired knowledge in a variety of formats. Cultural Geographies of Israel,
Fall 2019 is a pilot for a new type of Global Classrooms initiative at UT. I am grateful to all
students participating along with me in the very first year of experimenting with this hybrid
format. My goal is to make the course smooth, user-friendly and intuitive as possible, so
feedback is encouraged throughout the semester.
Note: This course carries a Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. Therefore, your course
assignments cover the practices, beliefs, and histories of a non-U.S. cultural group, past and
present in this case, populations living in Israel.
II. HYBRID COURSE FORMAT
Online component: As a hybrid course, most of the course learning activity has been moved
online, making it possible to reduce the amount of time spent in the classroom, and instead
live-streamed from your device by logging into Zoom and using this link to join the class in my
“Zoom meeting room” https://zoom.us/j/3202806665 wherever you are comfortable, during
the scheduled class time: 1:00pm-1:45pm. (Note that Jerusalem, where I am located during live
streaming is 8 hours ahead of Austin).
        Most days assignments include “read this” matched with a “watch this.” The overall
rhythm of a week online is usually as follows:
                                                                                                   2


     ● Mon. Zoom, student-led: Student leaders, designated in advance, provide discussion
         questions generated from the readings and GoPro videos.
     ● Wed. Zoom, instructor-led: Instructor-led seminar, completes and further
         contextualizes discussion.
     ● “Fun Fridays,” no class meeting, self-paced: In lieu of live streaming, you will be
         assigned a short reading and/or GoPro video. Each student will individually submit a
         brief, thoughtful, 200-250-word journal reflection based on a prompt. Students may
         watch and write at their convenience, and submissions are due on Canvas by Sunday at
         midnight as part of your written participation grade.
Classroom Meet-ups: Traditional face-to-face instruction in this course is significantly reduced,
but not eliminated. The virtual component is supplemented with in-class meet-ups, highlighted
in yellow on the syllabus. Specifically, I will be present for the first week of the course, two
weeks in the middle, and during the final week in class to help students engage with, refine, and
process the ideas learned online, build community, and facilitate workshops for their group
projects. There are also times when two other instructors associated team, will lead face-to-face
meetings, or facilitate group work, also highlighted in yellow.
         Dr. Matt Russel of the Faculty Innovation Center is available on campus throughout the
semester to facilitate the course and assist with any technical or logistical support, and Dr. Amy
Vidor Postdoctoral fellow is also available as we develop Scalar projects. You will find their
contact info on page 1 of the syllabus.
Course Reading, Materials, and Ideal Streaming Environment
Readings: All readings are provided online as a hyperlink in the syllabus and also appear under
files in Canvas.
Materials: a) I recommend a good pair of earbuds/headphones so you can hear and
concentrate during streaming if you are streaming on your own; b) Make sure your laptop or
phone is fully charged, or in a location where you can charge during online class time. You
would not want to run out of battery in the middle of a class!
Streaming Environment: a) Test out the quality and speed of your connection with Zoom in
your favorite location for streaming (e.g. dorm rooms do not always have the best
receptivity/connections). Dr. Russel or I am happy to test it out with you!); b) Make sure you are
in an environment in which you can comfortably speak out loud without feeling self-conscious,
or bothering others; c) When you are leading group discussion, I recommend sitting together
with your group and Zoom from the same computer; d) Our classroom will always be available
for streaming on the big screen to participate in class together, if that is your preferred Zooming
environment. We will perform a test run the first week of class so all students are familiar with
how to get online, project, and adjust settings, etc.
                                                                                                   3


III. COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of the course, students will:
● Develop the ability to challenge assumptions, develop communication skills, and refine
understanding of Israel’s cultural geography
● Exhibit independent, critical, and synthetic thinking through discussion leadership, individual
journal entries, written contributions to group projects, and a final test.
active participation in both online and face-to-face components of the course
● Converse, with historical, ethnographic and geographic sensitivity, about a range of
contemporary social issues related to Israel
● Place course themes within a wider context of anthropological theory, human geography and
spatial theory
● Articulate the distinctions and confluences between the geographical concepts of space, place
and landscape
● Reproduce detailed, multimedia political and topographic maps of Israel and the Palestinian
Territories
IV. GRADE BREAKDOWN
Participation: 15%
Your active participation is the most valuable part of the course, and the most important for
your success. Attend live streams, attend meet-ups, share your ideas based on readings and
videos.
Fun Friday Response Journal: Canvas 25%
In lieu of live streaming, I will release a link on Canvas to a short GoPro video with narration,
and a prompt by class time on Friday. Each student will submit a brief, thoughtful, 200-250-word
journal reflection based on the prompt. Students may watch and write at their convenience, but
submissions are due on Canvas by midnight (11:59pm) on Sundays as part of your written
participation grade.
Scalar: 40%
Final instructions to be provided. Sneak preview here.
Student Co-Designed Final TEST: 20%
Our final test will cover core concepts, maps, vocabulary, history, ethnographic examples, and
theory in our texts that we agree upon together. Each test will include a short-essay question
that will encourage you to develop an idea in writing.
         One week prior to each test during classroom meet-ups, we will design and prepare for
the test together. I have students post two questions they would like to see appear on the test
                                                                                                  4


on Canvas, and often draw up to 80% of test content from student suggestions. These
suggested questions also prove useful for students to study and prepare for tests and are a fair
reflection of what the course has actually taught you, not only my expectations of what it has
taught you.
Final presentation (recorded): V+ V V-
Students will present and record their Scalar projects to submit online. These presentations are
a requirement of the course, but do not receive a letter grade.
VII. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives.
As we go through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class. Such
changes, communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected
The course is divided into six parts: Part I: Welcome and Orientation ; Part II: Focus on
Jerusalem, Tel-Aviv, Haifa, The Negev; and The HIgh Holy Days as Experienced in Israel the Part
III: Mid-semester check-in, group project workshops (Classroom meet-ups); Part IV:
Student-selected sites in Israel; Where do you want to go, what do you want to ask? Part V:
Questions of Space and Power: Gender, Religious Minorities, Occupation; Part VI: Wrap up,
Test, Closure (classroom meet-ups)
 Date                Main Topics                           Assignment:              Due dates
                                                      complete before class
                                               PART I
                                        Course Orientation
                                              8/28-9/6
W      Introduction to this class and its
8/28 structure With Dr. Amy Weinreb
       Welcome, meet the instruction
       “team” getting started,
       brainstorming, best practices
F      Tech Overview With Dr. Russell          Background Reading: Barry Rubin
8/30 Troubleshooting and Creative              Israel: An Introduction. Ch. 1
       Possibilities                           “Understanding Israel”
                                                                                                5


                                             pp. 1-16;
                                             http://tinyurl.com/UTGetaScan
                                             Ch. 2, “History” pp.
                                             pp. 17-30.
                                             http://tinyurl.com/UTGetaScan
M   Labor Day: No Class                      Background Reading: Rubin Ch. 2 ,
9/2                                          “History”(cont’d) pp. 30-79
                                             http://tinyurl.com/UTGetaScan
W   Introducing Scalar with Dr. Vidor        Background Reading: Rubin Ch. 3
9/4                                          “Land and People” pp. 81-120.
                                             http://tinyurl.com/UTGetaScan
F   Fun Friday #1                            Reading: Rubin Ch. 4 “Society”     Submit on
9/6 Introducing yourself;                    pp. 121-191                        Canvas,
    Journal response to Rubin readings                                          Sunday,
                                             Fun Friday assignment #1           Midnight.
                                             Two, short tasks, See Canvas for
                                             instructions.
                                            PART II:
                         Focus on Jerusalem, Tel-Aviv, Haifa, The Negev
                          The HIgh Holy Days as Experienced in Israel
                                           9/9-10/20
M   *Student led discussion 1*               Read this: Marik Shtern,
9/9 Livestream Zoom with Dr. Weinreb         “Urban neoliberalism vs.
                                             ethno-national division: The case
    Slice of daily life in divided Jerusalem of West Jerusalem's shopping
                                             malls,” in
    Core concepts: Neoliberalism and         Cities, Volume 52,2016 pp.
    Spaces of encounter                      132-139.
                                             https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2
                                             015.11.019.
                                                                                          6






















