                             EVANGELICAL CHRISTIANITY
                                          FALL 2018
                                        RS 346.6 (43265)
                                        AMS 327 (31187)
Instructor: Chad Seales
Course Description:
This course is an introduction to the intellectual and social sources of evangelical Protestant
traditions in the United States. It examines varieties of evangelical beliefs and practices. In
the first section of the course, we address the self-professed ethical struggle of evangelicals
to be in but not of the world. We historically contextualize that struggle, tracing its more
recent expressions back to the categorical rupture between sacred “selves” and profane
“society” that was at the heart of the Protestant Reformation. In our second section of
readings, we study how evangelicals continually work out this ethical tension in their
everyday lives. Surveying a range of themes, including language, revivals, social reform, and
environmentalism, we examine how evangelicals have defined themselves in opposition to
secular society but also have engaged the secular in an effort to convert souls, manage
personal behavior, and transform American society in their image of Christian community.
Course Goals: By the end of this course, students should be able to defensibly define who
is an American evangelical. They should be able to construct a broad historical narrative of
nineteenth and twentieth century American evangelicalism. And they should be able to use
this narrative to evaluate evangelical encounters in the twenty-first century with at least one
sub-type of American culture listed on the syllabus.
Prerequisites: None. This course assumes no prior knowledge of the subject.
Texts:
Readings posted on Canvas.
Canvas:
Course information, handouts, assignments, review sheets, etc. will be posted on the class
website on Canvas. To find the Canvas site, and go to http://canvas.utexas.edu/ and log in
with your EID and password.
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
revise one or more assignments, and to read and discuss your peers' work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work.


University of Texas Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community. If you are uncertain about what constitutes plagiarism, or
other violations, please feel free to ask me. Students who violate the University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possible failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. The policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. For more information, you can talk with me or visit the Student Judicial
Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sis.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Accommodations: Documented Disability Statement
If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or
hard of hearing). Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss
the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should
remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


Grading and Course Requirements:
Your grade for the course will be based on:
    1. Class Participation (30%) – Over the course of the semester, you will have the
        opportunity to participate in various class discussion exercises. Each exercise will
        count up to 3 points. Points are cumulative, and you will need to successfully
        complete 10 class exercises for full credit on this assignment. Once you have
        reached full credit, you can continue to complete and submit participation exercises
        for up to 0.3 points extra credit per entry.
    2. Reading Journal (30%) – For each assigned reading, you will be given the option of
        writing a journal entry. Journal entries should briefly answer the reading guide
        questions posted on Canvas. This assignment requires you to keep a record of your
        responses to the readings, and helps you sharpen critical thinking and writing skills.
        Each entry counts up to 2 points. Reading journals should be submitted on Canvas by 11am
        the day of the given class in which they are assigned. Journal entries must directly answer the
        questions in your own words. You can quote from the assigned reading, but you
        must explain or use the quote to demonstrate your own analysis. Points are
        cumulative, and you will need to successfully complete 15 reading journal entries to
        receive full credit for this assignment. Should you receive less than full credit on any
        journal entry, you can submit additional journal entries until you reach full credit.
        And any additional entries beyond the cumulative 30 points are counted as extra
        credit at 0.2 points per journal entry.
    3. Final Essay (40%) – For this assignment you will write a 4 to 5 pages double spaced
        essay in which you identify a recent example of evangelical engagement with
        American culture and situate it within the history of evangelical Christianity in the
        United States using relevant readings from the course.
              a. Essay Outline with Thesis Statement Due in Class Tues Dec 4 (5 points)
              b. Peer Review in Class – Tues Dec 4 (5 points)
              c. Essay Draft Due in Class – Thurs Dec 6 (5 points)
              d. Peer Review in Class – Thurs Dec 6 (5 points)
              e. Final Essay Due on Canvas by 5pm Tues Dec 11 (20 points)
Course Schedule
Introduction
R Aug 30– Course overview
Who are Evangelicals?
T Sept 4
Readings: • Jonathan Merritt, “Defining ‘Evangelical’,” The Atlantic (December 7, 2015).
R Sept 6
Readings: • George Marsden, “Introduction: Defining Fundamentalism and Evangelicalism”
            in Understanding Fundamentalism and Evangelicalism, 1-6.
         • Mark Noll, “Historical Overview” in American Evangelical Christianity, 9-28.


Modern Revival Techniques
T Sept 11
Readings: • William McLoughlin, “Awakening as Revitalization of Culture” Revivals,
          Awakenings, and Reform (1978: 1-11)
R Sept 13
Readings: • “Jonathan Edwards Describes the Great Awakening in Northampton,
          Massachusetts, 1738,” (Allitt: 92-95)
          • “Nathan Cole, Connecticut Farmer, Hears the Preaching of George Whitefield and
          Is Born Again (1741), 1765” (Allitt: 95)
          • Charles Grandison Finney, “A Revival is Not a Miracle” and “Aim to Show what a
          Revival Is” (Gaustad 1: 321-324)
Religious Language
T Sept 18
Readings: • Susan Harding, The Book of Jerry Falwell: Fundamentalist Language and Politics
          (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2000), selections.
R Sept 20
Readings: • T. M. Luhrmann, When God Talks Back: Understanding the American Evangelical
          Relationship with God (New York: Random House, 2012), selections.
In-class listening: Patricia Cox, ‘What a Total God Shot!: Understand That? Then You Speak
          Christianese,” The World in Words (PRI Podcast).
Political Culture
T Sept 25
Readings: • Seth Dowland, “Introduction,” Family Values and the Rise of the Chritian Right
          (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2015), 1-20.
R Sept 27
Readings: • Beal, “The Promise Keepers’ use of Sport in Defining ‘Christlike’ masculinity” in
          The Promise Keepers: Essays on Masculinity and Christianity, 153-163.
          • Balmer, “Keep the Faith and Go the Distance: Promise Keepers, Feminism, and
          the World of Sports,” in The Promise Keepers: Essays on Masculinity and Christianity, 194-
          203.
Cultural Politics
T Oct 2
Readings • Shayne Lee and Phillip Luke Sinitiere, “Chapter 6: Surfing Spiritual Waves: Rick
          Warren and the Purpose-Driven Life,” Holy Mavericks: Evangelical Innovators and the
          Spiritual Marketplace (New York and London: New York University Press, 2009), 107-
          128.
          • David Brooks, “A Natural Alliance,” New York Times (May 26, 2005)


R Oct 4
Readings: • Jennifer E. Dyer, “The Politics of Evangelicals: How the Issues of HIV and AIDS
         in Africa Shapes a “Centrist” Constituency in the United States,” Journal of the
         American Academy of Religion (December 2014), 1010-1032.
The Limits of Evangelicalism
T Oct 9
In-Class Film Screening: The Heretic (Bullfrog Films, 2018) – Part 1.
R Oct 11
Readings: • Kelefa Sanneh, “The Hell-Raiser: A Megachurch Pastor’s Search for a More
         Forgiving Faith,” The New Yorker (November 26, 2012).
In-Class Film Screening: The Heretic (Bullfrog Films, 2018) – Part 2.
Racial Divisions
T Oct 16
Readings: • Selections from Michael O. Emerson and Christian Smith, Divided by Faith:
         Evangelical Religion and the Problem of Race in America (New York: Oxford University
         Press, 2000).
R Oct 18
Readings: • “Chapter 6: Reproducing White Hegemony” and “Conclusion” in Korie L.
         Edwards, The Elusive Dream: The Power of Race in Interracial Churches (Oxford and New
         York: Oxford University Press, 2008), 117-140.
Spatial Divisions
T Oct 23
In-Class Screening “The Pruitt-Igoe Myth” (First Run Features 2011) – Part 1
R Oct 25
In-Class Screening “The Pruitt-Igoe Myth” (First Run Features 2011) – Part 2
                  and Class Discussion
Environmentalism
T Oct 30
Readings: • Lynn White, “The Historical Roots of Ecological Crisis,” American Association of
Science (1967).
R Nov 1
Readings: • Laurel Kearns, “Noah's Ark Goes to Washington: A Profile of Evangelical
         Environmentalism,” Social Compass 44 (3) (1997): 349-366.
Prison Religion
T Nov 6
Readings: • Randall Styers, “Slaughter and Innocence: The Rhetoric of Sacrifice in
         Contemporary Arguments Supporting the Death Penalty,” in Human Sacrifice in Judeo-
         Christian and Other Ancient Mediterranean Religions, ed. Karin Finsterbusch and Armin
         Lange, Numen Book Series (Leiden: Brill Academic Publishers, 2006), 321-51


R Nov 8
Readings: • Winnifred Sullivan, “Introduction,” Prison Religion: Faith Based Reform and the
          Constitution (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009), 1-18.
Corporate Reform
T Nov 13
Readings: • Kevin Lewis O’Neill, “The Soul of Security: Christianity, Corporatism, and
          Control in Postwar Guatemala,” Social Text Vol. 30, No. 2, Summer 2012.
R Nov 15
Readings: • Amy Julia Harris and Shoshana Walter, “They Thought They Were Going to
          Rehab. They Ended Up in Chicken Plants,” Reveal (October 4, 2017).
T Nov 20
Readings: • Chris W. Surprenant, “Policing and Punishment for Profit,” Journal of Business
          Ethics (2017).
In-class Screening • “Prisons for Profit,” NOW on PBS (2008).
                    • “Private Prison Help with Overcrowding, but at what Cost?”, PBS News
                    Hour (June 24, 2017).
R Nov 22 – NO CLASS – Thanksgiving Holiday
Religious Food
T Nov 27
Readings: • Grem, Darren E. “The Marketplace Missions of S. Truett Cathy and Chick-fil-
          A.” In Sunbelt Rising: The Politics of Space, Place and Region, edited by Darren Dochuk
          and Michelle Nickerson, 293-315. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
          2011.
In class screening: Selections from “Food, Inc.” (Alliance, 2010).
R Nov 29
Readings • Pamela Walker, “Rehoboth Ranch and Windy Meadow Farms: For the Love of
          God and Family,” in Growing Good Things to Eat in Texas: Profiles of Organic Farmers and
          Ranchers Across the State (Everbest Printing Company, 2009), 92-119.
Final Essay Peer Reviews
T Dec 4
Assignment: Bring to class a title, thesis statement, and outline for your final essay.
R Dec 6
Assignment: Bring to class a draft of final essay.
