                Magic, Science, and Religion
Baptism, Trinidad [Photo by J.B. Crosson]
                Instructor: Brent Crosson
                Class Time: T/Th: 3:30-4:45 UTC 1.130
                Email: brent.crosson@utexas.edu [Please use my utexas email address rather
                than the Canvas messaging system for a faster reply. Please put “Magic, Science,
                Religion” in the subject of the email.]
                Office Hours: TH 1:30-3 in Burdine 514 and by appointment (just email me at
                the above email address)
                Teaching Assistant: Megan Selander, meganselander@utexas.edu
                Office Hours: TBA
                Course Objectives
                In this course, we will interrogate the concepts of magic, science, and religion as
                culturally and historically constructed categories. We will critically examine how the
                construction of science and religion, as well as the opposition of empirical knowledge
                and belief, were central to both the Enlightenment and the formation of the social and
                natural sciences. Drawing on recent critiques of these foundational distinctions, we
                will question common-sense understandings of these categories and their relations:
                • How did the experimental sciences emerge out practices of “natural magic,”
                   hermeticism, or evidence law?
                • How do our notions of religion reflect certain assumptions? What are other ways of
                   categorizing practices we might deem as religion?
                • How have the divisions between science, magic and religion, or between rationality
                   and superstition, undergirded projects of modernity, colonization, and development?
                Class Policies
                Class Etiquette
                No Cell Phone Policy (please don’t use cell phones during class)
                Electronic Etiquette: No Computer or iPad Policy. Please do
                not use computers in class. Unfortunately, due to abuse of
                screens in the past, I cannot allow computers in class as people
                Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                  1


Magic, Science and Religion
tend to surf the internet. This has distracted other students,
guest lecturers, and myself. Please print out readings or buy
the books and BRING THEM TO EVERY CLASS; do not rely
on your computer (nor on your cell phone) for the readings.
TARDINESS: If you have to leave class early or arrive in the
middle of class please let me know beforehand. Please do NOT
make a habit of entering or leaving in the middle of class.
Plus and minus grading will be used: A 95-100, A- 90-94, B+
88-89, B 84-87, B- 80-83, C+ 78-79, C 74-77, C- 70-73, D+ 68-69,
D 64-67, D- 60-63, F 59 and Below
VIOLATIONS OF CLASSROOM ETIQUETTE MERIT
LOSS OF POINTS
Other General Policies
Canvas
Course information, handouts, assignments, review sheets, etc. will be posted on the class website on
Canvas. To find the Canvas site, and go to http://canvas.utexas.edu/ and log in with your EID and
password.
University of Texas Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. If you are
uncertain about what constitutes plagiarism, or other violations, please feel free to ask me. Students
who violate the University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possible failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. The policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, you can talk with me or visit the
Student Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sis.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible
for reading your email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check
your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your email
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Accommodations: Documented Disability Statement
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                                     2


Magic, Science and Religion
If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your disability from
the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). Present the
letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later
than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing accommodations you
will need. For more information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Grading Components (100 Points Total)
Group Presentation (10 Points):
You will choose your first, second, and third preferences for presenting on one of the following topics:
1. Quantum Entanglement
2. Ectoplasm, Spiritualism, and Psychical Research
3. Isaac Newton and Alchemy
4. Fractals
5. Islamic Science
6. Giordano Bruno
7. Copernicus
8. Mesmerism
9. Zombies and Science in American Fantasy
10.Secularism
11. Scientific Buddhism
12. The Magic Lantern, the Camera Obscura, and the Powerpoint
13. Dutty Boukman and Pat Robertson
Groups of three to four persons will present on some aspect of these topics that is not fully elaborated
upon (though it may be covered) in our readings. Groups should consult me after class or by
appointment with their ideas for the presentation. Group presentations should be 10-15 minutes
long. Please do NOT go over 15 minutes. This is a requirement, so please prepare by timing
yourself (generally people take more time than they think they will).
Ethical Debates (30 Points):
We will conduct six in-class ethical debates in which students will be assigned a position on a
particular issue of importance to the current theme of the readings. Each debate will count for five
points of a student’s grade. Three of these points will come from a short position paper (1.5 to 3 pgs.
double-spaced) on the debate at hand, in which the student should detail the ethical consequences of
that position. What are the outcomes, personal responsibilities, and moral consequences involved in
enacting such a position? In these papers you must cite the assigned class readings to support
your assigned position. These papers must be submitted at the end of the class in which we will
conduct the debate. You must, therefore, print out the paper and attend the entire class to
receive credit. The remaining two points for each debate assignment will derive from each student’s
participation in the in-class debate. All students must, therefore, attend the in-class debate to receive
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                                      3


Magic, Science and Religion
this credit. Participation in the debates will be graded based on the quality of your contributions.
Simply saying something without having done the readings carefully will not gain credit (I can usually
tell when this happens).
Reading Journal Response Essays (30 Points):
For most assigned readings, you will be given the option of writing a journal entry. Journal entries
should briefly answer the reading guide questions posted on Canvas. These questions will also serve
as guides for in-class discussion. The journal requires you to keep a record of your responses to the
readings, and helps you sharpen critical thinking and writing skills.
Each entry counts up to 3 points. Reading journals must be turned in at the end of the given class
for which they are assigned (they cannot be submitted after this time). You must, therefore, print
out the paper and attend the entire class to receive credit. Journal entries must directly answer the
questions in your own words. You can quote from the assigned reading, but you must explain or use
the quote to demonstrate your own analysis. Journal entries should be between 1 and 2 double-spaced
pages, concisely addressing the reading guide questions. Answers should be written in full and
complete sentences that respond to the questions at hand; these responses should not simply be reading
notes.
Points are cumulative, and you will need to successfully complete 10 reading journal entries to receive
full credit for this assignment. Journal entries must be turned in during the given class for which
they are assigned (they cannot be submitted after this time). Please do NOT submit late entries
via email. Please keep track of how many journal entries you have completed, as our TA will not
grade any entries past ten.
Reading Quizzes (30 Points):
I will give four reading quizzes over the course of the semester. These quizzes will simply make sure
that you have read and understood the materials assigned up to that point in the course. The format
will be short answer. I will drop your lowest quiz score. Each quiz will be worth a total of ten
points. There will be no makeup quizzes without an official excused absence. By dropping one
quiz score, you can miss a quiz without any penalty.
Plus and minus grading will be used: A+ 99-100, A 94-98, A- 90-93, B+ 88-89, B 84-87, B- 80-83,
C+ 78-79, C 74-77, C- 70-73, D+ 68-69, D 64-67, D- 60-63, F 59 and Below
Texts
[To Be Acquired at a Local Book Store or Online]
Ronald Numbers, ed. Galileo Goes to Jail and Other Myths About Science and Religion. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 2009 [Required]
Karol Weaver. Medical Revolutionaries: The Enslaved Healers of Eighteenth Century Saint
Domingue. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2006 [Required-Make sure to order/buy in
advance!]
Harry West. Ethnographic Sorcery. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007 [Required]
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                                   4


Magic, Science and Religion
Itinerary
Class 1: Tues. Jan. 22nd
Introductions
Part ONE: Religion vs. Science
Class 2: Thurs. Jan. 24th
Religion vs. Science (1): Nonoverlapping Magisteria?
Readings:
Bruno Latour (2010), “Thou Shalt not Freeze Frame, Or How not to Misunderstand the Science vs.
Religion Debate” {ON CANVAS}
Stephen Jay Gould (1997), “Nonoverlapping Magisteria” [Canvas]
Optional Reading: Whitney Bauman and Lucas Johnston (2014), Science and Religion: One Planet,
Many Possibilities [Excerpts] {ON CANVAS}
Screening: Religulous [8:00 to 9:30, 38:22 to 39:11]
              The Unbelievers [20:40 to 21:40]
Latour Discussion Questions: What is “Double Click Communication”? How does Latour redefine
common-sense notions of the difference between science and religion? How do devotees of both
Christianity and secularism utilize double-click communication in the film Religulous? Is there no
overlap between science and religion as Gould asserts?
Class 3: Tues. Jan. 29th
Religion vs. Science: Overlapping Domains?
“Introduction,” “Myth 10: That the Scientific Revolution Liberated Science from Religion” and “Myth
24: That Creationism is a Uniquely American Phenomenon,” in Galileo Goes to Jail and Other Myths
About Science and Religion (Harvard University Press, 2009)
Debate 1: Are Science and Religion Nonoverlapping Domains?
Class 4: Thurs. Jan. 31st
Religion vs. Science (2): Creation, Science, and Secularism
“Myth 16: That Evolution Destroyed Darwin’s Faith in Christianity,” “Myth 23: That ‘Intelligent
Design’ Represents a Scientific Challenge to Evolution,” and “Myth 25: That Modern Science has
Secularized Western Culture,” in Galileo Goes to Jail and Other Myths About Science and Religion
(Harvard University Press, 2009)
Screening: Judgement Day: Intelligent Design on Trial (NOVA Documentary) [1:17:30 to 1:30:22]
Discussion: How do some creationists share a sense of temporality, evidence, and scientific truth with
the secularist viewpoint in this film? To what extent could we say that both of them subscribe to what
Bruno Latour calls “Double Click Communication” (or what Feyerabend calls “naive empiricism”)?
Further Reading: Ronald Numbers, “Introduction,” in The Creationists: The Evolution of Scientific
Creationism (Harvard University Press, 1992)
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                                   5


Magic, Science and Religion
“Myth 15: That the Theory of Organic Evolution is Based on Circular Reasoning,” in Galileo Goes to
Jail and Other Myths About Science and Religion
Class 5: Tues Feb. 5th
Sandra Harding, “Must Science be Secular?” Objectivity and Diversity (University of Chicago Press,
2015) {ON CANVAS}
Austin Chronicle, “Questions of Church-State Separation at Dell Seton Medical Center” by Mary
Tuma
Group Presentation: Secularism
Class 6: Thurs. Feb. 7th
Climate Change, Religion, and Science
Debate 2: Should Science be Secular?
“The Faithful Skeptics: Evangelical Religious Beliefs and Perceptions of Climate Change,” The
Journal for the Study of Religion, Nature, and Culture [Canvas]
“Evangelicals in Trump’s Cabinet,” Religion News Service [Canvas]
Additional Reading:
“Trump names Scott Pruitt, Oklahoma attorney general suing EPA, to head the EPA,” Washington Post
[Canvas]
“Faith Leaders Back Trump’s EPA Pick in Open Letter,” http://www1.cbn.com/cbnnews/politics/2016/
december/faith-leaders-back-trumps-epa-pick-in-open-letter
—
In-Class Debate 2: Should Science be Secular?
PART TWO: MAGIC VS. Religion and Science
Class 7: Tues. Feb. 12th
No Class
In lieu of class on Tues., please Attend N. Fadeke Castor’s lecture “The Spirit of Black Power” on
Monday Feb. 11th at Noon in BUR 554 (I will take attendance there). This lecture will prepare
you for the next readings on “magic” and the colonial regulation of religion.
If you are not able to attend the lecture, please read N. Fadeke Castor’s chapter “The Spirit of
Black Power” (on Canvas) and write a 2-3 page reading response.
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                               6


Magic, Science and Religion
Class 8: Thurs. Feb. 14th
“Magic”
“General Introduction,” in Defining Magic: A Reader, pp. 1-13 [Canvas]
Jason Josephson-Storm, “Magic Never Vanished” [Canvas]
Optional Reading: Randall Styers. Excerpt from “Introduction,” pp. 3-21, in Making Magic:
Religion, Magic, and Science in the Modern World (Oxford Univ. Press, 2004){CANVAS}
First Reading Quiz
Class 9: Tues. Feb. 19th
The Limits of Magic and Science
Sandra Harding, “Do Micronesian Navigators Practice Science?” excerpt from Objectivity and
Diversity (University of Chicago Press, 2015) [pp. 80-104] {CANVAS}
Optional Reading: Bronislaw Malinowski, “Magic, Science, Religion” in Defining Magic: A Reader
In-Class Debate 3: Do Micronesian navigators practice science?
Screening: The Navigators (0:00 to 5:48, 40:56 to 50:40)
                  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uxgUjyqN7FU
             Sacred Vessels (1:01 to 4:58)
                  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=I7nXev2Jt7g
PART THREE: History and Case Studies
Class 10: Thurs. Feb. 21st
Islamic Science: The Question of Origins
Howard Turner, “Roots,” Science in Medieval Islam: An Illustrated Introduction (UT Press 1997)
{CANVAS} [Note: Please read only the short section entitled “Roots”]
George Saliba, “The Islamic Scientific Tradition: Question of Beginnings I” from Islamic Science and
the Making of the European Renaissance (MIT Press 2007) {CANVAS}
Group Presentation: Islamic Science
Class 11: Tues. Feb. 26th
Islamic Science, Copernicus, and the Stars Above (“Medieval” Period)
George Saliba, “Islamic Science and Renaissance Europe: The Copernican Connection” from Islamic
Science and the Making of the European Renaissance (MIT Press 2007) {CANVAS}
Myth 4: “That Medieval Islamic Culture was Inhospitable to Science,” in Galileo Goes to Jail and
Other Myths About Science and Religion
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                                7


Magic, Science and Religion
Screening: Islam and Science—BBC Documentary (2:21 to 9:20, 10:43 to 13:46)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qL41gX0fJng
Group Presentation: Copernicus
Class 12: Thurs. Feb 28th
Renaissance Cosmologies: Hermeticism, Aristotelianism, and the Center of the Universe
“The Renaissance…had its roots in the Hermetic core of Renaissance Neo-Platonism and it is the
Renaissance magus [magician], I believe, who exemplifies that changed attitude…to the cosmos
which was the necessary preliminary to the rise of science”—Frances Yates
William Shea, “Hermes and Copernicus” [Canvas]
Kenelm Foster, “Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition” [Canvas]
“Myth 6: That Copernicanism Demoted Humans from the Center of the Universe,” and “Myth 8: That
Galileo was Imprisoned and Tortured for Advocating Copernicanism” in Galileo Goes to Jail and
Other Myths About Science and Religion
Further Reading:
Azfar Moin, “Akbar’s ‘Jesus’ and Marlowe’s ‘Tamburlaine’” [Canvas]
Hannah C. Wojciehowski, Commentary on “Akbar’s ‘Jesus’ and Marlowe’s ‘Tamburlaine,’” by Azfar
Moin, http://quod.lib.umich.edu/f/frag/9772151.0003.004/--commentary-on-akbars-jesus-and-
marlowes-tamburlaine?rgn=main;view=fulltext
Screening: Against Method vs. the Nova Galileo Documentary
Group Presentation: Giordano Bruno
Class 13: Tues. March 5th
The “Scientific Revolution” and Evidence
Steven Shapin, “Introduction,” in The Scientific Revolution [Canvas]
Orna Darr. “Experiments in the Courtroom: Social Dynamics and Spectacles of Proof in Early Modern
English Witch Trials” {CANVAS}
Group Presentation: Isaac Newton and Alchemy
Screening:
Monty Python Witch Trial: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X2xlQaimsGg
The English Civil Wars: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9qwXoT8Yao
Class 14: Thurs. March 7th
Hobbes vs. Boyle
Bruno Latour, “Constitution,” in We have Never Been Modern [Canvas], pp. 13-32 (Sections 2.1
through 2.8)
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                            8


Magic, Science and Religion
Optional:
Steven Shapin and Simon Schaffer. Excerpts from Leviathan and the Air-Pump: Hobbes, Boyle, and
the Experimental Life.
Debate 4: Hobbes vs. Boyle—“Should we Abhor a Vacuum?” [Half of the class will take the
position of Hobbes and the other half will take the position of Boyle in the debate over the social
implications of the experimental method.]
Screening:
The Air Pump: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oManjfm8_Kw
Class 15: Tues. March 12th
The Enlightenment: Electricity, Obeah, and Techno-Science
Jill Casid, “His Master’s Obi: Machine Magic, Colonial Violence, and Transculturation” [Canvas]
Second Reading Quiz
Optional Readings:
Brent Crosson, “Oil, Obeah, and Science” {CANVAS}
Justine S. Murison, “Obeah and its Others: Buffered Selves in the Era of Tropical
Medicine” {CANVAS}
Donald Hogg, “Magic and ‘Science’ in Jamaica” {CANVAS}
Group Presentation: The Magic Lantern, the Camera Obscura, and the Powerpoint
Class 16: Thurs. March 14th
Haiti: Science, Medicine and Technology
Haiti: An Introduction
Karol Weaver. Medical Revolutionaries: The Enslaved Healers of Eighteenth Century Saint
Domingue. Pages. 1-29
Group Presentation: Dutty Boukman and Pat Robertson
Spring Break
Class 17 Tues. March 26th
Magnetists, Medical Knowledge, and the Haitian Revolution
Karol Weaver. Medical Revolutionaries: The Enslaved Healers of Eighteenth Century Saint
Domingue. Chapter 4—Enslaved Herbalists [pp.61-75] and “Chapter 6--Magnetism in 18th Century
Saint Domingue: The Case of Enslaved Magnetists and their Fight for Freedom” [pp.98-112]
In Class Debate 5: Is Western science a form of magic?
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                                9


Magic, Science and Religion
Optional Reading:
Danny Burton and David Grandy. “Spirits, Science, and Pseudo-Science in the Nineteenth Century.”
In Magic, Mystery, and Science {CANVAS}
Group Presentation: Mesmerism
Screening: The Fabulous Fraud (1948)
Class 18: Thurs. March 28th
Zombie/Science
Laënnec Hurbon, “American Fantasy and Haitian Vodou” {CANVAS}
Group Presentation: Zombies and Science in American Fantasy
Screenings:
White Zombie
Night of the Living Dead
Zombie Science:
zombieresearchsociety.com
Class 19: Tues. April 2nd
“Scientific Buddhism”
Donald Lopez, “Preface” and “Introduction” in Scientific Buddhism: A guide for the Perplexed, pp.
ix-38
Group Presentation: Scientific Buddhism
Class 19: Thurs. April 4th
Buddhism, Science, and Race
Donald Lopez, Chapter 2: “Buddhism and the Science of Race,” in Scientific Buddhism: A guide for
the Perplexed, pp. 73-104
Class 20: Tues. Apr. 9th
Race, Science, and “Biodiversity"
“American Tropics: The Caribbean Roots of Biodiversity Science”1
“Panama Canal Forum.” Please read Carse and Keiner, “Forum Introduction Abstract” p. 2; Megan
Raby, “‘The Jungle at our Door’: Panama and American Ecological Imagination in the Twentieth
Century,” pp. 260-269; and Blake Scott, “From Disease to Desire: The Rise of Tourism at the Panama
Canal,” pp.270-277.
Guest Lecture(s): Megan Raby and Blake Scott
Reading Quiz 3
1 Title of Megan Raby’s book
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                              10


Magic, Science and Religion
Class 21: Thurs. Apr. 11th
Anthropology as Science, Anthropology as Sorcery, Part 1
West, Harry. “Preface,” “Misunderstanding,” “In Search of the Forward-Looking Peasant,” “‘This
Must be Studied Scientifically,” “Belief as Metaphor,” and “The Problem May Lie There” In
Ethnographic Sorcery, pp. ix-34.
Class 22: Tues. Apr. 16th
Anthropology as Science, Anthropology as Sorcery, Part 2
Ethnographic Sorcery, Pages 35-64.
Class 23: Thurs. Apr. 18th
Anthropology as Science, Anthropology as Sorcery, Part 3
Ethnographic Sorcery, Pages 65-94
In Class Debate 6: Are Social Sciences Sorcery (uwavi)?
Class 24: Tues. Apr. 23rd
Spiritualism, Séances, and the Birth of the Anthropology of Religion
George Stocking. “Animism in Theory and Practice: E. B. Tylor's Unpublished Notes on
‘Spiritualism.’” {CANVAS}
Further Reading:
Peter Pels, “Spirits of Modernity: Alfred Wallace, Edward Tylor, and the Visual Politics of
Fact” {CANVAS}
Stanley Jeyaraja Tambiah. “Sir Edward Tylor vs. Bronislaw Malinowski: Is Magic False Science or
Meaningful Performance?”
Richard Noakes, “Spiritualism, Science, and the Supernatural”
Helen Tilley, “A Living Laboratory” in Africa as a Living Laboratory: Empire, Development, and the
Problem of Scientific Knowledge, 1870-1950 [Canvas]
Class 25: Thurs. Apr. 25th
No Class: Please watch the remainder of Science and the Seance at home:
Part 1: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sRMeJJrzEkc
Part 2: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qll2VdC-gfQ
Part 3: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GU-uXHeWIL8
Part 4: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IJ_6-TVRgH4&pbjreload=10
Class 26: Tues. Apr. 30th
Ectoplasm and the Infinitely Little
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                             11


Magic, Science and Religion
Richard Noakes, “‘The World of the Infinitely Little’: Connecting Physical and Psychical Realities
Circa 1900” {CANVAS}
Excerpts from J.J. Thomson’s autobiography {CANVAS}
Group Presentation: Ectoplasm, Spiritualism, and Psychical Research
Guest Lecture: Joshua Roebke, Institute for Historical Studies, UT Austin
Joshua is currently authoring a book on the history of particle physics, entitled The Invisible World. He
will speak about the scientist who discovered the electron, J.J. Thompson, and the ways that spiritualist
seances influenced his research.
Class 27: Thurs. May 2nd
Quantum Mechanics and the Politics of Mysticism
Juan Miguel Marin, “‘Mysticism’ in Quantum Mechanics: The Forgotten Controversy” {CANVAS}
Group Presentation: Quantum Entanglement
Video: The Original Double Slit
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Iuv6hY6zsd0
Further Reading: “Myth 22: That Quantum Physics Demonstrated the Doctrine of Free Will,” in
Galileo Goes to Jail and Mary Jane Rubenstein, Worlds Without End
Class 28: Tues. May 7th
Fractals, Computing, and African Divination
Ron Eglash. “Introduction to Fractal Geometry,” “Doubling Series in Africa,” African Fractals [pp.
1-19, 89-101]
Videos:
Ron Eglash’s TED Talk
Ifa Divination on the iPad
Binary counting and making a 5 bit computer with your bare hands:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Mxn2Ckuc0w
Further Reading: Helen Verran. Science and an African Logic.
Group Presentation: Fractals
Class 29: Thurs. May 10th [LAST CLASS]
The End of Certainty?
Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers, “Introduction: A New Rationality?” In The End of Certainty, pp.
1-8
Final Reading Quiz
Crosson--Magic, Science and Religion                                                                   12
