Syllabus RTF 301N Introduction to Editing for non-majors – Summer 2019
Faculty Anne Lewis alewis615@earthlink.net 512-656-0507 (please text if necessary)
Faculty Office Hours MW 3-6 in my office CMA6.110. Also by appointment.
Classes MTWTH 1-3 CMA 4.144
Course Objectives and Description
This is the first editing class that RTF has offered to non-majors, intended to build confidence
in editing so that you can complete projects without boring or confusing the audience. It is
hands (and eyes and ears) on. By the end of the session, you should understand basic editing
theory, be able to organize material and construct it into meaningful sequences, and feel
comfortable with Adobe Premiere.
The course is non-competitive and process oriented. There are five projects. I believe that if you
commit yourself fully to this class you will be able to complete every exercise between Monday
and Thursday, with the majority of the work completed during class. Feel free to show your
work to fellow students at any point – or visit me during office hours for editor's notes.
Completed projects will be screened and discussed during Thursday classes. We will treat each
other’s work with respect and kindness.
Course Outline
6/6 - 6/13 Project 1: Event. From 20 minutes of footage edit a 1.5 - 2.5 minute piece that
allows us to experience the event. Basic editing theory and techniques. Get up to speed on
Adobe Premiere.
6/17 – 6/20 Project 2: Interview. From 10 minutes of interview and 6 minutes of cutaway
material plus music if you choose, edit a 1-2 minute piece for condensed content and emotional
impact. Explore condensing and organizing ideas, language, cut aways.
6/24 -- 6/27 Project 3: a scene from a short comedy by Sophia Loffreda. Edit for character, plot,
and humor. About 2 minutes. Additional editing techniques including comedy editing.
7/1 - 7/3 Project 4: Create a video remix from YouTube material of your choice. (Try to keep it
to 1-2 minutes but no constraints.) Pay attention to detailed instructions on how to download
so we don’t have quarantined computers in the lab.
7/8 - 7/11 Project 5: Shoot and edit a short piece of your choice. Subject matter, length, and
genre is totally up to you. I can offer prompts. From start to finish in 4 days.
The course is non-competitive and process oriented. Feel free to show your work to fellow
students at any point – or schedule an appointment. Completed projects will be screened in
class. Revisions are optional. We will treat each other’s work with respect and kindness.
Reading
The semester is a continuing experiment in avoiding the costs of a reading packet by posting
links and documents on Canvas. Readings are optional and meant to deepen understanding of
theory and lecture material.
Materials
A thumb drive to save your project files is recommended. If you would like to work at home or
on additional stations at the university, an external hard drive. We suggest at least 500 gigs to


make your purchase worthwhile.
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/comm/Recommended+Hard+Drives+for+Non-Linear+Editing
Grades
Please ignore the grade book on canvas! I will try to be accurate on the details, but I
calculate attendance in a different way.
Attendance/participation                        2 points off final grade for each unexcused class absence –
                                                or if you sleep, tweet, text, e-mail, or in any way become
                                                semi-conscious or unconscious in class. Please make up
                                                classes during my office hours whether excused or not.
Editing exercises                               14 points each. Please understand that these will not be
                                                harshly graded. The first three have constraints you must
                                                follow to get full credit. We will show every exercise on
                                                Thursday to the class for comments. You will be expected
                                                to comment on at least one other student’s exercise
                                                during discussion (1 point per exercise).
         My freedom will be so much the greater and more meaningful the more narrowly I limit my
         field of action and the more I surround myself with obstacles. Whatever diminishes constraint
         diminishes strength. The more constraints one imposes, the more one frees one's self of the
         chains that shackle the spirit. -Igor Stravinsky
Constraints
Statue
     1. 1.5-2.5 minutes that allows us to experience the event.
     2. Natural audio throughout. Do not strip the audio tracks. You may lower them.
     3. No footage other than that provided except optional music.
     4. If you use music it must either relate to the woman who suggests the Navy Hymn or be brilliant. And
         the project must work without it. No manipulated cuts to music, especially on the downbeat.
     5. No more than one title sentence about the event (optional).
     6. No voice over narration that you write.
     7. At least 6 visual cuts and no more than 20.
     8. You must not use the comments by the woman or the argument at the end as a voice over that you
         illustrate for structure. These are optional. Structure from the event.
Kenneth Interview
     1. 1-2 minutes long.
     2. We should understand more about Kenneth at the end of the sequence than we did at the beginning.
         Create an emotional/idea arc.
     3. Avoid repetition unless it adds to the emotional content.
     4. You are allowed to be transparent. You can use the interviewer’s questions and the visual of the set
         up.
     5. The grammar and rhythm of the words must be timed accurately. Be aware of inflection and add tone
         if you need pauses.
     6. No obscure references.
     7. Maximum 1 jump cut.
     8. At least 50% sync.
     9. Anything you see on screen you must hear.
     10. Any lyrics in the music you choose that don’t make sense should be eliminated. At least one music
         edit if you use music. You do not need to close music at the end.
The Green
     1. 2-3 minutes long. Must include Scenes 2J through 6. You do not need to include the entire bike ride.
     2. At least one line of dialogue edited out.
     3. At least 2 moments cut for comedy probably with pauses.
     4. At least 4 J or L cuts where the line of dialogue doesn’t begin or end in sync.
     5. At least 3 reactions.
     6. No jump cuts. Honor continuity.
     7. One effect at most, aside from beginning and ending fades (if you’d like).
     8. Use music at least for the bike ride.


Calendar
WEEK 1   Lectures and labs                                 Assignments
TH 6/6   The cut. Murch discussion. Cutting vs.
         assembly.
WEEK 2   EVENT-- Statue
M 6/10   Introduction to exercise 1 Statue. Experience an If you plan to work on an external
         event.                                            hard drive, bring it with you,
         Lab 1. Set up Statue on the EditShare. View, log, and
                                                           formatted for Mac OS Journaled.
         subclip the raw material into a selects bin.
         Create a selects string out. Save the project.
T 6/11   Selects to Assembly/Rough cut. Structure and      Log notes and organized project.
         condense observational footage. Examples of       Selects string out.
         verite.
         Lab 2. Duplicate selects string out. Assembly reorder,
         3 point edits, insert, overwrite,
         Extract.
W 6/12   Assembly/Rough cut to Fine Cut. Additional        Assembly/Rough cut. Bring or know
         examples observational cinema.                    location of music if you’d like to use
         Lab 3. Track management, trim, import and         some.
         lay in audio, export.
TH 6/13  Screenings Exercise 1.                            DUE DATE exercise 1 Statue. Export
                                                           an uncompressed QT. Put it in the
                                                           EditShare.
WEEK 3   INTERVIEW -- Kenneth
M 6/17   Introduction to Exercise 2 Interview Kenneth –
         Select, structure, condense, and add actuality
         To interview.
         Lab 4. Set up Kenneth interview. Subclip selects.
         Create a selects string out in order shot.
T 6/18   Examples of interview editing. A and B roll       Log notes and organized project.
         (or not!)                                         Selects string out.
         Lab 5. Structure and condense interview. Audio
         accuracy. Rhythm.
W 6/19   Interview editing demonstration. Examples of      Assembly. Every piece of interview
         Great interview editing. Lab 6. L and J cuts.     should be timed so that you could
         Refine interview using multiple audio tracks      close your eyes and it would seem
         and music.                                        natural.
TH 6/20  Screenings Exercise 2.                            DUE DATE exercise 2 Interview
                                                           Kenneth.
                                                           Export an uncompressed QT.
                                                           Put it in the EditShare.
WEEK 4   FICTION – the Green
M 6/24   Introduction to Exercise 3 – scene from
         The Green --comedic fiction scenes with
         multiple characters.
         Lab 7. Fiction methodology. Break into scenes
         and takes with naming conventions. Create
         assembly to rehearse material.
T 6/25   Dialogue editing. The dance of looks.             Notes with preferred takes.
         Lab 8. Two approaches to dialogue editing.        Organized project.
W 6/26   Comedy editing.
         Lab 9. A few additional editing techniques.
         Match frame. Color correction and titles. A few
         effects.


TH 6/27          Screenings and discussion Exercise 3.                          DUE DATE exercise 3 The Green.
                                                                                Export an uncompressed QT.
                                                                                Put it in the EditShare.
WEEK 5           REMIX
M 7/1            Introduction to Exercise 4 – Video Remix.
                 Examples.
                 Lab 10. Download from YouTube.
T 7/2            Create video remix. You will need to finish the
                 project during class or early Thursday morning.
W 7/3            Screenings and discussion Exercise 4.                          DUE DATE exercise 4 Video Remix.
                                                                                Export an uncompressed QT.
                                                                                Put it in the EditShare.
JULY 4
WEEK 6           SHOOT AND EDIT
M 7/9            Come with an idea of something you would like
                 to shoot and a camera. Undecided? I’ll give
                 you a prompt. No camera? We’ll have some in
                 class or you can go out with a buddy.
                 If possible Lab 11.
T 7/10           Lab 11. Import from iPhone or other camera.
                 Set up Premiere project. Pull selects and show
                 1-3 to the class.
W 7/11           Edit your project. Add music if you’d like. Class
                 survey.
Th 7/12          Exercise 5 screenings and discussions.                          DUE DATE exercise 5 your project.
                                                                                Export an uncompressed QT.
                                                                                Put it in the EditShare.
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic
records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also
includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on
a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere
to them. Scholastic dishonest damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of
a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on
scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone 471-6222, http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc/
offers individualized assistance to students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students
may come in on a drop-in or appointment basis.
Services For Students With Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a work assignment or other
project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed
within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each
of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a
religious holy day.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to
check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,


recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Use of Canvas.
This course will use Canvas this summer.
Copyright and Fair Use: You may find the need to use copyrighted material this semester: music, photographs, movie
clips, or any other expression. You may use these materials according to the rules of fair use. However, you do not
own the copyright to the exercise material, which has been generously donated only for classroom use. As a copyright
holder yourself in other production classes, you understand the importance of copyright ownership. It is your
responsibility to secure music and archival footage licenses as well as artwork, location and personal releases. You will
find release templates on the RTF website.
For some uses, however, neither you nor anyone else needs to license copyrighted material. This is because copyright
law exists to encourage and support creativity. Copyright law recognizes that creativity doesn’t arise in a vacuum. As
creators, we all stand on the shoulders of giants. New works of art (such as films, books, poems, paintings) all make
use of what has gone before. Thus, copyright law not only protects authors with a copyright that lets them decide who
can use their works, but also offers exemptions from the author’s control. For filmmakers, the most important
exemption is the doctrine of fair use. You can rely on fair use, where appropriate, in the film and media projects you
undertake for this course. If you are making a documentary film, consult the influential Documentary Filmmakers
Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/files/pdf/fair_use_final.pdf which was
created by a group of national filmmaker organizations, has been endorsed by the University Film and Video
Association, and is now relied on by film festivals, insurers, cablecasters, distributors and public broadcasters. Fair use
also applies in the fiction film environment, but not necessarily to the same extent or in the same way.
As always, the central question is whether the new use is "transformative" -- i.e., whether it adds significant value by
modifying or recontextualizing the original. For more understanding, including information on when you can use works
for free http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/files/pdf/free_use.pdf without even using fair use, why you (mostly) don’t
need to worry about trademarks http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/files/pdf/free_use.pdf what is in the public
domain http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/rock/backgrounddocs/copyrightterm.pdf how fair use lawsuits
http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/videos/sets/fair_use_case_studies have been settled, and on how fair use has
been employed successfully http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/videos/sets/fair_use_case_studies in documentary
film, visit centerforsocialmedia.org/fairuse
