ADV373/PR377K—	  Integrated	  Communications	  Campaigns	  	  
Spring	  2019	  
MW	  11:00	  –	  12:30	                 	         	          	             	         	             	  
PAR	  101	  (where?)	  
	  
Eric	  Webber	  	   	                   	         TA:	       	             Jiahua	  (Bella)	  Yang	  
ericwebber@utexas.edu	                                	          	             jhyang@utexas.edu	  
512	  658	  5255	  	  	   	           	         	          	             512	  803	  6812	  
Office:	  BMC	  4.358	  
Office	  Hours:	  M-­‐Th	  2:00	  –	  3:00	  or	  whenever	  we	  can	  arrange	  it	  	   	             	  
	              	  
	              	             	  
What	  can	  you	  expect:	  
This	  is	  where	  you	  take	  much	  of	  what	  you’ve	  learned	  in	  the	  past	  few	  years	  and	  put	  it	  into	  practice.	  We	  won’t	  
cover	  new	  ground	  here	  –	  maybe	  a	  refresher	  or	  two	  and	  certainly	  you’ll	  get	  my	  perspective	  on	  topics	  that	  may	  
differ	  (often	  substantially)	  from	  what	  you’ve	  been	  taught	  already.	  	  
	                             	  	       	  
How	  that	  happens:	  
The	  class	  will	  be	  divided	  into	  teams,	  and	  each	  team	  will	  function	  as	  an	  independent	  “agency.”	  All	  teams	  will	  
work	  on	  the	  same	  thing.	  	  
	  
That	  “thing”	  is	  a	  real	  opportunity	  from	  an	  actual	  client.	  Your	  client	  this	  semester	  is	  CLEAN	  CAUSE	  
(www.cleancause.com).	  CLEAN	  CAUSE	  was	  founded	  by	  Wes	  Hurt,	  an	  entrepreneur	  with	  a	  number	  of	  successes	  
under	  his	  belt.	  CLEAN	  CAUSE	  is	  his	  latest	  venture,	  and	  it’s	  a	  business	  with	  an	  interesting	  twist.	  CLEAN	  CAUSE	  
makes	  organic	  energy	  drinks.	  That’s	  a	  very	  competitive	  category,	  and	  gives	  you	  a	  lot	  to	  work	  with.	  But	  Wes	  
didn’t	  set	  out	  to	  just	  make	  great	  energy	  drinks.	  50%	  of	  CLEAN	  CAUSE’	  profits	  support	  programs	  for	  people	  
struggling	  with	  addictions.	  Wes	  is	  part	  of	  a	  new	  breed	  of	  social	  entrepreneurs	  –	  people	  who	  understand	  that	  
you	  can	  build	  a	  successful	  and	  profitable	  brand	  that	  also	  works	  to	  create	  positive	  change	  in	  the	  world.	  Plenty	  
of	  brands	  have	  supported	  causes	  and	  social	  change	  over	  many	  years,	  but	  the	  idea	  of	  creating	  consumer-­‐
products	  brands	  that	  are	  driven	  by	  a	  cause	  is	  relatively	  new.	  Wes	  is	  also	  a	  recovering	  addict,	  so	  this	  is	  all	  very	  
personal	  to	  him.	  	  
	  
You’ll	  meet	  Wes	  early	  in	  the	  semester,	  and	  he’ll	  tell	  you	  the	  whole	  story	  himself.	  You’re	  gonna	  like	  him	  and	  
the	  company.	  He’ll	  tell	  you	  about	  some	  of	  the	  marketing	  challenges	  the	  company	  is	  facing,	  and	  he’s	  going	  to	  
ask	  for	  your	  help.	  	  
	  
OK;	  so	  then	  what	  happens?	  
This	  will	  be	  much	  like	  a	  real	  new	  business	  pitch,	  where	  several	  agencies	  compete	  for	  a	  chance	  to	  represent	  a	  
client.	  That	  often	  happens	  in	  stages,	  and	  so	  it	  will	  for	  you.	  There	  are	  two	  main	  phases	  to	  the	  class,	  cleverly	  
called	  Phase	  1	  and	  Phase	  2.	  In	  Phase	  1	  you	  will	  be	  briefed	  on	  the	  problem,	  then	  let	  loose	  to	  deep	  dive.	  	  
	  
You	  will	  be	  given	  a	  lot	  of	  background	  information	  and	  brand	  guidelines,	  including	  some	  good	  information	  on	  
the	  current	  CLEAN	  CAUSE	  audience,	  but	  you’ll	  need	  to	  be	  thinking	  about	  new	  audiences	  as	  well.	  You’ll	  need	  to	  
act	  like	  planners	  to	  get	  into	  the	  heads	  of	  existing	  and	  potential	  consumers.	  What	  can	  you	  learn	  about	  them	  
that	  will	  help	  you	  craft	  the	  most	  relevant,	  effective	  brand	  story?	  Desk	  research	  will	  be	  done.	  Maybe	  a	  survey.	  
Lots	  of	  questions	  to	  be	  answered.	  	  
	  
It’ll	  be	  tough	  to	  answer	  those	  questions	  without	  getting	  to	  know	  the	  client.	  Who	  are	  they?	  I	  mean	  who	  are	  
they	  really?	  What’s	  at	  the	  heart	  of	  their	  brand?	  Better	  yet,	  what’s	  the	  heart	  of	  the	  brand?	  You	  have	  to	  
understand	  the	  current	  CLEAN	  CAUSE	  story	  before	  you	  can	  even	  begin	  to	  craft	  a	  forward-­‐thinking	  story	  for	  
                                                                                                  1


them.	  A	  big	  part	  of	  that	  is	  understanding	  the	  competitive	  landscape.	  With	  whom	  and	  what	  are	  they	  
competing,	  for	  shelf	  space	  and	  for	  space	  in	  hearts	  and	  minds?	  	  
	  
But	  wait;	  you’re	  just	  getting	  going.	  By	  this	  point	  you’re	  going	  to	  have	  at	  least	  an	  inkling	  of	  how	  you	  are	  going	  
to	  craft	  a	  story	  that	  cracks	  the	  client’s	  challenge	  –	  the	  beginnings	  of	  a	  broad	  creative	  strategy	  culminating	  in	  
the	  development	  of	  a	  creative	  brief.	  That’s	  where	  Phase	  1	  ends.	  All	  of	  that	  new	  knowledge	  cluttering	  your	  
brain	  will	  spill	  out	  in	  a	  presentation	  to	  the	  client.	  Tell	  them	  what	  insights	  you’ve	  uncovered	  about	  their	  target	  
audience(s).	  Tell	  them	  what	  you	  think	  CLEAN	  CAUSE	  is	  offering,	  that	  the	  audience	  wants,	  that	  the	  competition	  
isn’t	  delivering.	  Then	  present	  your	  creative	  brief.	  	  
	  
You’ll	  be	  graded	  on	  your	  presentation	  and	  your	  book,	  which	  is	  a	  more	  detailed	  version	  of	  the	  presentation	  and	  
commonly	  called	  the	  “leave-­‐behind.”	  Because	  you	  leave	  it	  behind	  after	  you	  present,	  for	  me	  to	  read	  at	  my	  
leisure.	  And	  don’t	  worry;	  you	  will	  get	  a	  more	  formal	  briefing	  that	  lays	  out	  exactly	  what	  Wes	  and	  I	  are	  looking	  
for	  in	  terms	  of	  deliverables	  for	  the	  book	  and	  presentation.	  	  
	  
Is	  that	  it?	  	  Not	  hardly.	  You’ll	  get	  feedback.	  Plenty	  of	  it.	  Then	  you	  move	  onto	  Phase	  2.	  Based	  on	  what	  you’ve	  
learned	  so	  far	  and	  all	  of	  the	  clever	  ideas	  that	  have	  sprouted	  in	  your	  noggin,	  you’ll	  lay	  out	  your	  activation	  plan.	  
What	  opportunies	  do	  you	  see	  for	  CLEAN	  CAUSE?	  How	  would	  your	  story	  come	  to	  life?	  How	  will	  you	  integrate	  
the	  many	  storytelling	  options	  at	  your	  disposal,	  and	  where	  will	  your	  story	  best	  be	  told?	  You’ll	  end	  Phase	  2	  with	  
another	  presentation	  and	  another	  leave-­‐behind.	  Again,	  you	  will	  be	  thoroughly	  briefed	  on	  what	  is	  (and	  isn’t)	  
expected	  of	  you.	  	  
	  
So	  what	  do	  I	  do?	  	  I’ll	  wear	  several	  hats	  during	  the	  semester.	  Much	  of	  the	  time	  I	  will	  be	  acting	  like	  a	  new	  
business	  consultant,	  which	  is	  a	  real	  thing	  (https://www.thelistinc.com/blog/reach-­‐top-­‐ad-­‐agency-­‐search-­‐
consultants/)	  and	  is	  a	  liaison	  between	  client	  and	  agency	  in	  pitches.	  They	  get	  paid	  by	  the	  client.	  Other	  times	  I’ll	  
be	  part	  of	  your	  team	  –	  a	  mentor,	  sounding	  board,	  whatever.	  Sometimes	  I’m	  just	  the	  guy	  who	  locks	  up	  when	  
you’re	  done.	  	  	  
	  
But	  wait,	  there’s	  more:	  During	  the	  course	  of	  the	  semester,	  I’ll	  be	  bringing	  in	  guest	  speakers	  to	  talk	  about	  
some	  of	  the	  disciplines	  that	  you’ll	  need	  to	  incorporate	  into	  your	  team	  planning.	  For	  example,	  a	  strategist	  
might	  come	  in	  and	  talk	  about	  getting	  the	  most	  out	  of	  a	  survey,	  or	  just	  general	  best-­‐practices.	  A	  creative	  
director	  and	  an	  account	  director	  may	  come	  together	  to	  talk	  about	  their	  individual	  perspectives	  on	  creating	  
and	  implementing	  a	  creative	  brief.	  Someone	  from	  the	  media	  world	  will	  drop	  in	  too.	  They	  will	  be	  valuable	  
resources	  for	  you.	  And	  I’ll	  cover	  some	  ground	  too,	  on	  things	  like	  presentation	  skills	  and	  writing.	  	  	  
	  
I’m	  throwing	  in	  an	  individual	  class	  participation	  element	  just	  to	  keep	  you	  on	  your	  toes.	  Here’s	  how	  that	  
works:	  
Participation	  isn’t	  the	  same	  thing	  as	  attendance.	  Participating	  is	  giving	  your	  opinion,	  asking	  questions.	  I	  feel	  so	  
strongly	  about	  it	  that	  I	  make	  it	  part	  of	  my	  classes.	  Five	  or	  six	  times	  during	  the	  semester,	  sometime	  after	  class	  
on	  Tuesday,	  I’m	  going	  to	  toss	  out	  to	  the	  class	  (via	  email	  or	  Canvas)	  a	  question	  or	  a	  problem	  or	  challenge	  or	  just	  
something	  interesting	  I	  find	  from	  the	  branding	  world.	  It	  might	  be	  some	  intriguing	  new	  work	  I’ve	  seen,	  or	  news	  
about	  a	  brand	  in	  crisis	  –	  it	  will	  vary.	  You’ll	  then	  have	  until	  class	  time	  on	  Thursday	  to	  weigh	  in	  with	  a	  comment,	  
opinion,	  review	  –	  some	  point-­‐of-­‐view	  of	  at	  least	  a	  little	  substance,	  which	  you	  will	  also	  do	  digitally.	  I	  want	  to	  
know	  what	  you	  think,	  and	  why	  you	  think	  it.	  “I	  liked	  the	  music,”	  won’t	  cut	  it.	  But	  tell	  me	  how	  the	  particular	  
choice	  of	  music	  enhanced	  the	  ad,	  or	  how	  the	  music	  choice	  distracted	  from	  the	  story	  and	  you’ll	  score	  points	  
with	  me.	  You	  aren’t	  limited	  to	  one	  comment	  per	  topic,	  but	  remember,	  I’m	  looking	  for	  substance	  in	  a	  response,	  
not	  volume.	  	  
	  
	  
                                                                                                       2


And	  another	  curve	  ball:	  This	  class	  is	  almost	  entirely	  team	  oriented.	  The	  real	  world	  is	  like	  that	  too.	  But	  
sometimes	  you	  get	  to	  do	  something	  entirely	  on	  your	  own,	  and	  so	  you	  shall	  this	  semester.	  I’m	  including	  one	  
individual	  written	  assignment.	  I’m	  going	  to	  ask	  you	  to	  evaluate	  one	  of	  this	  year’s	  Super	  Bowl	  campaigns	  and	  
give	  me	  your	  brilliant	  POV.	  You’ll	  be	  briefed	  formally	  in	  due	  time.	  	  
	  
And	  oh	  yeah,	  there’s	  this:	  
You	  are	  about	  to	  enter	  a	  world	  that	  is	  much	  more	  often	  a	  team	  sport	  than	  an	  individual	  effort.	  The	  ability	  to	  
effectively	  collaborate	  in	  groups,	  to	  marshal	  and	  exploit	  diverse	  points	  of	  view	  and	  personalities,	  to	  be	  a	  good	  leader	  
or	  follower	  as	  a	  situation	  demands	  are	  all	  crucial	  to	  your	  success	  after	  graduation.	  Part	  of	  your	  grade	  is	  assessing	  
your	  abilities	  and	  those	  of	  your	  teammates	  through	  a	  Peer	  Evaluation	  of	  the	  team	  project.	  
	  
A	  few	  other	  things	  to	  know:	   	  
                             •   To	  that	  end,	  a	  review	  of	  your	  teammates	  is	  an	  important	  element	  of	  this	  class.	  
                             •   Don’t	  believe	  the	  cliché.	  Curiosity	  didn’t	  kill	  the	  cat;	  it	  made	  the	  cat	  smarter.	  You’ve	  
                                  chosen	  a	  field	  where	  curiosity	  is	  a	  prized	  characteristic.	  Flex	  your	  curiosity	  muscle.	  	  
                             •   “Class	  participation”	  doesn’t	  just	  mean	  showing	  up	  and	  paying	  attention,	  although	  I	  
                                  appreciate	  you	  doing	  both.	  I	  love	  comments,	  questions,	  opinions	  and	  any	  other	  
                                  participation	  from	  the	  class.	  I	  always	  ask	  for	  it,	  and	  rarely	  get	  as	  much	  as	  I	  want.	  With	  few	  
                                  exceptions,	  there	  are	  no	  dumb	  or	  wrong	  questions.	  And	  trust	  me.	  If	  you	  don’t	  ask	  
                                  questions,	  I	  will	  ask	  you.	  I	  take	  note,	  literally,	  when	  people	  speak	  up.	  You	  may	  even	  get	  a	  
                                  little	  extra	  credit	  for	  it.	  	  	  
                             •   	  Finally,	  there	  are	  selfish	  objectives.	  I	  want	  each	  of	  you	  to	  eventually	  find	  jobs	  in	  the	  
                                  industry	  and	  immediately	  start	  making	  an	  impact.	  Blow	  shit	  up.	  Make	  us	  better.	  That’s	  
                                  good	  for	  you,	  but	  it	  also	  makes	  me	  look	  good.	  And	  UT	  as	  well.	  Everybody	  wins	  if	  you	  leave	  
                                  smarter	  than	  when	  you	  came	  in.	  	  
	  
Evaluation:	                	         Team	  Project:	  	  
                                                      Phase	  1	  Written	  	              =	           20%	  
	           	              	         	            	              Presentation	   =	                   15%	  
	  
	           	              	         	            Phase	  2	  Written	  	              =	           20%	  
	           	              	         	            	              Presentation	   =	                   15%	  
	           	              Individual	  Assignment	   	                          	       =	           10%	  
	           	              Participation	   	                     	              	       =	           10%	  
:	          	              Team	  Peer	  Evaluation	   	                        	       =	           10%	  
	  
                                                      Total	   	                    	       =	  	       100%	  
	  
Required	  Reading:	                  That’s	  a	  trick;	  there	  is	  no	  assigned	  textbook	  for	  this	  class.	  Much	  of	  what	  you	  need	  to	  
                                        know	  is	  already	  in	  your	  head,	  or	  soon	  will	  be	  after	  you	  dig	  into	  the	  project	  and	  let	  your	  
                                        creative	  muscles	  flex.	  You’ll	  probably	  be	  doing	  plenty	  of	  reading	  though,	  but	  online.	  
                                        And	  if	  you	  really	  like	  books,	  pick	  up	  a	  copy	  of	  Perfect	  Pitch	  by	  Jon	  Steel	  
                                        https://www.amazon.com/Perfect-­‐Pitch-­‐Selling-­‐Winning-­‐Business/dp/0471789763.	  If	  
                                        you’ve	  never	  read	  Ogilvy	  on	  Advertising,	  first,	  shame	  on	  you.	  Second,	  read	  it.	  
                                        https://www.amazon.com/Ogilvy-­‐Advertising-­‐
                                        David/dp/039472903X/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1516134170&sr=8-­‐
                                        1&keywords=ogilvy+on+advertising.	  If	  you	  don’t	  want	  to	  buy	  either	  of	  those	  books,	  
                                        borrow	  mine.	  Did	  you	  save	  your	  old	  advertising	  and	  PR	  texts?	  Those	  may	  come	  in	  
                                        handy	  too.	  	  	  
	  
                                                                                                      3


	  
	  
Some	  more	  important	  info:	  
•   I	  don’t	  grade	  on	  a	  curve.	  You	  get	  the	  grade	  you	  earn,	  and	  vice	  versa.	  Team	  grades	  are	  typically	  “same	  
        grade	  for	  each	  member”	  unless	  there	  are	  extenuating	  circumstances,	  like	  a	  team	  member	  really	  not	  doing	  
        their	  share.	  Those	  extenuating	  circumstances	  will	  more	  likely	  be	  recognized	  by	  you	  way	  before	  me.	  That’s	  
        why	  the	  Peer	  Review	  is	  so	  important,	  but	  they	  can	  also	  be	  brought	  up	  to	  me	  directly	  at	  any	  time	  
•   There	  is	  a	  certain	  degree	  of	  subjectivity	  in	  grading	  written	  assignments	  and	  presentations.	  What	  I’m	  
        looking	  for	  is	  not	  necessarily	  a	  right	  or	  wrong	  answer,	  but	  rather	  a	  demonstration	  that	  you	  can	  determine	  
        what	  information	  is	  and	  isn’t	  important	  in	  forming	  your	  recommendations,	  being	  able	  to	  back	  up	  those	  
        recommendations	  with	  facts	  and/or	  well	  thought	  out	  opinions,	  and	  the	  ability	  to	  clearly	  and	  succinctly	  
        state	  those	  recommendations.	  
•   Language	  is	  a	  loose	  and	  fluid	  thing.	  Sometimes	  formality	  is	  important,	  and	  sometimes	  you	  can	  (and	  
        should)	  be	  informal.	  But	  proper	  grammar,	  spelling,	  and	  punctuation	  are	  always	  important.	  At	  my	  firm,	  
        many	  managers	  and	  directors	  eliminate	  job	  candidates	  who	  have	  even	  one	  typo	  in	  a	  resume	  or	  cover	  
        letter;	  that’s	  how	  important	  it	  is.	  I’m	  not	  that	  severe,	  but	  I	  tend	  to	  be	  a	  harsh	  editor.	  	  
•   I	  won’t	  be	  taking	  attendance.	  You’re	  grown-­‐ups	  now,	  and	  you	  know	  your	  responsibilities.	  Plus,	  the	  nature	  
        of	  this	  course	  is	  mostly	  teamwork	  oriented,	  so	  we	  won’t	  even	  be	  meeting	  every	  Tuesday	  and	  Thursday.	  
        Much	  of	  the	  time	  you	  need	  to	  be	  somewhere	  else	  working,	  creating,	  researching,	  navel-­‐gazing.	  I	  aim	  to	  be	  
        your	  mentor,	  not	  your	  babysitter.	  But	  when	  we	  are	  meeting	  as	  a	  class,	  I	  expect	  you	  to	  be	  there.	  	  
•   Make	  a	  habit	  of	  checking	  your	  email	  before	  class.	  If	  for	  any	  reason	  class	  has	  to	  be	  cancelled,	  I	  will	  send	  out	  
        an	  all-­‐class	  email	  no	  later	  than	  30	  minutes	  prior	  the	  start	  of	  class	  
•   It’s	  perfectly	  fine	  to	  seek	  outside	  advice,	  counsel	  or	  input.	  In	  fact,	  it’s	  encouraged.	  But	  the	  final	  output	  
     needs	  to	  be	  your	  original	  work.	  Breaches	  of	  UT’s	  Standard	  of	  Academic	  Integrity	  and	  will	  be	  dealt	  with	  
     accordingly.	  Don’t	  make	  me	  go	  all	  Dean	  Wormer	  on	  you.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
•   Get	  your	  work	  done	  on	  time.	  If	  there	  are	  extenuating	  circumstances,	  contact	  me	  as	  soon	  as	  possible	  to	  talk	  
     about	  it.	  Never	  jeopardize	  your	  safety	  and	  health	  by	  driving	  recklessly	  or	  being	  on	  campus	  at	  an	  unsafe	  
     hour	  in	  an	  attempt	  to	  meet	  a	  class	  deadline.	  
•   I	  expect	  to	  see	  some	  coffee,	  tea,	  Red	  Bull.	  Eat	  before	  you	  get	  here.	  And	  pick	  up	  after	  yourselves.	  
•   I	  promise	  not	  to	  take	  or	  make	  calls,	  texts	  or	  emails	  during	  class.	  I	  expect	  the	  same	  from	  you.	  Likewise,	  I	  
     want	  to	  be	  accessible,	  but	  use	  discretion.	  Like	  you,	  I	  have	  a	  life	  away	  from	  the	  classroom.	  Well,	  maybe	  it’s	  
     not	  like	  yours,	  but	  you	  get	  the	  point.	  	  
•   Numeric	  scores	  are	  posted	  on	  Canvas.	  Final	  grades	  are	  recorded	  as	  a	  letter	  grade,	  including	  plusses	  and	  
     minuses.	  Those	  are	  available	  at	  the	  Office	  of	  the	  Registrar's	  "See	  my	  grades"	  page	  located	  at:	  
     http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/grades/report.	  
•   As	  in	  real	  life,	  things	  can	  and	  do	  change.	  The	  schedule	  is	  tentative	  and	  can	  change	  based	  on	  client	  and	  guest	  
     availability,	  production	  schedules	  and	  unexpected	  opportunities.	  Students	  are	  responsible	  for	  changes	  to	  
     the	  course	  schedule	  as	  announced	  in	  class.	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
                                                                                                 4


	  
	  
The	  legal	  stuff.	  I	  didn’t	  write	  this,	  but	  you	  still	  need	  to	  read	  it:	  
University	  of	  Texas	  Honor	  Code	  
The	  core	  values	  of	  the	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin	  are	  learning,	  discovery,	  freedom,	  leadership,	  individual	  
opportunity,	  and	  responsibility.	  Each	  member	  of	  the	  University	  is	  expected	  to	  uphold	  these	  values	  through	  
integrity,	  honesty,	  trust,	  fairness,	  and	  respect	  toward	  peers	  and	  community.	  
	  
Documented	  Disability	  Statement	  
The	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin	  provides	  upon	  request	  appropriate	  academic	  accommodations	  for	  qualified	  
students	  with	  disabilities.	  For	  more	  information,	  contact	  Division	  of	  Diversity	  and	  Community	  Engagement,	  
Services	  for	  Students	  with	  Disabilities,	  512-­‐471-­‐6259,	  http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.	  
	  
Mandatory	  Reading:	  All	  students	  agree	  to	  read	  then	  abide	  by	  the	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin’s	  Standard	  of	  
Academic	  Integrity	  and	  understand	  the	  nature	  of	  Academic	  Dishonesty	  as	  defined	  by	  UT-­‐Austin	  at:	  
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php	  	  and	  	  
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php	  
	  
By	  UT	  Austin	  policy,	  you	  must	  notify	  me	  of	  your	  pending	  absence	  at	  least	  fourteen	  days	  prior	  to	  the	  date	  of	  
observance	  of	  a	  religious	  holy	  day.	  If	  you	  must	  miss	  a	  class,	  a	  meeting,	  an	  examination,	  a	  work	  assignment,	  or	  
a	  project	  in	  order	  to	  observe	  a	  religious	  holy	  day,	  you	  will	  be	  given	  an	  opportunity	  to	  complete	  the	  missed	  
work	  within	  a	  reasonable	  time	  after	  the	  absence.	  
	  
Copyright	  Notice:	  All	  original	  materials	  presented	  in	  this	  class	  are	  protected	  by	  copyright.	  These	  materials	  may	  
be	  used	  only	  by	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin	  students	  officially	  registered	  for	  this	  semester’s	  class.	  	  
	  
Helpful	  people	  and	  places:	  
●	  College	  of	  Communication	  Instructional	  Media	  Center:	  
http://communication.utexas.edu/technology/imc/	  
●	  Fresh-­‐ups:	  UT	  College	  of	  Communication	  Software	  Workshops:	  
http://www.facebook.com/pages/The-­‐Fresh-­‐Ups-­‐UT-­‐College-­‐of-­‐Communication-­‐Software-­‐Work	  
shops/147245465319771	  
●	  UT	  Counseling	  and	  Mental	  Health	  Center,	  24-­‐Hour	  Telephone	  Counseling:	  512-­‐471-­‐2255	  
●	  Behavioral	  concerns	  advice	  line:	  512-­‐232-­‐5050	  
●	  Undergraduate	  Writing	  Center,	  FAC	  211,	  471-­‐6222:	  www.uwc.utexas.edu	  
●	  Student	  Emergency	  Services:	  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/	  
	  
If	  stress,	  test	  anxiety,	  racing	  thoughts,	  feeling	  unmotivated	  or	  anything	  else	  is	  getting	  in	  your	  way,	  UT	  has	  
options	  available	  for	  support.	  Our	  CARE	  
Counselor	  in	  the	  Moody	  College	  of	  Communication	  is:	  Abby	  Simpson,	  LCSW	  |	  CMA	  4.134	  |	  512.471.7642	  
(leave	  a	  message	  if	  she	  is	  unavailable)	  
Need	  Immediate	  Help?	  
-­‐	  Counseling	  and	  Mental	  Health	  Center	  (CMHC):	  M-­‐F	  8-­‐5p	  |	  SSB,	  5th	  floor	  |	  512-­‐471-­‐	  3515	  |cmhc.utexas.edu	  
-­‐	  CMHC	  Crisis	  Line:	  24/7	  |	  512.471.2255	  |	  	  cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html	  
	  
	  
	  
                                                                                                   5
