                                                  Integrated
                              Communication
                                                   Campaigns
                                     PR S377K & ADV 373 (Unique #s: 06160 & 06625)
the person handing out grades:                        the real brains of the operation (your TA):
Ryan Romero                                           Regan Gavin
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com                            rtgavin@utexas.edu
Office: BMC 4.306                                     Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays                         Hours: TBD
        12:30pm - 2pm, 3:30pm - 5pm
course objectives
Sure, I could get all business buzzwordy about what you’re here to do. I could talk about how
you’re going to work synergistically as a single unit to effectively communicate a brand
message and increase the conversion of a given target market. But I won’t. Well, not beyond
that last bit. We all know what this class is about. This is where you take everything you’ve
learned in your time here here at UT and put it together for one, single, noble purpose - to take
over the wor...ahem, to win a client’s business. You’ll get to know a real world client, do your
research, discover the issue/problem/opportunity, do more research, figure out a plan, execute
that plan, and then try to convince that client that you’re right and everyone else has no idea
what they’re talking about. Like picking up a new friend at a bar, only with a bigger budget and
less risk of getting alcohol thrown in your face. Oh, and you’ll do it as a team, because that’s
what we do in the real world. For realsies.
You’ll spend weeks working to prepare and deliver a single campaign idea. That’s right, all the
eggs are in one big project basket. In the end you’re to deliver a presentation that convinces
me and the client that you’re the best and we’d be crazy not to hand over our money to you on
the spot. Simple. Did I mention you’ll be competing with other teams? Well, now I have. Yup,
the team whose campaign is chosen will lead the way for the other teams in the execution
phase.
things to focus on. (worth coming back to a few times, I’d wager)
    - Teamwork​: I’m talking ‘80s montage, guitar solo, best buds getting together to get it
        done kinda teamwork. No loners. No “I do this, you do that and we’ll cram it together in
        the end.'' I want you all talking, exchanging ideas, building each other up and
        discovering new territory. Meet every day. Trust me on this. Work as a real team, in real
        time, in person if possible.
    - Good ideas​: What do I mean “good”? It’s unique, conceptual, solves the problem,
        engages the customer, talks “with” not “at”, has legs that take it into all known media
        (and some unknown), and above all DOESN’T BORE THE PANTS OFF ME. Oh, and not


        just two or three of these things. All of them. If it’s been done before, don’t do it. I don’t
        want well-researched advertising wallpaper here. You’ve turned in boring papers
        already. Now do something you’re proud of.
     -  Research and proof​: Don’t just tell your idea, sell it. Your idea may be amazingly funny
        or it may move a client to tears, but you still have to convince them it’s the right way to
        go. If they’re gonna spend money with you then they want to know they’re getting a
        solid ROI. They won’t just take your word for it. Have a rationale and show it.
     -  Trust​: Does the client trust you and your team with their future? Why should they? Earn
        that trust. Don’t misspell a single word. Don’t use outdated research. Prove to them you
        know their business and above all make them like you. Yeah, go figure. They’re human
        beings and emotional connections are important. Make them like you and they’ll like
        your idea just a bit more. Make them think you’re a tool and it doesn’t matter how good
        your idea is.
required text
Buy this thing. Read this thing. Is there a test? Yes, it’s called “life”.
Perfect Pitch,​ Jon Steel ISBN 0471789763
suggested texts
All the books you’ve read for all your classes previous to this. I’m not kidding. Read them
again. Ask your group members if they’ve read different books and read those too. Life (and
this class) is about connecting dots and the more dots you have the better chance you have at
doing something amazing.
helpful people and places
     ● College of Communication Instructional Media Center:
     ● http://communication.utexas.edu/technology/imc/
     ● Fresh-ups: UT College of Communication Software Workshops:
        http://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Fresh-Ups-UT-College-of-Communication-Softw
        are-Workshops/147245465319771
     ● Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-6222: ​www.uwc.utexas.edu
     ● Student Emergency Services: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ut policies.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 512.471.6259, 512.471.6441 TTY.
things to do - ​Think smart. Think weird. Invent. Explore. Share.
things to don’t​ - Cheat - You will be caught, fail, and be kicked out of school. Or worse you
won’t.
do the work. do it on time. it’s your only chance.
Late assignments are a zero. Read that again. And again. Make arrangements with me to turn
in assignments EARLY if you know you’ll be absent. Emergency issues should be handled by
Student Emergency Services who will, in turn, contact me. There is no extra credit, only Zuul.


Unless you have accommodations from SES and have worked out said accommodations with
me AHEAD OF TIME, there is no extra credit work, makeup tests, or other special treatment.
email and canvas
In this course, email and Canvas will both be used to communicate. I’m very reachable on my
email. So you will be as well. Make sure your Canvas email is updated to a current, reachable
account. You will be responsible for checking it regularly for class work and announcements.
let’s get passionate
We talk about a lot of things in class. As creatives our goal is to make real, truthful human
emotional connections. And both humans and emotions are nothing if not messy. Touchy
subjects will be brought up and discussed because we’re putting real work out into the real
world where those subjects exist. While we have to discuss (and grow from doing so) the
impact these thoughts and ideas have on society from an academic perspective, I will not
tolerate racism, hate speech, misogyny or any other kind of marginalization and neither should
you.
We’re navigating a very delicate time in our society and if someone, including myself, ever
crosses a line, even accidentally, I encourage you to come to me or to my TA and address your
concerns. Chances are the person in question was simply mistaken or ignorant on the subject
and will want to apologize. This is how we grow and move forward. You are safe here. You are
welcome here. Do not bottle up your concerns. Nobody can feel creative if they don’t feel safe
and we won’t undermine our mission to grow your creativity.
grade breakdown
I’ve weighted your grade evenly across all aspects of your pitch with extra OOOMPH on peer
evals. “Oh boy, another group project. When will professors learn that I don’t get anything out
of…” I’ve heard it. The reality is this is the rest of your chosen professional career. You will
work on teams. You will work with people you do not like. You will work with slackers and
goody-two-shoes and drama queens and people related to the management. You will work
with people who are committed, others who are too busy, some who have kids, some who
have 2nd and 3rd jobs, people in complicated relationships, people with emotional hardships,
the list goes on and on and on. Some of the best education I can give you will be related to
learning to handle these very human challenges. Know how to work with a team and you’ll find
yourself far more hirable out there after graduation.
Think of me as a member of your team. I’m here to help. Then, once you are happy with your
work you turn it in for a grade. This should be the easiest “A” you can earn so long as you keep
moving forward, keep me in the loop, and never settle for just “ok”.
Research Deck/Preso (internal)                           15%
Strategy Deck/Preso (internal)                           15%
Client Pitch                                             15%
Creative Deck/Preso                                      15%
Client Impressions / Feedback                            15%
Peer evaluations / Professionalism                       25%


It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful than usual lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts,
feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for
support. Our CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is:
     - Abby Simpson, LCSW | CMA 4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is
        unavailable)
Need Immediate Help?
     - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
        3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
     - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html


But, when? WHEN?!
R, 8/29  - Welcome: Syllabus, Introductions, etc.
T, 9/3   - Client Meetings
R, 9/5   - Client Meetings
T, 9/10  - First thoughts, strategy, and organization. Develop research.
R, 9/12  -
T, 9/17  - Launch research initiatives and gather consumer insights
R, 9/19  -
T, 9/24  -
R, 9/26  -
T, 10/1  - Develop strategy, budget(s), segmentation, and positioning.
R, 10/3  -
T, 10/8 -
R, 10/10 - Polish and practice presentations
T, 10/15 -
R, 10/17 - Pitch to client
T, 10/22 - Client feedback
R, 10/24 - Adjust tweak and develop creative brief.
T, 10/29 - Begin concepting creative.
R, 10/31 -
T, 11/5  -
R, 11/7  - Develop creative executions
T, 11/12 -
R, 11/14 -
T, 11/19 -
R, 11/21 - Final Creative Preso
T, 11/26 - Receive tweaks
R, 11/28 - Thanksgiving Holiday
T, 12/3  - Send to client. Receive any final needs over weekend.
R, 12/5  - Send final deliverables. (if needed)
