                                                                                           Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                                        Summer 2019
                                   EDP 371: Introduction to Statistics
                                        Summer 2019 – Web-based
Instructor
Dr. Anita Israni
Email: aip@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesdays: 11am-1pm (online) & by appt (online or in office)
Office: SZB 538E
Online Office Hours: As this is a WB class, I will be holding online office hours. During the hours listed
above, please use the link provided in Canvas under “Office Hour Link” to connect using your computer. If
possible, please email me at least 15 minutes beforehand so I can get the online whiteboard equipment set. I
am also available to meet in person during the week. Please email me to setup an appointment.
Teaching Assistant
Jennifer Nadasdy
Email: jennifer.nadasdy@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Mondays: 10am-12pm, Wednesdays: 4pm-6pm
Homework review session: Monday 4-5pm
Office: SZB 536 (Open Area)
Course Description:
This course is designed to help students learn:
    • Introductory descriptive and inferential statistical procedures that are used in educational, behavioral
        and social science research studies.
    • Assumptions and concepts underlying, the hypotheses being tested by, and the inferences that can be
        made with the use of the relevant statistics and procedures.
    • How to conduct your own such statistical analyses and to evaluate critically others’ uses of statistics.
Pre-requisites
        Mathematical skills: While this course is not completely mathematical, it is founded upon the use of
mathematical tools. Thus some fundamental mathematical skills are essential for successful mastery of the
material. Students are expected to have basic algebra skills including the ability to solve single variable
equations. Students should have a basic understanding of exponents and square roots, as well as the order of
operations, proportions, fractions, decimals, percentage, and negative numbers. Appendix A of the textbook
contains a review of the basic math skills needed for this course. Please be sure to review and check with the
instructor or teaching assistants if you have any concerns.
        Calculator: Students are required to have a scientific calculator that can be used for the following
operations: sum, multiply, square and take the square root of numbers. Calculators are recommended for use
during lecture time, homework assignments, and exams. Please do not forget your calculator for the exam.
Use of cell phones is completely forbidden during the exam.
        Computer software: The material covered in this course does not require the use of statistical
software. Instead, students are expected to calculate the relevant statistics using the formulas provided by
hand/calculator. The formulas are simple enough that their use should reinforce students’ understanding of
the relevant concepts. Jumping straight to using statistical software instead of working on problems by hand
tends to reduce the depth of students’ understanding. In higher level statistics courses, use of Excel, SPSS,
SAS, R, etc. is introduced but it is not deemed necessary for this basic material.
                                                                                                                  1


                                                                                             Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                                          Summer 2019
Course Materials and Resources
         • Statistics for the Behavioral Sciences, 10th Edition by F. J. Gravetter and L. B. Wallnau. This
              textbook is available at the Co-op. It also provides a good resource in that it presents the material
              in a slightly different way than the instructor presents the material during lecture time. You are
              welcome to use an earlier edition (9th edition) but then you are responsible for making sure that
              you read corresponding material (as page numbers likely differ), figuring out errors that might
              have been fixed in the later edition and aligning problems. You are only responsible for the
              material in the textbook covered during the lectures. There is also a copy on PCL reserves.
         • Lecture handouts matching the overheads used by the instructor will be available on CANVAS
              (http://canvas.utexas.edu) under Introduction to Statistics. Reading the handouts does not
              provide the student with the learning experiences nor the complete material equivalent to that
              obtained by attending class. The handouts provide a skeleton of what is being covered in the
              lectures and will thus be an incomplete version of the material actually covered. They contain
              spaces for the student to fill in the additional material and practice provided during the lectures.
              Notes will be posted at the start of the online module. I recommend printing out the notes and
              using them as you go through the lectures and write in any additional notes and calculations
              discussed in the lectures.
Assignments - UNGRADED
Homework
         Reading about statistics does not ensure mastery. As with many other skills, the best way to master
statistics is through practice. There will be homework problems associated with each class topic (see List of
Topics). Once a topic has been covered in class, the homework should be completed. The homework
problems will be posted online also for students who do not have the 10th edition.
         The majority of the homework assignments are even-numbered problems from the textbook. Because
answers to odd-numbered problems are available at the back of the text, students are also strongly
encouraged to try odd-numbered problems on their own. The more practice, the better!
         The answers to each assigned even-numbered homework problem will be made available in the
Homework Answers folder on Canvas. It is the student’s responsibility to check their work and ensure their
mastery of the relevant material. Do come to office hours with the teaching assistant and the instructor if you
have any questions. Also attend the homework review session offered by the TA each week. These sessions
will go through the homework for that week in detail and provide a step-by-step process.
Assignments - GRADED
Exams
         Exams tend to “motivate” students to thoroughly review course material and provide students with
additional practice. There will be 1 final exam (see schedule on page 6 & 7) will consist of conceptual,
computational and application questions. The exam will focus on the material covered during the course
from the first module. More detail will be provided about the material assessed by the exam closer in time to
the actual exam. It should be noted that most of the statistical skills acquired during this class are constantly
building upon earlier learning. This means that to do problems in later chapters, students might need to recall
skills learned in earlier sections! The exam will be given on campus.
         To relieve test anxiety and approximate a more authentic environment in which researchers have
access to reference materials, students will be given a formula sheet for use during exams. And the format of
the formula sheet will be shared the week before the exam. The exam is not open-book because summary of
learning should be accomplished before, not during, the exam. The dates of the exam will not change.
         Format: Exam will consist of true-false, multiple-choice and short-answer questions including both
conceptual and computational problems. Partial credit is awarded where relevant. Students will be given the
entire final exam time to complete the exam.
                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                             Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                                          Summer 2019
        Materials: Students will be given a formula sheet and necessary tables for the exam. Students MUST
bring a calculator. Cell phones must be hidden away and turned off during exams.
        Proportion of final grade: The final exam is worth a total of 30%.
Online Quizzes
        This assignment is designed to encourage students to keep up with material covered in class while
offering them the opportunity to test their mastery of concepts and to try out additional computational
exercises. It also exposes students to various kinds of questions they should be considering when reviewing
material. Quizzes for each module will be posted on Canvas and need to be completed by the deadline
posted for that module. Please be responsible for keeping track of the deadlines. The quiz will be closed
after the due date and time. It is your responsibility to ensure that you complete the quizzes on time.
        Proportion of final grade: Quizzes are worth 50% of the final grade.
Participation in Online Class Discussions/Polls for each Module
        Each module will have a discussion/poll after you have reviewed the topics. You might be asked a
simple question or given a task, like finding an interesting statistics article. Your participation will not only
help you in understanding the concepts by pushing you to think through some of the tasks/discussion
questions but also help your fellow (online) classmates through your insightful contributions. You will be
evaluated on the quality of your postings for each module and if they show that you carefully thought
through them. While you be graded on your own postings, adding insightful replies to your classmates’
postings may add some bonus points to your grade.
        Proportion of final grade: Participation with fully thought-out posts in online discussions are worth
20% of the final grade. Extra Credit will be given if you provide insightful comments to others’ posts.
NOTE: As this is a web-based course, it is mostly self-paced. You are responsible for completing all
lectures and assignments, along with meeting the deadlines for the quizzes and exams. All material needed
for a module will be posted on Canvas at the start of each module. It is recommended that you go through the
sub-sections for each module in order. Please visit office hours when needed. I also recommend attending the
homework review sessions each week where the TA will go through the homework problem in detail. You
just need to show up and be ready to learn. Do not wait until the week of the exam to start doing the HW!
Makeup assignments
        Only in exceptional circumstances (which does NOT include family vacations/ weddings, routine
doctor’s appointments, job interviews, etc.) and only with prior permission from the instructor, or with a
verifiable medical excuse, will students be able to take a makeup exam. The student must provide medical
proof of illness. The student is responsible for notifying the teaching assistant and the instructor by the day of
the exam that they cannot attend the exam.
        As a student will be given ample time to complete a quiz, it is the responsibility of the student to
ensure the quiz is completed by the due date. It is important to complete the quizzes before the day that they
are due to avoid forgetting or working around other issues that may come up.
Grading system
              Assessment                                                           Weight
              Online Quizzes                                                       50%
              Final Exam                                                           30%
              Discussions                                                          20%
                                                                                                                    3


                                                                                           Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                                        Summer 2019
Grades are assigned based on the percentage of accumulated points as follows:
        A : 93-100; B+: 87-89;         C+: 77-79;      D+: 67-69;      F: 0-<60
        A−: 90-92;       B : 83-86;    C : 73-76;      D : 63-66;
                         B−: 80-82;    C−: 70-72;      D−: 60-62;
Attendance policy
        Students are responsible for all material presented in lectures. (This material includes course material
and due dates for online quizzes). It is expected that students will watch all lectures and complete all
exercises and assignments. The class is designed this way because it is felt that the guided practice obtained
during lectures provide one of the best opportunities for learning. While exam dates will not change, due
dates for online quizzes are assigned because they will be based on when the coverage of the relevant
material is complete.
        The final exam is held during the times noted and can only be re-scheduled for individual students
under exceptional circumstances. (see Makeup Assignments section)
Religious Holy Days
        Religious holy days sometimes conflict with examination schedules. Section 51.911 of the Texas
Education Code addresses absences by students for observance of religious holy days. The policy states that a
student shall be excused from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused
under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or
complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the
absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the
absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
        If you must miss an examination or a online assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, you
will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence but you
must have arranged the new deadline with me (the instructor) in advance. The same applies for online
assignments. If you will have to miss the deadline for submission of an online assignment, due to the
observance of a religious holy day, then it is your responsibility to schedule a time with me in advance of the
deadline for the assignment.
Scholastic dishonesty policy
        The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive
a postponement or an extension on a test or other class assignment, and submission of essentially the same
written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of faculty members. (Please refer to the
University of Texas’ Honor Code that can be found at the following website:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct)
        By accepting this syllabus and participating in this course, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. This means (specifically for this class) that any work that you hand in for a grade
MUST be your own work. This also means that you may NOT use or review the assignments or exams of
students of this class from previous semesters.
        Violation of this agreement and of any of the University rules on scholastic dishonesty will result in
the student being awarded an F for the final course grade, being referred to the appropriate university
officials, and may result in suspension or expulsion from the University.
                                                                                                                  4


                                                                                        Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                                     Summer 2019
Disability Accommodation
        Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get an accommodation letter
that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities (471-6259 voice or 471-4641
TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each
course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five
business days before an exam, the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that
will be needed. See the following website for more information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Communication
        You will also be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for announcements and
copies of my overheads. As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as
unanticipated disruptions, so plan accordingly.
        In this course Canvas and e-mail will be used as a means of communication between instructor,
teaching assistants and students. When emailing questions, please be specific and give adequate time for
response.
CARE Counseling
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to need support
when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are available to
help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in
the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB
212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you
leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on
Mondays and Wednesdays from 1 - 2 PM in JES A115 and Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM in SZB
216. You will check–in at the Front Desk, and they will let Danie know you're waiting. All services are
confidential. None of your information will be shared without your written consent. Come by and see us,
we are here to listen.
                                                                                                               5


                                                                                   Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                                Summer 2019
                         EDP 371: Introduction to Statistics-WB, Summer 2019
                                         Schedule of Topics
** NOTE: Start date for each module represents when the course material will be available, and end
                        date represents the completion date for that module.
   Date:                   Topic                Reading       Homework - 10th          Assignments
                                                                    edition                  Due
 Module 0    Syllabus, course requirements,                  Read Syllabus and Complete all
     6/6     course content, etc.                            ask questions as     discussions and
                                                             needed               graded quizzes by the
 Module 1    Introduction continued:          Chapter 1      Chapter 1            deadlines listed in
 6/6 to 6/10      Vocabulary                                8, 10, 12, 20, 22    Canvas
                  4 scales of
                     measurement
                  Statistical notation
 Module 2    Frequency distributions of       Chapter 2      Chapter 2
6/11 to 6/13 scores:                                         4, 6, 10, 22
                  Tables / Graphs
                  Shape
                  Percentiles
 Module 3    Measures of central tendency     Chapter 3      Chapter 3
6/14 to 6/16      Mean / Median / Mode                      4, 6, 10, 22, 24
                  Characteristics of
                     Mean
 Module 4    Measures of variability:         Chapter 4      Chapter 4
6/17 to 6/21      Range /                                   2, 4, 7, 8, 14, 15,
                  IQ & SIQ Range                            18, 22, 24
                  Variance & standard
                     deviation
 Module 5    Z-scores:                        Chapter 5      Chapter 5
6/22 to 6/26      Raw scores⇒Z-scores                       1, 6, 22, 24, 25
                  Z-scores⇒Raw scores Chapter 6:            Chapter 6
                  Transforming scales        p.159-178,     6, 10, 18, 20
                  Normal distribution        p.184-on
 Module 6    Sampling distributions of        Chapter 7      Chapter 7
 6/27 to 7/1 sample means:                                   1, 4, 8, 10, 13, 16,
                  Shape                                     20
                  Mean
                  Variability
 Module 7    One-sample Hypothesis            Chapter 8      Chapter 8
 7/2 to 7/8  Testing                                         4, 6, 8, 16, 22, 23
                  Assumptions
                  The Four Steps and the
                     “logic” of Hypothesis
                     testing
                  Type I & II / Power
                                                                                                          6


                                                                          Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                       Summer 2019
   Date:                  Topic           Reading   Homework – 10th           Online Quiz
                                                           edition             Due Date
 Module 8    The one-sample t-statistic  Chapter 9  Chapter 9            Complete all
 7/9 to 7/12                                        1, 2, 5, 6, 8, 12,   discussions and
                                                    18, 22, 23           graded quizzes by
 Module 9    Confidence intervals        Chapter 9  13, 14c), 15b),      the deadlines listed
7/13 to 7/16                                        17b)                 in Canvas
Module 10    Independent samples Hyp.    Chapter10  Chapter 10
7/17 to 7/19 Testing                                3, 4, 6, 10, 14, 18,
                 Sampling dist’n of                19, 22
                     differences between
                     sample means
                 F-Max statistic
Module 11    Related samples             Chapter 11 Chapter 11
7/20 to 7/24     Sampling dist’n of                1, 2, 10, 20, 22
                     mean differences
Module 12    Analysis of Variance        Chapter 12 Chapter 12
7/25 to 7/28 (ANOVA)                                1, 3, 4, 9, 10, 12,
                                                    20, 21
Module 13    Multiple comparisons        Chapter 12 Chapter 12
 7/29 to 8/1 (cont’d)                    p.393-on   HW will be
                 Tukey’s HSD                       provided
                 Scheffé’s
Module 14    Correlation                 Chapter 15 Chapter 15
 8/2 to 8/5      Hypothesis testing     p.485-509 1, 2, 5, 8, 10, 12,
                                                    14
Module 15    Simple Regression           Chapter 16 Chapter 16
 8/6 to 8/9                              p.529-537 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 14
                                                    and calculate
                                                    standard error of
                                                    estimate for 10
                                                    and 14
Module 16    Chi-squared test of         Chapter 17 Chapter 17
8/10 to 8/14 Goodness of fit             p.559-573 2, 4, 8, 10
             Final Exam                  TBD        Time: TBD
                                                                                                 7


                                                                                                Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                                             Summer 2019
Hints for success
         Practice: Practice will facilitate successful mastery of the skills to be learned from this class. During the
module, guided practice will be offered in the form of sample problems. The ungraded homework and online
quizzes will also provide opportunities for practice. It is hoped that studying for and completion of exams will
provide additional such opportunities!
         Practice II: Watching the instructor work through examples might (hopefully) make it appear simple.
However, I will not be at your side when you are working problems out in the real world (or, say) on exams. I
strongly recommend that you practice what you see me doing.
         Practice III: You know the topic you are covering when doing a homework or online quizzes or listening
to my working through an example in class. In the real world (or, in, say, an exam), you will not have these
contextual clues (such as chapter headings!). Make sure you understand when to use the statistics we cover, not
just how to do so. (The portfolio entries are designed to help you think about when to use the statistics as well as
how to do so).
         Homework I: The homework problems provide you with mostly computational practice. However, I
expect you to grasp more than just the steps required to solve problems. I would strongly recommend that you
also focus on mastering the concepts covered during lecture time. Their mastery will provide you with a strong
foundation for understanding the statistics covered in this and later statistics courses.
         Homework II: By the same token, while some of the homework problems appear to entail purely
computational practice, some of them are trying to demonstrate statistical concepts (such as comparing factors
that might impact statistical conclusions) using numbers. Instead of whipping through the computations, do try to
take some time to think through why the questions might ask you to compare outcomes. What factor is being
manipulated and what is the impact of the manipulation?
         Homework Review Session: What better way to go through the homework than to have an expert by your
side ready to answer any questions you have. Each of the TAs will hold a weekly homework review session
where they will go through the problems assigned. It is recommended to try the problems on your own before
coming but is not needed. If you want to come sit in, please do.
         Textbook: You are responsible for whatever topics are covered in the lectures. We do not necessarily
cover all the material in the textbook. The terminology in the textbook sometimes differs from what we use in the
lecture videos. Use the terminology and symbols that I use in the lectures. For class assignments, you must use
the terminology and symbols that I use in the lecture. However, it is helpful to realize that there are multiple ways
that disciplines present statistical concepts and for you to be flexible for scenarios outside of this class.
         Study groups: It is highly recommended that you form study groups to master the material in this class. If
you understand a concept, teaching it to your fellow students will help you solidify that learning. If you do not
understand a concept, it might help to have it presented to you by someone who has more recently mastered it
rather than by the TA or instructor. It can help to have a concept presented by several people in different ways.
BUT any of the work handed in for assessment (assignments and exams) must be the work of the individual
student. If it is not, you will receive an F for the course.
         Office hours: Use them – our job is to help you learn! If you cannot make our office hours due to
scheduling conflicts with work or courses, ask me or the teaching assistants via email to schedule another time to
meet.
         Email I: Check your email messages from me and the TAs.
         Email II: Use email to schedule appointments NOT to ask conceptual or computational questions. We
will not answer those questions online because hand-feeding you the answer(s) does not help your learning as
much as our prompting you (face-to-face) to come up with the answer.
         Email III: (and most important) If you email one of us (professor or teaching assistants), please give us
adequate time to respond and copy all of us on the email. That ensures a speedier response.
         Keep up: The skills to be mastered for statistical analyses keep building upon themselves. If you fall
behind, it will not only affect the topic in which you are behind but will affect your learning of a later topic.
                                                                                                                       8


                                                                   Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                                Summer 2019
   FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO HAVE THE 9th EDITION OF THE
TEXTBOOK, PLEASE USE THE FOLLOWING PAGE NUMBERS
                            9th EDITION PAGE NUMBERS
                     Topic                  Reading   Homework – 9th Edition
   Syllabus, course requirements, course              LOOK ON CANVAS
   content, etc.                                      FOR HOMEWORK
                                                      SETS
   Introduction:                           Chapter 1
        Vocabulary
        4 scales of measurement
        Statistical notation
   Frequency distributions of scores:      Chapter 2
        Tables
        Graphs
        Shape
        Percentiles
   Measures of central tendency            Chapter 3
        Mean
        Median
        Mode
        Characteristics of Mean
   Measures of variability:                Chapter 4
        Range
        IQ & SIQ Range
        Variance & standard deviation
   Z-scores:                               Chapter 5
        Raw scores⇒Z-scores
        Z-scores⇒Raw scores               Chapter 6:
        Transforming scales               p.163-184,
        Normal distribution               p.189-on
   Sampling distributions of sample means: Chapter 7
        Shape
        Mean
        Variability
   One-sample Hypothesis Testing           Chapter 8
        Assumptions
        The Four Steps and the “logic” of
          Hypothesis testing
        Type I & Type II error / Power
                                                                                          9


                                                    Syllabus for EDP 371-WB
                                                                 Summer 2019
                  Topic               Reading  Homework
The one-sample t-statistic          Chapter 9
Confidence intervals                Chapter 9
Independent samples Hyp. Testing    Chapter10
    Sampling dist’n of differences
       between sample means
    F-Max statistic
Related samples                     Chapter 11
    Sampling dist’n of mean
       differences
Analysis of Variance (ANOVA)        Chapter 12
Multiple comparisons (cont’d)       Chapter 12
    Tukey’s HSD                    p.415-on
    Scheffé’s
Correlation                         Chapter 15
    Hypothesis testing             p.509-530
Simple Regression                   Chapter 16
                                    p.557-569
Chi-squared test of                 Chapter 17
    Goodness of Fit                p.591-603
                                                                          10
