HIS 340S/AAS 325/ANS340S                                                                                                              Fall 2019
                                             CHINESE IN THE UNITED STATES
Considering U.S. history through the lens of Chinese experiences emphasizes the national development of ideas and
practices concerning immigration controls, rights to citizenship, multiracial societies, forms of multicultural
integration and assimilation, and the relationship of the Constitution to varying conceptions of equality. Chinese as
a race were the first targets of enforced immigration restrictions. As such, they have played key roles as the United
States determined its powers and priorities in enacting immigration controls and its visions for democracy, along
with the underlying racial ideologies and conceptions of national belonging.
This course offers an overview of the history of Chinese in America with an emphasis on Chinese American identity
and community formations under the shadow of the Yellow Peril. Using primary documents and secondary
literature, we will examine structures of work, family, immigration law, racism, class, and gender in order to
understand the changing roles and perceptions of Chinese Americans in the United States from 1847 to the present.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following
four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal
responsibility, and social responsibility.
This course also carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of American cultural experiences. A substantial portion of your grade stems from assignments
concerning the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
Required Texts:
Iris Chang, The Chinese in America (Penguin, 2003).
Yung, Chang, and Lai, Chinese American Voices: From the Gold Rush to the Present (University of California Press, 2006)
Additional course materials will be posted on Canvas including maps for the quiz, chronology of important events, exam
reviews, and excerpts from the following:
Chan and Hsu, ed., Chinese Americans and the Politics of Race and Culture (Temple University Press, 2008)
Philip Choy et al, Coming Man: 19th Century American Perceptions of Chinese (University of Washington Press, 1995)
Franklin Odo, ed., The Columbia Documentary History of the Asian American Experience (Columbia University Press, 2002)
Vivian Wu Wong, “Somewhere Between Black and White: The Chinese in Mississippi”
          http://www.oah.org/pubs/magazine/asianamerican/vivian-wong.html
Judy Yung, ed., Unbound Voices: A Documentary History of Chinese Women in San Francisco (University of California Press, 1999)
Grade Distribution: Final grades will be allocated as follows: A 93-100; A- 90-92; B+ 88-89; B 83-87; B- 80-82; C+
78-79; C 73-77; C- 70-72 and so forth
                    25 % research essay
                      5 % Map quiz
                    20 % Class attendance and discussion
                    50 % Examinations
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from Services for Students with Disabilities.
Lecture and Reading Assignment Schedule (Subject to Change)
Week 1: Introduction
Week 2: East Across the Pacific
Week 3: Chinese on the American Frontier
Week 4: Becoming the Yellow Peril
                                                           1


Week 5: Experiences of Exclusion
Week 6: Between Black and White
Week 7: Neither American nor Chinese
Week 8: Midterm
Week 9: Domesticating the Yellow Peril
Week 10: World War II
Week 11: Enemies and Friends: The Cold War
Week 12: Chinese American Culture and Hybrid Identities
Week 13: Chinese American Civil Rights
Week 14: Astronauts and Illegals
                                 THANKSGIVING BREAK, Nov. 28-Dec. 1
Week 15: Are Chinese Honorary Whites? Race and Class in the Twenty-first Century
Final Exam: Friday, December 13, 2:00 pm-5:00 pm
                                         2
