ARC 327G/386M: REGENERATIVE ARCHITECTURE
Fall 2018
Instructor: Michael Garrison	  
	  
                                                                                 	  
OBJECTIVE
The intent of this course is to learn to integrate sustainable building and
planning principles into the form making process of architectural design. This
course is intended to be one of a series of design enrichment seminars that
explore in depth the principles of qualitative and quantitative design.
CONTENT
The course content will: survey the principles of environmentally sensitive
design and planning, review case studies of "green building" applications and
explore various concepts for integrating sustainable planning and building
principles into the form making process of architectural design. The process
includes: an analysis of bioclimatic comfort and building metabolism; design
with climate; integration of passive heating and cooling systems; water
conservation planning; waste systems; and the basis for specifying sustainable
building materials. The focus of the course investigation for the fall semester
of 2018 will be to develop the design and the sustainable architecture principles
for the U.S. Department of Energy’s sponsored student design competition;
“Race to Zero”.
FORMAT
The course will have six components, including: 1) regularly scheduled
lectures; 2) a weekly student progress report and class discussion; 4) An
interim class report and discussion; and a 5) final report. Note the five
components complement each other. The lectures and research investigations


are offered to provide the basic "information" of the course. The class
discussions should explore the implications of the topics considered in the
lectures and readings. Finally, the interim a class report assignment is meant
to encourage student synthesis of the course material and the final class report
is to challenge the student to pursue further research and implementation of
sustainable strategies in design and planning.
EVALUATION
There will be ten student progress reports and class presentations of proposed
ideas and ideals of Race to Zero topic areas. The progress reports should
include a brief written text and include both: GOOD quality graphic examples
of your research topic, and thoroughly documented case studies of your
research topic. The progress reports must be presented in a 5-minute power
point presentation to the entire class. The interim report and final report are a
group project report that address the requirements set for in the U.S.
Department of Energy Race to Zero student design competition. The length of
the reports is limited to 40 pages.
The progress reports and presentations will be worth: 60 points. The interim
report and presentation will be worth 15 points. And the final report and
presentation will be worth 25 points.
Consideration of up to 5 additional points for participation in the class
discussions and for attendance will be considered. All progress reports should
be posted no later than midnight on the day before that they are due for
presentation. Progress reports, interim and final report sections more than
one class period late will be lowered one letter grade for each class that the
paper continues to be late. Class attendance in this course is mandatory and
absences from the class unrelated to course work will generally have an
adverse effect on the student's final grade in the course.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259. If you have any
questions about the class, you may make an appointment with the instructor
at 512 632-1972 or via e-mail mgarrison@utexas and a conference will be
scheduled.


READINGS ON RESERVE IN BATTLE HALL READING ROOM
   Juhani Pallasmaa, The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, 3rd
        Edition, John Wiley & Sons, United Kingdom, 2012.
   Stephen Kellert, Judith Heerwagen and Martin Mador, Biophilic Design, The
        Theory, Science and Practice of Bringing Building to Life, 1st Edition,
        John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken NJ, 2008.
   Kiel Moe, Thermally Active Surfaces in Architecture, Princeton Architectural
        Press, New York NY, 2010
   Kiel Moe, Convergence: An Architectural Agenda for Energy, Routledge
        Press, New York NY, 2013
   Kiel Moe, Integrated Design in Contemporary Architecture, Princeton
        Architectural Press, New York NY 2008
   Paul Hawken, Natural Capitalism: Creating The Next Industrial Revolution,
        Little Brown and Company, Boston, 1999.
   David W. Orr, Earth In Mind: Environment, and the Human Prospect, Island
        Press, Washington, D.C., 1994.
   William McDonough and Michael Braungart , Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the
        Way We Make Things, North Point Press, 2002.
   Alison Kwok, The Green Studio Handbook, Architectural Press, Elsevier, UK,
        2011.
   Paul Hawken , The Ecology of Commerce: A Declaration of Sustainability,
        Harper Collins Publishers, New York, 1993.
   Edward Allen, How Buildings Work: The Natural Order of Architecture, New
        York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
   John Tillman Lyle, Regenerative Design for Sustainable Development, New
        York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
   Klaus Daniels, The Technology of Ecological Building; Basic Principles and
        Measures, Examples, and Ideas, Basel, Switzerland: Birkhauser, 1995.
   Ken Yeang, Designing With Nature: The Ecological Basis for Architectural
        Design, New York: McGraw Hill, 1995.
   Sim Van de Ryn & Stuart Cowan, Ecological Design, Washington, D.C.: Island
        Press, 1996.
   Andrea Compagno, Intelligent Glass Facades, Boston: Birkhauser, 1997
   Lance Hosey, The Shape of Green Aesthetics, Ecology and Design,
        Island Press, 2012.
   Jim Wasley and David Rousseau, Healthy by Design, Harley & Marks, 1997.
