Syllabus | Reporting with Data, Summer 2019
School of Journalism, Moody College of Communication, University of Texas at Austin
This syllabus is for the Fall 2018 semester. There are two class periods, and each has an
undergraduate and graduate section.
 J S327D REPORTING WITH DATA
 Unique                    Day                      Time                    Location
                           MTWTF                    11:00 - 12:30           BMC 3.208
Prerequisite
Graduate standing or upper-division standing and Journalism 310F (or 320D) with a grade of at
least B-.
Description
This course will teach you basic skills to use data analysis and visualizations for news reporting.
Students will learn how to request data from public and governmental sources, to clean up and
analyze that data using tools such as Google Spreadsheet, Workbench and Tableau, and use
simple statistical models to accurately report based on the data.
Much of this class is presented in the reverse classroom method: You are given readings and
tutorials that must be completed before class. Class time will include discussion or demos of key
points, then include time to work through mastery assignments.
Objectives
    ●    Locate and use common governmental data clearinghouses from local, state and
         national sources.
    ●    Request and negotiate for electronic data from government agencies and other sources.
    ●    Clean and organize a data set to prepare for analysis.
    ●    Use statistical models and data visualization software to analyze and contextualize data
         in news reporting.
    ●    Use patterns and “answers” from data to create source lists and fully-reported stories.
Instructor
Christian McDonald
christian.mcdonald@utexas.edu
g) 512-537-2748


Office hours: After class each day and during lab on Fridays. There will be at least one required
office hours visit to be worked out.
Resources
Required texts
     ●  Numbers in the Newsroom​ by Sarah Cohen (​$15​ with discount code IREmember2019.
        Get the PDF to save time)
     ●  Other online readings and tutorials, as assigned.
Some readings and tutorials are due before a specific lecture, while others (NITN) are due in
conjunction with a quiz. These are outlined in Canvas.
Software
In the UT Catalog, the School of Journalism strongly encourages students to have a laptop
capable of running Microsoft office and Adobe Creative Suite. You are encouraged (implored,
even) to use your own computer during this class. If you are limited to the lab, you will be at a
disadvantage as you will have homework that requires a computer. All software used is
available on both Macs & PCs, but know I will be using a Mac to demonstrate these skills.
     ● Google Spreadsheets: This is free with your utexas.edu Google account. You could get
        by with Microsoft Office or even ​Libreoffice​, but we’ll focus on Spreadsheets in class.
     ● Tableau Desktop: Downloads and a free access key will be provided in class.
     ● We'll be using other software tools for assignments. These are typically free for the level
        we are using them or I have acquired educational licences.
IRE Membership
I encourage (but do not require) students to join Investigative Reporters & Editors. It is a
wonderful community of journalists. Many members are technically- or data-minded, and some
of the most helpful and sharing people you will ever meet. Price is $25/year for students, but
with that membership, you get, ​among other things​:
     ● Tableau Desktop​/Tableau Prep, a data analysis and visualization tool.
     ● CometDocs​, an online file conversion and storage tool.
     ● PacerMonitor, a legal research tool created to help people follow federal court cases.
     ● IRE Journal subscription - Keep up with the latest and greatest investigations and tips
        through our magazine, the IRE Journal.
     ● Member Listservs - Get tips and advice from some of the biggest names in investigative
        journalism on one of the IRE listservs.
     ● Online Resources - Visit www.ire.org to take advantage of free data sets, podcasts,
        conference audio recordings, on-demand training videos and more.
     ● Thousands of Tipsheets - Some of the best reporters in the business have put together
        more than 4,000 guides to help you with your reporting.
Once you are a member, email Amy Johnston at ​amy@ire.org​ to get licenses.


Course outline
I will adjust this class based on progress. See the course in Canvas for a full list of assignments
and readings.
Grading
     ●   (10%) ​Participation*​: Students are expected to come to class and participate in
         discussions and in-class assignments. This is a lab-centric course where skills are
         covered at a computer with instructor supervision, and each class builds upon the
         previous, so if you miss a class you will fall behind. If you must miss a class, tell me in
         advance, or I can't help you. Attendance in class is a part of your grade. ​Each student
         will be assigned a day to present in class a data story from the news​ (and post in
         the Facebook group), which we will all discuss in class.
     ●   (20%) ​Quizzes​: Quizzes will include material from assigned readings, lectures and work
         done in class.
     ●   (30%) ​Assignments​: Some assignments are done in class, but others require
         out-of-class time to complete.
     ●   (40%) ​Final project​: This project will include a fully-reported story with at least three
         sources based on pre-approved data sets obtained by the students. The process will
         include a pitch, analysis, data report and visualization. If you fail the final, you will not
         receive an A no matter the grades on your other assignments.
*By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Grading scale
The grading scale for the course will be as follows:
     ● A: 94-100
     ● A-minus: 90-93.99
     ● B-plus: 87-89.99
     ● B: 84-86.99
     ● B-minus: 80-83.99
     ● C-plus: 77-79.99
     ● C: 74-76.99
     ● C-minus: 70-73.99
     ● Anything below a 70 is failing.
Graduate credit
This class is cross-listed for graduate students. Those students will have additional assignments


and have more rigor applied others.
Quantitative reasoning flag
This course carries the ​Quantitative Reasoning flag​ for undergraduates. Quantitative Reasoning
courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of
quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of
quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
About academic dishonesty
I take academic dishonesty seriously, in addition to ​university policies​, know the following are
not acceptable:
     ● Plagiarizing or using someone else’s material, another media source, student work or
        even yourself and representing it as new for this class. You can’t turn in a story or media
        project from another class without the instructor’s prior permission.
     ● Making up quotes, sources or facts.
     ● Not interviewing people who appear in your stories.
     ● Not giving appropriate attribution or citation of a source or background information.
     ● Cheating during a quiz or an assignment.
Moody writing center
The ​Moody College Writing Support Program​, located in BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one
assistance without charge to undergraduates seeking to improve their professional writing in all
fields of communication. We have student specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS,
Communication & Leadership and PR & Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to
strengthen core writing skills in each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence.
Students may guarantee their time by booking half-hour appointments on our website for
assistance during all stages of the writing process. Writing coaches also will take drop-ins if they
are not working with appointments.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
     ● Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
        | ​512-471-3515​ | ​cmhc.utexas.edu
     ● CMHC 24/7 Crisis Line: ​512.471.2255​ | ​cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
     ● CMA 4.134 | ​512-471-7642​ (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)


FREE Services at CMHC:
     ● Brief assessments and referral services
     ● Mental health & wellness articles - ​cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     ● MindBody Lab - ​cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     ● Classes, workshops, & groups - ​cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: ​“As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.”​ ​Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.​ Therefore, if you
use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must
cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary
action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding ​UT’s Academic
Honesty and the University Honor Code​.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: ​http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both
your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on
campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in
case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an
effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs
with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If
appropriate, also contact ​Services for Students with Disabilities​, 512-471-6259 (voice) or


1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.
For more information, please visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc​ or call 512-471-3614 (JES
A332).
     ●   Undergraduate Writing Center
     ●   Libraries
     ●   ITS
     ●   Student Emergency Services
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in
our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
         or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit ​titleix.utexas.edu​ or contact the Title IX
Office at ​titleix@austin.utexas.edu​.


The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the ​Office of Campus
Safety and Security​, 512-471-5767:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
    ●   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    ●   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
    ●   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
        re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
        The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    ●   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at: ​www.utexas.edu/emergency
