        COPY-
 WRITING
            ADV 378, FALL 2018
                  T/TH 2-3:15PM
                     CHAD REA
4.310 BMC, T/TH 9-12 & BY APPT
    ADRIANNA SAN ROMAN, TA


PREAMBLE
So, you can write stories. But can you write a thing’s story that you know very little about to an
audience that’s nothing like you? Or maybe you can write a web banner headline telling the world
that your widget is on sale, but could you write an award-winning short film?
This class isn’t just about writing great ads. It’s about great writing. And just because you’re a
writer doesn’t make you a copywriter or vice versa. The great copywriters are often great writers.
But not all great writers make great copywriters. The goal here is to be great at both.
One trait of a great copywriter is to be able to take on the voice of any brand and effectively
communicate it to any variety of audiences in a way that they can identify with, and as a result,
have them feel AND actually do something. In a large agency, you might get assigned to one
account in which case you might only have to take on the voice of one brand that speaks to one
audience. However, in many cases, you’ll be working on multiple, very different brands at once.
Copywriting is more than just words. It’s basic communication, which is harder than most people
think. Most of the time, it’s about getting information, a thought, an emotion, a universal truth,
and/or an observation across in the simplest, most concise, most engaging way as possible to
someone who may or may not give a rat’s ass about anything you have to say. It’s about
dissecting brands and translating them to consumers. Sometimes it requires visual aides. In fact,
sometimes it’s a single visual that says 1,000 words. And other times, it’s only words that are
designed to create visuals in the reader’s mind. But most of the time, it’s a combination of words
and visuals. As a copywriter, you are responsible for thinking of how the two work together.
To achieve greatness, you have to do triple duty. You have to study great copywriters, you have
to study great writers, and you have to study great communicators. Read and watch everything
you can. Dissect paragraphs, analyze sentence structure, learn new words, and make some up.
Maintain a curious nature. Immerse yourself in advertising but, more importantly, immerse
yourself in culture. Read plays, prose, poetry, comics, the back of the peanut butter jar. Be a
sponge. Observe the world under a microscope. Question everything. In essence, take apart the
toaster to see how it works, put it back together, perhaps by combining it with other appliances
you’ve taken apart to create something new, and then share your experience in a relatable way.
Great writing takes practice. You have to write a lot. And you have to write fast. Be prepared to do
both. Some days are easier than others but most of the time copywriting is a real challenge. Just
get it all out of your head and onto paper or screen. Then expand. And refine. And write more.
And refine. If you’re not happy with your end product, chances are, no one else will be. Do
whatever it takes to get to the perfect word, the perfect sentence, the perfect ending. If you need
a change of scenery, change it. If you need inspiration, go be inspired. When you achieve
perfection, be prepared to have to change everything and start all over again with an even shorter
deadline.
This semester, we’ll take on writing in all its many forms, and we’ll hone our craft through fun,
thought-provoking in-class and out-of-class exercises. We’ll talk strategy. You’ll create, critique,
present, perform and hopefully emerge a more inspired, more confident, more skilled writer,
thinker, and idea maker.


MUSTS
READ:
Read Me: 10 Lessons for Writing Great Copy. (2014) Roger Horberry and Gyles Lingwood
WATCH:
Crazy People, a comedy about truth in advertising. (1990) Starring Dudley Moore.
Learning Objectives:
1) To learn The Rules of Writing Practice and come up with your own while putting pen to
paper/words to screen on a weekly basis.
2) To explore the art of advertising copywriting across a range of mediums and develop a writing
portfolio.
3) To find your writing “self”.
Class Requirements:
Arrive on time. If you’re more than 15 minutes late or have to leave more than 15 minutes early, it
will be considered an absence. If you have more than two absences, you will lose one letter
grade on your final grade for each absence thereafter. This is non-negotiable.
Class participation is mandatory. This includes online feedback via Google docs for your peers.
Speak up. The class needs your participation. We’ll all be better for it.
Take pride. Present your best. I expect your work to be of the highest professional grade. Your
work must be neat and grammatically correct in all its forms.
Use the class for feedback but don’t make them do your work for you. Make hard choices before
you show up.
No texting, checking e-mail or Facebook while in class.
All assignments are due online before class the day they are due, or per the hand-in instructions
of the assignment. The digital time stamp when you post the work will be considered the time you
handed it in. That item must be complete. Errors in uploading, corrupted files, or missing emails
are not excused. Technology can be challenging, so plan ahead. Assignments turned in late, up
to 5 minutes late, will receive an automatic 50%. Assignments turned in after 5 minutes late will
receive a zero. The work cannot be made up.
Put your name and EID on everything you hand in. Assignments without these will not be
counted.
Student Responsibilities:
1. Students are responsible for all material covered in class and all assigned readings and
viewings.
2. Students must complete readings and assignments by the times specified.
3. Check Canvas frequently, and make sure your e-mail address is current with the University so
that you can receive emails sent through Blackboard. It is the student’s responsibility to maintain


this email address and ensure that it is correct and able to receive messages. Check your junk
mail too.
4. Any questions about grades must be submitted in writing within 5 days of when the grade is
posted to Canvas.
5. This course upholds the values of the University Policy of Scholastic Dishonesty. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information,
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php.
6. Technology can be a pain. So plan accordingly. Work posted or handed in late is late,
regardless of technology errors, computer crashes, corrupt files, or lack of internet access. I
honor the Blackboard or email timestamps, depending on the specified submission format.
Forgetting to attach files, or email bounce-backs, are not excuses.
RECCOS
BOOKS:
EATS, SHOOTS AND LEAVES. TRUSS, LYNNE.
THE IDEA WRITERS: COPYWRITING IN A NEW MEDIA AND MARKETING AGE. IEZZI,
TERESSA
WILD MIND: LIVING THE WRITER’S LIFE. GOLDBERG, NATALIE .
OCCASIONAL READINGS ARE POSTED TO CANVAS PRIOR TO DISCUSSION OF THAT
MATERIAL.
SUBSCRIBE/ FOLLOW/BOOKMARK
MODERNCOPYWRITER.COM
ADWEEK
ADVERTISING AGE
CREATIVITY-ONLINE.COM
COMMUNICATION ARTS
LURZER’S ARCHIVE
GRAPHIS
HOW
THE ONE SHOW
D&AD
THEFWA.COM
ADSOFTHEWORLD.COM
ADLAND.TV
HEYWHIPPLE.COM
LIVE LIFE
Be a sponge. Get out there, observe, study, deconstruct, document, and then write. Write some
more. Write again. And repeat.


GRADES
Attendance & Class Participation
Ongoing Writing Assignments (First Drafts)
                                                                    10%
                                                                    30%
Final Versions of Work (PDF)                                        40%
Songvertising Piece/Performance                                     10%
In-Class Writing Assignments                                        10%
Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum
grade of C in all communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major.
Final letter grades are calculated as follows:
A 93.5 to 100 A- 89.5 to 93.4 B+ 86.5 to 89.5 B 83.5 to 86.4 B- 79.5 to 83.4 C+ 76.5 to 79.4
C 73.5 to 76.4 C- 69.5 to 73.4 D+ 66.5 to 69.4 D 63.5 to 66.4 D- 59.5 to 63.4 F 0 to 59.4
INFO
Student Responsibilities:
1. Students are responsible for all material covered in class and all assigned readings and
viewings.
2. Students must complete readings and assignments by the times specified.
3. Check Canvas frequently, and make sure your e-mail address is current with the University so
that you can receive emails sent through Canvas. It is the student’s responsibility to maintain this
email address and ensure that it is correct and able to receive messages. Check your junk mail
too.
4. Any questions about grades must be submitted in writing within 5 days of when the grade is
posted to Canvas.
5. This course upholds the values of the University Policy of Scholastic Dishonesty. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information,
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php.
6. Technology can be a pain. So plan ahead. Do not wait until the last minute, or even hour. Work
posted or handed in late is late, regardless of technology errors, computer crashes, corrupt files,
or lack of internet access. I honor the Canvas or email timestamps, depending on the specified
submission format. Forgetting to attach files, or email bounce-backs, are not excuses.
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag


classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Scholastic Dishonesty Statement
The Department of Advertising has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the College of Communication. By
enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is
unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Policy on Scholastic
Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course an/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Campus Policy on Holy Days:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support
for your learning.
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
email address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily—to
stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can
find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Emergency evacuation recommendations:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you


may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Policy on Campus Carry:
In the development of the policies adopted by President Fenves to comply with the law in a way
that prioritizes the safety of everyone on the campus, the concealed carry of handguns is strictly
prohibited in my office.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
| 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-     CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
-     M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
-     Brief assessments and referral services
-     Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-     MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-     Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


WHEN
Part of the process of understanding the creation of visual communication in a changing world is
that you prepare yourself for uncertainty and surprises. Schedules change daily in this industry.
While I will make every effort to maintain this schedule, it is subject to change, depending on
class progress, unforeseen amazing opportunities, and other surprises. Being able to love and
accept this notion will make you a consummate professional.
TUESDAYS                                                     THURSDAYS
                                                             30 AUG Intro, Lecture
03 SEPT Bios Due Online
04 SEPT Bios                                                 06 SEPT Bios
11 SEPT Bios                                                 13 SEPT Bios, Lecture
17 SEPT Truth In Adv Due Online
18 SEPT Truth In Adv                                         20 SEPT Truth In Adv
          Crazy People Quiz
25 SEPT Truth in Adv – Part Deux                             27 SEPT Truth In Adv, Lecture
01 OCT HyperboLIES Due Online
02 OCT HyperboLIES                                           04 OCT HyperboLIES
09 OCT HyperboLIES                                           11 OCT HyperboLIES, Lecture
         5 TV Ex. Due
16 OCT TV/Video Due                                          18 OCT TV/Video
23 OCT TV/Video                                              25 OCT TV/Video, Lecture
         5 Radio Ex. Due
30 OCT Radio Due                                             01 NOV Radio
06 NOV Radio                                                 08 NOV Radio, Lecture
13 NOV Adv Is Everything Due                                 15 NOV Adv Is Everything
20 NOV Adv Is Everything, Lecture                            22 NOV Turkey Break – no classes
27 NOV Adv Is Everything                                     29 NOV TBD
04 DEC Songvertising Due                                     06 DEC Songvertising
                                                             14 DEC Final Versions Due


WHO
CHAD REA
chadjrea@utexas.edu
BMC 4.310
Teaching Experience:
        Lecturer, The University of Texas at Austin, 2014-Present
        ADV 343K Portfolio 1
        ADV 468K Portfolio 2
        ADV 475K Portfolio 4
        ADV 378 Copywriting
        ADV 376/PR 377 Integrated Campaigns
        ADV 325 Intro to Creativity
        Stan Richards Faculty Fellow in Advertising Creativity 2016 - 2017
        Teacher, Art Center College of Design, 2002-2006
        Integrated Brand Communications, (Great Teacher Award 2002)
Degrees:
        Bachelor of Arts, Advertising, May 1993
        Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas
Professional Industry Experience:
        Full-Time:
        ecopop (Austin), Founder/Creative Director, 2008-Present
        Wieden+Kennedy (Portland), Creative Director, 2008-2009
        86 the onions (LA), Founder/Creative Director, 2002-2007
        KesselsKramer (Amsterdam), Senior Creative, 2000-2002
        Mother (London), Senior Creative, 1998-2000
        The Richards Group/Pyro (Dallas), Copywriter, 1994-1998
        Freelance:
        Mullen, Crispin Porter + Bogusky, JDK, Creature, mono, nemo, enso, attik, david &
        goliath, Butler Shine Stern, Strawberry Frog, TBWA/Chiat Day, Factory Labs, dw+h,
        Saatchi & Saatchi, MEplusYOU, mkg, Sedgwick Rd., sandymontana, Climate Reality
        Project (in-house), Curious Beast, The Butler Bros., Preacher, etc.
Client Experience (150+ brands):
        Nike, Google, Target, Starbucks, Mountain Dew, ESPN X Games, Crackle, adidas,
        Diesel, Coca-Cola, Bacardi, Climate Reality Project, MTV, FUEL TV, Activision,
        HUMMER, Motel 6, Oakley, Samsung, Roland, Toyota, etc.
Professional recognition:
        Accolades: Effie, The One Club, D&AD, NY Art Directors, National Addys, The
        Creative Circle, British Television, Graphis, Communication Arts, Lurzer’s
        International Archive, Creativity, Print, ZOO, Creative Review, Shots, Eye, Campaign
        Screen


Book Features: Advertising Today, Punk Marketing: Get Off Your Ass And Join The
Revolution, I Like It. What Is It?, Advertising Graphics With Impact, Consumer Behavior:
Buyer, Having, Being (7th Edition), A Hundred And One Things To Do, 200% Cotton:
New T-Shirt Graphics, Touch This: Graphic Design That Feels Good, Dos Logos,
Introducing: Designs For Making A First Impression, 2 Kilo Of KesselsKramer, World
Business Cards Today, Letterhead & Logo Design 9, All Access: The Making Of Thirty
Extraordinary Graphic Designers, Sustainable Graphic Design: Tools, Systems And
Strategies For Innovative Print Design, Shovel It: Kick-Ass Advice To Turn Life’s Crap
Into The Peace And Happiness You Deserve
