                                                                                                                            ANT394
  Critical Media Practices
  Intermedia & Aesthetics
  Research Creation                           }               Intermedia Workshop
“Insofar as form allows sense to appear to sentience, to paraphrase Aristotle, the role of aesthetics is to illuminate the ways in
which the forms of knowledge provoke interpretation . . . Aesthesis, I suggest, allows us to insist on the value of subjectivity that
is central to aesthetic artifacts—works of art in the traditional sense—and to place that subjectivity at the core of knowledge
production” (Drucker 2009:xiii).
                               lab - workshop - studio - seminar
Course Description.
Critical Media Practices explores the theoretical foundations for arts of immediacy and for
encounters with sensible and sensuous worlds. This theme explores ways of knowing and evoking
(which I prefer to representing) as they originate in the academy and from the art world and in the
way these formations relate to their objects of study. The key words here (intermedia and
aesthetics) are sites of current and enduring attention and coalescence in cultural studies and
associated disciplines. Readings will include selections from Trinh T. Minh Ha, Jacques Rancière,
Erin Manning, James Clifford, George Marcus, Susan Hiller, and others. Studio practices will
include hands-on and DIY inspired techniques of photography and collage. You will also have the
opportunity to learn and develop skills in digital media production.
Half the classes will be spent actively workshopping projects directly (or indirectly) related to your
own research. The other half will be dedicated to a few select readings that help to feel out the
edges of emerging discourses on arts-based research, politics and aesthetics, and multi-sensory
anthropology. This course combines creative practice in a variety of media with scholarly
investigation.
Obstructions.
Early on in the seminar you will propose an intermedia remediation of research you have
already (or nearly) completed. You then work towards completion of this project over the
                ANT 394M CRITICAL MEDIA PRACTICES | 31935 | Fridays 9:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m. | Fall 2018


span of the semester, regularly presenting on and workshopping your project. Over the
semester I will give you a number of 'obstructions' -- challenges to re-imagine and re-design
the research project according to set rules; essentially detours. These obstructions usually
result in proposals rather than fully formed projects.
Who is this for?
This class is designed for Graduate students and PhD candidates who are interested in
estranging, defamiliarizing, and deconstructing their research projects with the goal of re-
encountering their ideas and 'data' by re-assembling these matters through intermedia
tactics. The first part of the seminar will establish a common language in sensory
ethnographic and media theory.
Craig Campbell - Critical Media Practices
31935 • Fall 2018
Meets Fridays 9am-noon | SAC 4.120
Office hours: Thursdays 2-4pm | SAC 4.122
craig.campbell@utexas.edu
            ANT 394M CRITICAL MEDIA PRACTICES | 31935 | Fridays 9:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m. | Fall 2018


Course Policies and Information for Students
Inclusive learning environment statement
The best learning environment––whether in the classroom, studio, laboratory, or fieldwork site––is one in which all
members feel respected while being productively challenged. I recognize cultural antagonisms towards (and
challenges faced by) people of color, women, LGBTQ identified folk, linguistic minorities and others. My goal is to
help you feel safe to express your ideas, criticisms, and questions. I am dedicated to fostering an inclusive
atmosphere, in which all participants can contribute, explore, and challenge their own ideas as well as those of
others. Every participant has an active responsibility to foster a climate of intellectual stimulation, openness, and
respect for diverse perspectives, questions, personal backgrounds, abilities, and experiences. I recognize my
responsibility for maintaining this climate.
Attendance policy
Regular attendance is required.
Notice regarding academic integrity
     •   Honor Code or statement of ethics.
              o University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
                   learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
                   member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
                   fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
     •   Web site for more information: http://uwc.utexas.edu/academic-integrity
Religious Holy Days
     •   By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
         of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
         project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
         work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     •   If you are worried about someone who is acting strangely, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
         Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
         through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
         Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
         (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning.
     •   University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     •   Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     •   Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
              ANT 394M CRITICAL MEDIA PRACTICES | 31935 | Fridays 9:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m. | Fall 2018


Resources for Graduate Students
   •  Graduate School, services: https://gradschool.utexas.edu/services-and-resources
   •  Graduate writing center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/grad
         ANT 394M CRITICAL MEDIA PRACTICES | 31935 | Fridays 9:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m. | Fall 2018
