HIS 350L/AFR 372G: African Travel Narratives
Prof. Osseo-Asare
Class location: PAR 302           Class time:    Mondays/Wednesdays 1:00-2:30 pm
Questions? I prefer if you contact me through canvas email.
Email: (osseo@utexas.edu) - label all additional emails in subject line with HIS 350L
Description.
This course examines histories of Africa and travel through eyewitness accounts. Course
participants will study journeys Africans have made within and from the continent alongside
accounts of travelers visiting Africa from elsewhere. These travelers included migrant laborers,
market women, Peace Corps volunteers, enslaved individuals, soldiers, political activists, adopted
children, and religious evangelists since the 18th century.
The course readings and films focus on different groups of travelers in a number of time periods.
Some of the guiding questions we will consider:
    •   How did people experience the movement of their bodies from one location to another?
    •   How has ‘Africa’ taken on different meanings for our travelers?
    •   What do their narratives indicate about changing conceptions of ethnicity, migration,
        tourism, citizenship, and the environment in different time periods?
    •   And how did shifts in medical, transportation, and communication technologies shape
        their journeys?
Requirements:
Open to all interested participants. Assignments include attendance and class participation
including speaking in class (30%), Weekly Written Comments (20%), Oral Presentations (10%),
and a short research paper (40%) due Friday May 1. Excused absences require prior notice or
a doctor’s statement.
Course Goals:
Participants in this course will have the opportunity to:
    • improve reading comprehension
    • improve knowledge of African history
    • improve historical research skills
    • improve writing skills
    • improve oral presentation skills


Flags:
This course is designated as fulfilling the requirements for a Global Cultures Flag. At least
one third of the course content requires an in-depth examination of the broader cultural
context and perspectives of one or more non-U.S. communities, countries, or coherent
regional groupings of countries, past or present.
It is also designated as fulfilling the requirements for a Writing Flag. At least one third of the
course grade depends on writing. Course participants will produce regular written projects
and receive feedback on their writing assignments from the instructor.
Travel Narratives:
Each week we will closely study a first-person account of travel to or from Africa. If you want
to buy all the books for the course, they are available at the Co-op. Note that not all of them
are required, some are available as e-books, and some are available for much less from
resellers on amazon and other websites. Consider sharing books with someone else in the
class who lives nearby, or reading on reserve at PCL.
Books available at the campus bookstore and on 24 hr reserve at PCL
Maya Angelou, All God’s Children Need Traveling Shoes (1986)
Teju Cole, Every Day is For the Thief (Random House, 2014)
Tete-Michel Kpomassie, An African in Greenland (New York Review Books, Classics, orig. 1981)
George Packer, The Village of Waiting (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001, orig 1984)
Arthur Japin, The Two Hearts of Kwasi Boachi
Available as free electronic books
Joseph Conrad, Heart of Darkness (1902) – UT libraries has an electronic book link
Olaudah Equiano (1794), The Interesting Narrative of Olaudah Equiano or Gustavus Vassa,
         The African, Written by Himself – Free full text available on google books
Mary Kingsley, West African Travels (1897) – Free full text available on google books
Films:
Nollywood Babylon (2008)
Steven Spielberg (dir.), Amistad (Dreamworks, 1998) 155 mins.
Osuofia in London (Nollywood, 2003)
Jon Shenk and Megan Mylan (dir.), Lost Boys of Sudan (New Video Group, 2003) 87 mins.
Study Strategies:
This is a reading-intensive course. At the end of the semester, participants will also have the
opportunity to apply what they have learned about historical narratives and primary sources in a
short final paper.
Learning to read efficiently is an important skill that may take time for you to develop. The main
thing to realize is that everyone reads and comprehends material differently. Someone may need
                                                    2


a 5 hour solid block of time to read 200 pages and best retain the information if they type up
careful notes as they read. Another person may need many 20 minute time blocks and best
remember the material if they highlight and underline the text as they go. Advanced students may
find that they can read a monograph over a couple of hours, jot down a few questions for class
discussion, and remember the critical points in their head.
A note on films: During the course of the semester, we will watch several films and
documentaries about migration. Take notes while watching these films, noting time code of
interesting scenes and dialogue.
Written Comments:
On Fridays by midnight, each participant will upload to Canvas an original one-page comment on
the book of the week. I understand that you may not have completed the entire book by the time
you start writing, but the point is to get some initial thoughts down prior to our in-class
discussions. You can view prompts, and guidelines on Canvas. Use full sentences, indent for new
paragraphs, and try to write in simple, clear language. This weekly writing practice will help you
hone your writing skills and will get much easier to complete over the course of the semester as
you develop your writing style. With your permission, I will circulate well-written comments to
other students in class for us to discuss. For more tips and guidelines, see Canvas.
Please note that I will not accept emailed, printed, or late submissions so plan
accordingly.
Note: If you cannot type quickly without looking at the keys, I recommend you spend some time
on your keyboarding skills. There are lots of free games and websites to help you learn, i.e.
http://www.typingclub.com
https://play.typeracer.com/
In-class Discussions:
This class meets twice a week for 90 minute sessions. Please arrive on time and be
prepared to discuss the book for the week. The purpose of our discussions is to think through
life in another time and place, and learn more about the historical context in which a story
takes place. It is an opportunity for you to sit back and imagine life in a faraway place which
can be very relaxing and fun. African history also opens up many dilemmas, and these
stories are a way to consider such complex themes as slavery, exploration, colonialism,
migration, volunteering, and global poverty through the eyes of real people.
         Often, course participants have travelled a lot in their lives, or are about to set off on
new adventures, so do share how the stories remind you of your own experiences and
inspire you to form new ones. If you find it challenging to speak up in class or require
any accommodations, please meet with me to discuss strategies.
Oral Reports:
All participants will choose two weeks to make a 3-minute oral report at the start of class. You
may focus more on summarizing and analyzing the content in the book or provide geographic and
historical context for the book of the week. For tips and guidelines, see Canvas.
Final Research Paper:
                                                     3


One of the best ways to improve your historical writing is to read a variety of first-person accounts
from different time periods. This will allow you to reflect on changes over time and the ways that
people in different contexts witnessed African societies. Your experience in the class will
culminate in a 6-8 page research paper (2,000 words or more). You will have the opportunity to
select a travel narrative of your choice, or choose one discussed in class, to write an essay about
the person’s experience travelling to/from/within Africa. You can add background information on
the historical conditions in the country that the writer visits using scholarly journal articles,
newspaper articles, photographs, audiovisual recordings, and history books. We will discuss your
proposed narrative, outside sources, and drafts in class. Our goal is to write a completely original
and new paper on a topic that you find interesting.
Papers due on Canvas Monday May 10 by midnight. No late submissions or emailed papers.
We will use Turnitin Software for all written submissions. Plagiarism (copy and pasting
sentences and phrases from other sources including websites without use of quotation
marks and full citations) may result in a failing grade.
Grading Scale:
                                                         C+       77-79%
A       93-100%                                          C        73-76%
A-      90-92%                                           C-       70-72%
B+      87-89%                                           D        69-60%
B       83-86%                                           Failing: Below 60%
B-      80-82%
Safety:
Please note that I do not allow concealed guns in my office, GAR 3.106 and may remind you
orally when you visit. You may make arrangements to speak with me by phone during my
office hours. While I am not permitted to ban concealed weapons in our classroom, please
note that you must be 21 and older and hold a license for a firearm. Licensed carriers must
have the gun in a holster on or about them. Openly carried weapons are not allowed on the
UT campus. If a gun is visible in class, faculty and students are advised to immediately call
911 and leave the room. For more information on campus safety and campus-approved
holsters, visit: http://campuscarry.utexas.edu
                                                   4


Syllabus (Check Canvas for further details on assignments and updates):
Module 1: Middle Passages: Journeys from Africa
January 22                   Introduction: Travel and Africa – watch a youtube video
                             about an African journey or visit a local African
                             restaurant such as: Wasota Food Truck or Aster’s
                             Ethiopian Restaurant
January 27 & 29              Olaudah Equiano (1794; 2001), The Interesting
                             Narrative of Olaudah Equiano or Gustavus Vassa, The
                             African, Written by Himself, edited by Werner Sollors –
                             ebook available
February 3 & 5               Arthur Japin, The Two Hearts of Kwasi Boachi
Module 2: Explorations and Returns: Journeys to and within Africa
February 12                  Stanley, (1878) Through the Dark Continent -ebook
                             available
                             Mary H. Kingsley (1897), Travels in West Africa –ebook
                             available
February 17 & 19             Belloc (1898), Modern Travellers -ebook available
                             Conrad (1902), Heart of Darkness- ebook available
                             Wednesday: Map quiz (countries only)
February 24 & 26
                             Joe Lunn (1999), “‘Les Races Guerrieres’: Racial
                             Preconceptions in the French Military about West
                             African Soldiers during the First World War,” Journal of
                             Contemporary History, 34 (4): 517-536.
                             Joe Lunn (2005), “Male Identity and Martial Codes of
                             Honor: A Comparision of the War Memoirs of Robert
                             Graves, Ernst Junger, and Kande Kamara,” in Journal
                             of Military History 69 (July): 713-36.
                             E.E. Sabben-Clare (1954), “African Troops in
                             Asia,” African Affairs
Module 3: Unsettling: Journeys to and from Africa after Independence
March 2 & 4                  Angelou (1986), All God’s Children Need Traveling
                             Shoes
March 9 & 11                 Kpomassie (1981), An African in Greenland
March 16 & 21                ** Spring Break **
March 23 & 25                Packer (1984), The Village of Waiting
Module 4: Resettlement: Migration and Exile
                                             5


March 30 & April 1 Eshun (2005), Black Gold of the Sun: Searching for
                   Home in Africa and Beyond –excerpts on canvas
April 6 & 8        Dent et al (2005), They Poured Fire on Us from the
                   Sky: The True Story of Three Lost Boys from Sudan –
                   excerpts on canvas
April 13 &15       Cole (2014), Every day is for the Thief
                   Film in class: Nollywood Babylon
April 20 & 22      Paper discussions
April 27 & 29      Paper discussions
May 1              Paper Due on Canvas
                                  6
