                            The University of Texas at Austin Summer 2018
                                 Department of Middle Eastern Studies
Course: Aljazeera: the Voice of the Voiceless
Prerequisites: None
Instructor and Moderator: Mohammad A. Mohammad
Office: CAL.415
Email: mamohammad@austin.utexas.edu
Meetings: Lecture TWTH 11:30 – 2:00 MEZ 2.102
Office Hours: Wed, 2:30-4:30
Or by appointment
“If there's one channel in the Arab world much talked about, alternately lauded and bashed by
various commentators in both the West and the Arab world, it's Al-Jazeera. Pre-September 11 (and
pre-bin Laden tapes and exclusive Afghanistan coverage) western writers largely praised the
channel for its open and independent coverage; the Arab world, although they were hanging on
every talk show, often denounced the channel as being pro-Israel, pro-West, anti-Arab. But with the
airing of Al-Jazeera's exclusive bin Laden videos, the tables were turned. The US administration
pressured the emir of Qatar to "rein in" the channel, while Arab viewers praised the Al-Jazeera as
"the voice of truth" about the war in Afghanistan.”
The Arabic channel has been described as “CIA agent”, “Zionist agent”, “Al-Qaida agent”, “anti-
Semitic”, and many other contradictory charges. With the exception of Qatar and Lebanon, the
channel’s offices were closed at one time or another in all the Arab countries. Today, Qatar is under
a sea, land and air blockade imposed by Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, The Arab Emirates and Egypt.
Prominent among their thirteen demands that Qatar must meet before the blockade is lifted is the
shutdown of Al-Jazeera and its affiliates.
In the relatively short period of ten years, Aljazeera emerged as the most watched media outlet in
the Arab world. It is today one of the most valuable media trademarks in the world. Why is that?
The course will attempt to answer this question.
Aljazeera is not broadcasting from Mars to Martians. It is an Arab channel broadcasting to Arab
audiences. In this course we will explore the difficult question: who are the Arabs? Even a partial
understanding of the answer will shed a great deal of light on Aljazeera. Thus, we look at language,
history, culture, society, and, of course, politics. We will also study some of Aljazeera’s programs
translated into English.
This course is student centered. This means that students are expected to be active participants in
class. All assignments will have a writing component.


ACADEMIC GOALS
1, Students would gain an in-depth knowledge of the Arab culture;
2. Students would be able to analyze critically news reports about the Middle East;
3. Students would gain a good knowledge about the historical make up of the Arab World.
Reading Material:
All required course materials will be uploaded on Blackboard
Videos:
Control Room
Suggested But Not Required:
Josh Rushing, Mission Al-Jazeera: Build a Bridge, Seek the Truth, Change the World.
Marc Lynch, Voices of the New Arab Public: Iraq, al-Jazeera, and Middle East Politics Today
Khalil Rinnawi, Instant Nationalism: McArabism, al-Jazeera, and Transnational Media in the Arab
World .
Mohammed El-Nawawy and Adel Iskandar, Al-jazeera: The Story Of The Network That Is Rattling
Governments And Redefining Modern Journalism Updated With A New Prologue And Epilogue.
COURSE WORK AND GRADING
Participation (10%)
Students are expected to come to class having read the material assigned for that day. Participation is
assessed based on the frequency and quality of the questions and comments raised in class.
Oral Presentations (20%)
Students will present to the class research on any topic relevant to the content of the course. The
presentations will be given in the last week of the session.
Assignments (60%)
There will be four 5-6-page assignments required in this class. These short assignments spread
throughout the session are meant to test students’ comprehension of the material assigned.


Papers will be evaluated on their accuracy of information, analytical skills, attention to detail,
organization, and writing. The assignments will be reaction papers to materials read and/or covered in
class.
Report and presentation on the Blanton Museum (10%)
Imagine that you a reporter for Aljazeera and you were assigned to prepare a story on the Blanton
Museum. Visit the museum, look around, take notes and see if there is any of the Museum’s
holdings would be of some interest to a visitor from the Middle East. Any painting with a Middle
Eastern theme? Any artifacts? Presentations are due in Week 4. You written reports are due on or
before August 11. It is ok if you work on this project in groups.
Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies:
Number/Letter grade equivalents are:
  Number       Letter     Number       Letter     Number       Letter     Number      Letter
  94 - 100               87 - 89.9               77 – 79.9               67 – 69.9
              A                       B+                     C+                     D+
 90 – 93.9    A-         84 - 86.9               74 – 76.9               64 – 66.9
                                      B                      C                      D
                         80 – 83.9               70 – 73.9               60 – 63.9
                                      B-                     C-                     D-
         (Below 60% = F)
    •    Grades on the border between two letter grades (89.9 for instance) may or may not be rounded
         up to the next higher letter grade, at the instructor’s discretion.
    • Your final class grade will be based on your final weighted average in the class.
Attendance
You are allowed no unexcused absences. Excused absences include religious holidays, family
emergencies, and illnesses. If you need an absence to be excused, contact me before the absence
or as soon as possible afterwards with appropriate documentation. Being absent, for whatever
reason, does not excuse you from handing the assigned homework. Each unexcused absence will
result in two percentage points being deducted from the final grade.
Honesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Special Needs


The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive)
who requires academic accommodations should contact of the Office of the Dean of Students at
471-6259 as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
Writing Flag: This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from
your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one
or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing
Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.
Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-
6222: http://uwc.utexas.edu/home). The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free, individualized,
expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Any
undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any writing project.
They work with students from every department on campus, for both academic and non-academic
writing. Whether you are writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an
application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants will be happy to work with you. Their services are
not just for writing with "problems." Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part
of a successful writing project. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their
writing. The assistance they provide is intended to foster independence. Each student determines
how to use the consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in
ways that preserve the integrity of your work.
