                                                                                                Image by Banksy
                                   ANT 330C: Theories of Culture & Society
                      Jason Cons: SAC 5.138; jasoncons@utexas.edu; 512.232.3832
                              Tuesdays & Thursdays: 9:30-11:00 AM, SAC 4.118
                         Office Hours: Tuesdays, 2:00-4:00pm or by appointment
The purpose of this course is to introduce students to a set of core ideas and propositions in social
theory broadly and theories of culture and society specifically. The course aims to do this by teaching
strategies for thinking with and against, writing about, using, and engaging theoretical texts. The course
works forward from the mid-19th century, engaging a highly selective set of thinkers who provide core
foundations in contemporary social and anthropological thought. It then moves into a series of
explorations of the ways that anthropological theories of culture and society written in the early and
mid-twentieth century continue to fuel debates in anthropology today. It closes with a brief
introduction to a series of transformations in social and cultural theory from the 1970s forward,
particularly postcolonial theory and post-structuralism. The course makes no claim to be
comprehensive. Rather, it aims to teach students how to work with and through social theory and to
prepare them for further encounters with social theory in academic work and in the “world beyond.”
The course is conceived primarily for majors but above all for students who are committed to working
with difficult, influential, and fascinating texts. The course combines lecture and seminar discussion. The
course integrates an intense and demanding regime of reading and discussion with an equally intense
and demanding program of writing. The aim is to encourage students to develop the habit of writing
clear and concise prose, especially when engaging with difficult and complex ideas.
                                                                                                              1


                                 Course Format, Policies and Procedures
Course Format
This course is a writing intensive and combines lectures, in-class presentations, and small group work. We
will cover a range of different materials in a number of different ways. I expect your full, active, and
professional participation in class. This means:
. Attending all class meetings
. Showing up on time (note—persistently showing up late will negatively affect your participation grade)
. Respectfully engaging with the course instructor and your peers
. Being responsible for all of the assigned reading and materials: this means that if you miss a class, it is
  your responsibility to do the reading and get class notes from one of your peers
. Actively participating in peer review sessions
Assignments and Grades
The following is a breakdown of how I will evaluate your performance in the class. More in-depth
descriptions, rubrics, and prompts will be provided with each assignment.
. Class Participation: 20%—Active, informed, and respectful participation in class discussions and small
  group work. Course leadership on days you are a course leader is a significant factor in this grade.
. Reading Responses: 20%—You are responsible for writing a summary of a reading, a discussion question
  based on that reading, and a justification of that question’s purpose at least weekly. At the end of the
  semester, you will collect your best 10 of these and turn them in in portfolio form.
. Short Papers: 60%—There will be 5 short papers (4-5 pages) that you will complete over the course of
  the semester. These will all take different forms. I will grade and count your best 4 towards your overall
  grade.
Grade Cutoffs
         A                 94%
         A-                90%
         B+                87%
         B                 84%
         B-                80%
         C+                77%
         C                 74%
         C-                70%
         D                 65%
         F                 <65%
A note on class participation
The class participation is worth 20% of your overall grade. This is a famously fuzzy measure. Here is how I
plan to assess it:
     • 5% of total grade: Showing up on time
     • 5% of total grade: Coming prepared to discuss the readings
     • 5% of total grade: Making regular and productive contributions to class discussions
     • 5% of total grade: Being an effective discussion leader during your designated course sessions
                                         Learning Objectives/ Goals
Upon completion, students will be able to:
. Understand core ideas in theories of culture and society
                                                                                                              2


. Communicate in both writing and speech about social theory
. Apply perspectives in theories of culture and society to real world contexts.
. Identify and analyze key challenges and complexities related to addressing specific problems in social
  theory
. Explain, in broad strokes, the intellectual history of social theory from the 19th century to the present
. Analyze and explain different approaches to the study of culture and society (materialist, structural,
  poststructural, etc.)
. Write, speak, communicate, and think more critically and clearly about the world around you
                                         Introduction to Social Theory
Week 1: Course Introduction
January 22: Course Introduction
January 24: Reading Theory
    • Danilyn Rutherford. 2012. “Kinky Empiricism.” Cultural Anthropology.
    • Christian Lund. “Of What Is This a Case? Analytical Movements in Qualitative Social Science
         Research.” Human Organization. 73(3).
Week 2: Theory: What is it Good For?
January 29—What is the scale of anthropological theory?
    • Clifford Geertz. 1973. “Thick Description: Towards an Interpretive Theory of Culture.” In The
         Interpretation of Cultures.
    • Healy, K. 2015. “F*ck Nuance.”
January 31—Anthropological theory and/in the world?
    • Michel-Rolph Trouillot. 2003. “Anthropology and the Savage Slot: The Poetics and Politics of
         Otherness.” In Global Transformations: Anthropology and the Modern World. Palgrave.
                                             Historical Materialism
Week 3: Marx—Classes and Histories
February 5: Why should the workers of the world unite?
    • Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. “The Communist Manifesto.” The Marx-Engels Reader.
February 7: What is a Commodity?
    • Karl Marx. “Chapter 1” Capital: Volume 1. In The Marx-Engels Reader.
    • David Harvey. Reading Marx’s Capital Vol 1—Class 2, Chapters 1-2.
         http://davidharvey.org/2008/06/marxs-capital-class-02/
Week 4: Marx—Value, Society, and the Commodity-Form
February 12: What is a commodity?
    • Walter Benjamin. 2007. “The Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility.” In The
         Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility and Other Writings on Media. Harvard.
                                                                                                            3


February 14: What is value?
    • In-Class Screening: The Price of Everything
Week 5: Marxian Echoes
February 19: Rethinking Historiography/Peer Review
    • Assignment 1 Draft: Due Tuesday at 9:30am. NOTE—Bring 2 hard copies
    • Ranajit Guha. 1982. “On Some Aspects of the Historiography of Colonial India.” In Selected
       Subaltern Studies. Oxford.
February 21: Split Discussion: Devils in Commodity Fetishism
    • Assignment 1 Final: Due Thursday at 11:59PM
    • Michael Taussig. 1980. “The Devil and Commodity Fetishism.” In The Devil and Commodity
       Fetishism in South America.
    • Gastón Gordillo. 2002. “The Breath of the Devils: Memories and Places of an Experience of
       Terror.” American Ethnologist.
                                       Functionalism vs. Psychoanalysis
Week 6: Freud—Uncanny States
February 26: What is the Uncanny?
    • Sigmund Freud. 2003. “The Uncanny.” In The Uncanny. Penguin Classics.
February 28: How do we encounter the Uncanny?
    • Film Screening: The Act of Killing
Week 7: Durkheim—The Function of Religion
March 5: What is religion?
    • Assignment 2: Draft: Due Tuesday at 9:30am. NOTE—Bring 2 hard copies
    • Durkheim, E. “Book 1, Ch. 1; Book 2.” In The Elementary Forms of Religious Life.
March 7: What is the relationship between religion and collectivity?
    • Assignment 2 Final Due Thursday at 11:59PM
    • Durkheim, E. “Conclusion.” In The Elementary Forms of Religious Life.
                                       The Structural and the Symbolic
Week 8: Levi-Straus—STRUCTURE & agency
March 12 What is the relationship between structures and individuals?
    • Claude Lévi-Strauss. 1962. “Towards the Intellect.” In Totemism.
    • Claude Lévi-Strauss. 1966. “The Individual as Species.” In The Savage Mind.
March 14: Split Discussion: What does it mean to be “good to think with”?
                                                                                                 4


    •    Sarah Vaugh. 2017. “Disappearing Mangroves: The Epistemic Politics of Climate Adaptation in
         Guyana.” Cultural Anthropology.
    •    Emily Chao. 1999. “The Maoist Shaman and the Madman: Ritual Bricolage, Failed Ritual, and
         Failed Ritual Theory.” Cultural Anthropology.
Week 9: Dirty, Rooted, Betwixt, Between
March 26: What is dirt?
    • Douglas, M. “Ritual Uncleanliness” and “Secular Defilement”. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of
         Concepts of Pollution and Taboo. Routledge.
March 28: What is the liminal?
    • Turner, V. 1967. “Betwixt and Between: The Liminal Period in Rites de Passage.” In The Forest of
         Symbols: Aspects of Ndembu Ritual. Cornell University Press.
                                                 Poststructuralism
Week 10: Foucault—Thinking Past Structuralism
April 2: Peer Review
    • Assignment 3: Due Tuesday at 9:30am. NOTE—Bring 2 hard copies
    • For the assignment: Liisa Malkki. 1992. “National Geographic: The Rooting of Peoples and the
         Territorialization of National Identity Among Scholars and Refugees.” Cultural Anthropology.
April 4: What is Discipline?
    • Michel Foucault. 1977. “Panopticism.” In Discipline and Punish.” Vintage.
    • Assignment 3 Final: Due Thursday at 11:59PM
Week 11: Foucualt—Towards a Bio-Politics
April 9: What is Biopower?
    • Michel Foucault. 1978. “The Right of Death and the Power Over Life. The History of Sexuality, Vol.
         1. Vintage.
    • Anne Stoler. “6/13—Society Must Be Defended.” 13 Years at the Collège. [Through Minute 43].
         http://blogs.law.columbia.edu/foucault1313/613-2/
April 11: Biopolitics in practice: Split Discussion
    • Miriam Ticktin. 2006. “Where Ethics and Politics Meet: The Violence of Humanitarianism in
         France.” American Ethnologist.
    • Adriana Petryna. 2004. “Biological Citizenship: The Science and Politics of Chernobyl-Exposed
         Populations.” Osiris.
Week 12 Biopolitics of Gender
April 16: The Normalization of Gender
    • Butler, J. “Subversive Bodily Acts.” In The Cultural Studies Reader.
                                                                                                       5


April 18: Beyond “Science”
     • Emily Martin. 1991. “The Egg and the Sperm: How Science Has Constructed a Romance Based on
         Stereotypical Male-Female Roles.” Signs.
     • Donna Haraway. 1988. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the
         Privilege of Partial Perspective.” Feminist Studies
Week 13: A softer structuralism? Bourdieu
April 23: What is habitus?
     • Bourdieu, P. 1992. “Structures, Habitus, Practices.” In The Logic of Practice. Stanford.
April 25: Habitus and habits
     • Philippe Bourgois and Jeff Schonberg. 2009. “A Theory of Abuse” and “Intimate Apartheid.” In
         Righteous Dopefiend. University of California Press.
                                              The Postcolonial Turn
Week 14: Colonialism, Anthropology, and Postcolonialism
April 30: Is Anthropology a colonial practice?
     • Assignment 4: Due Tuesday at 9:30am. NOTE—Bring 2 hard copies
     • Talal Asad. “Introduction.” Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter
May 2: What is orientalism?
     • Edward Said. 1979. “Knowing the Oriental.” In Orientalism. Vintage
     • Assignment 4 Final: Due Thursday at 11:59PM
Week 15: Provincializing Europe
May 7: What might it mean to provincialize Europe?
     • Dipesh Chakrabarty. 1992. “Postcoloniality and the Artifice of History: Who Speaks for ‘Indian’
         Pasts?” Representations.
May 9: Course Conclusion
                                     Course Policies and Procedures
Course readings and syllabus
I believe that a course and its instructor should be adaptable. This means that readings and course
activities may change to suite course developments, forward fruitful discussions, or to address student
interests. For this reason, the readings in this syllabus should be regarded as provisional. For any given
week, the readings will be available on Canvas.
While readings may, from time to time change, the course policies and procedures listed in this syllabus
will not. It is your responsibility to know them.
Reading Policy
                                                                                                           6


All of the course readings for this class can be found on Canvas.
In some classes, we will spend significant time discussing particular readings. In others, we will treat them
as background. In all cases, if there is something you don’t understand in the material, it is your
responsibility to make sure that you gain an understanding of it by asking questions and raising issues.
You are expected to arrive at class ready to discuss any and all of the required course readings.
Policy on Plagiarism
I strongly believe that learning is a collaborative venture. I encourage you to study with your peers, meet
to discuss readings with them, and, on particular assignments, to work together with them. That said, the
work that you produce for this course must be your own. There are no exceptions to this rule and no
legitimate excuses for violating it.
In event that you fail to acknowledge others' work or that you are caught overtly plagiarizing from online
or written sources, you will receive a zero on the assignment and may be subject to disciplinary
procedures. See below (following course readings) for links to the University Policy on Academic integrity
Email and Office Hours policy
Please, feel free to contact me via email. I prefer that you contact me directly rather than through
Canvas. Please also keep in mind that we are as busy as you. Make sure you consult the course syllabus,
other handouts, your peers and the course Canvas site before sending an e-mail. Note that e-mail should
not be seen as an alternative to meeting with me or your TA during office hours. Nor should e-mail be
used as a mechanism to receive private tutorials or to explain material that was covered in classes you
missed (those are your responsibility to obtain from your peers). We will endeavor to respond within 24
hours, though we do not respond to email on the weekends or after 5pm, so plan ahead. Contacting us
the night before an assignment is due is, by definition, too late.
My office hours are your time and you are welcome to drop by at any time during them. Because, at
particular times in the semester, many of you will want to see me, I do recommend setting up an
appointment ahead of time. Also, if you have a regular class conflict during my office hours, I am more
than happy to set up an appointment with you at another time, however, I ask that you do not just drop
by my or your TA’s office outside of office hours without checking first. We may be there, but we will be
working on other things with pressing deadlines.
Late Policy
I adhere to the following late policy on assignments:
.  Framing Papers are due by 6am the day of class. Late assignments will not be accepted.
.  Assignments turned in up to 12 hours late will be penalized by 1/3 of a letter grade.
.  Assignments turned in between 12 and 24 hours late will be penalized a full letter grade.
.  Assignments turned in between 24 and 48 hours late will be penalized two full letter grades.
.  Assignments more than 48 hours late will not be accepted.
Writing Policy
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester,
complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve
your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked
to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
                                                                                                             7


come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.
     •    I have extensively detailed my policy on citation and bibliography on my website:
          http://www.jasoncons.net/formatting-and-referencing-papers.html
     •    I have also provided advice for student writers that is applicable not just in my courses, but in any
          course you are likely to take as an undergraduate:
          http://www.jasoncons.net/advice-on-writing.html
Attendance Policy
Attendance at all course and section meetings is required. There will be an attendance sheet available
when you come into class.
You are permitted two unexplained course absences per semester. After that, each absence will reduce
your overall participation grade by 3.33% (i.e., by 1/3 of a letter grade). If you have a legitimate reason to
miss class, it is your responsibility to let me and your TA know by email before class.
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. We will develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are
listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
     learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
     isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
     teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
• Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
     and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
     excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
     standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                                                                                              8


Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
                                UNIVERSITY POLICIES & RESOURCES
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259
(voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
• Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
• Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
• Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the following
web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                                                                             9


University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning,
use these to help you succeed in your classes
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing.
The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and
prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth
and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
                                     Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                                                                                                           10


Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                           11
