                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                             INTRODUCTION TO BLACK STUDIES
                                         AFR 303, ANT 310D
                                            29620 & 30730
                           Ethics, Cultural Diversity, Global Cultures Flags
                                            Online Streamed
                                               Fall 2019
Instructor: Dr. Edmund T. Gordon
Instructor: Dr. Traci-Ann Wint
Technical Support: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu.
Course Description:
This course provides students with an introduction to Black Studies. In the first section of the
course we consider the history of Black Studies in the U.S. using the integration and development
of Black Studies here at the University of Texas, Austin as a case study. We then turn to
considerations of the historical construction of Africa, the Black Diaspora, and the idea of
Blackness. Building on this foundation the course provides students with the analytical tools to
critically explore canonical Black Studies literature, themes, and theories. This section of the
course interrogates race, gender, class, sexuality, and their intersections. The second section of the
course focuses on Black cultures, power, and politics. It utilizes the analytical tools provided by
the course to forge an understanding of Black gendered cultural forms. The third section of the
course focuses in on the expression and use of Black Studies and the ethical questions raised by
applying this perspective to everyday concerns in critical areas of social inequity.
The course meets online during scheduled class times and includes a live-streaming video
component. Students are encouraged to visit http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html to test
their computer and network connection and learn about the course structure.
Description of Online Format:
This is the Synchronous Massive Online Course (SMOC) version of the AFR303 course. Unlike
almost all other courses offered at the University of Texas, you will be viewing this class online
(from the comfort of your own home, library, or coffee joint) rather than in-person (except as
required.) Though delivered as a live stream through Canvas, this course takes place at the official
times described in the course schedule: 1:00pm – 2:30 pm Mondays and Wednesdays. You are
required to attend class by logging into the course site before 1:00 pm on Monday and Wednesday
to watch the live, real-time video stream of our lectures and participate in class activities. It is very
important that you treat logging into the course website the way you would treat attending a
traditional course held in a classroom; attendance is required. You will have the opportunity to
pose questions online in real-time just as if you were raising your hand in class. The lectures will


have 7 students participating directly with Dr. Gordon and Dr. Wint during the live class and
another 18-21 person studio audience. These students will be chosen through an application
process on a first come basis.
About the Live Online Class format:
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1240671. You can enter directly at this URL or through
Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you will need
your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, you can navigate your way to other
areas.
Some of the most important features include:
1.      Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the Video Stream
where you watch class every day, a help section, and several other important links you’ll use
through the course.
2.      Video Stream – The Video Stream is the page on which you will find the live lecture for
the course. The Video Stream will also display the outline for the current lecture and links to other
participation activities.
3.      Modules – The Modules page includes links to the Assignments, Readings, Lecture video
archives and other course documents.
Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Video Stream and Modules tabs.
Tech Requirements:
Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to an internet-
enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your
computer should have enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following
requirements:
○       Computer laptop or desktop
○       RAM: at least 2GB
○       Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
○       Browsers: Safari, Firefox, or Chrome (highly recommended)
○       5Mbps internet connection speed (check here: http://beta.speedtest.net/)
You should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting the test
stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html.
There are multiple computer labs on campus for your use if you do not have a personal computer
or laptop. (You can find a listing of these labs here. If you do not have an internet-enabled device,
some inexpensive ones are available at local stores or on the internet, some for as little as $100.
We also encourage you to watch the lectures with your classmates so if you do not have a personal
computer or laptop you might consider pairing with a classmate who does.


Bandwidth limitations: Because the streaming video is bandwidth-intensive, you should not access
YouTube, Skype, Gmail video chat or other online video system, or any other program that is
bandwidth-demanding during class. During the class session, you should be watching the lecture,
taking written notes, and nothing else! (I recognize the temptation to multi-task. If you find
yourself frequently distracted online, I recommend you try browser-based solutions like
StayFocused or LeechBlock that prevent you from accessing certain tempting websites during
class hours).
Course communication:
During Class:
The Class Chat feature allows you to communicate with your TA and other students during the
class.
The Ask the Professor a Question feature on the Video Stream is the forum where students should
ask questions for clarification or further elaboration.
We expect that you will treat online discussions as though you are having a civil, respectful
discussion with your fellow classmates in the same classroom. Please refrain from using profanity
or any euphemisms for profanity. Please do not bait other commenters or personally attack them.
Please do not use sarcasm in a way that can be misinterpreted negatively. And please do not make
the same point over and over again. Also, please ensure that your discussion in the class chat
remain relevant to the topic a hand. In short, please just respect the right of your colleagues to ask
questions and discuss their opinions about the subject matter of our course on the discussion board
and refrain from unnecessarily being a distraction to others. Violators of these discussion rules
will simply be shut out of the online discussion board and will be asked to see the professor in
person.
Outside of Class:
The TAs and professor will often post Announcements in Canvas. Click on the “Settings” link in
the upper-right corner of your Canvas page, to adjust your email address and notification
preferences. This will allow you to receive email updates whenever course Announcements are
made, or when assignments and grades are posted.
If you have a specific, personal or grade-related question, please email your TA or visit them
during office hours.
Please do not use the Inbox feature within Canvas for course-related email.
Even though this is an online course, you are encouraged to communicate with the professors and
TA. Come to our posted online office hours, or send an email to set up an appointment if none of
the weekly office hours fit your schedule.
Honor system for quizzes and writing assignments:


By taking this class, you agree to abide by the University of Texas regulations concerning
cheating. During the quizzes you cannot receive help from others or discuss your writing
assignments with other students. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact
the TAs or instructors.
Information and data security:
All quizzes and online interactions in Canvas will be saved and stored. All information will be
kept for educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other
researchers will involve de-identifying the data, including the removal of names, UTEIDs, email
addresses, or other information. To further ensure that your information is secure, please do not
include identifying information in your online interactions with others. Remember that in online
interactions, the instructors and TAs will have access to all information. Please communicate in a
respectful manner.
Reporting technical problems:
If you experience a technical problem during class, your first course of action should always be to
immediately report the issue to tech support via the tech chat accessible through the Home Page or
the Video Stream. Please note that you must report any technical issue before the end of the
lecture during which the problem occurs. The professor and teaching assistants will not address
the ramifications that your technical problems might have on your grade if tech support does not
have a record of your problem. If you experience a technical problem outside of class, please
follow the link to contact tech support in Canvas.
Lecture Attendance – We Will Take Attendance!!
The course will meet two times per week for lectures by the professor. The lectures will present
empirical material, and interpretive perspectives not available elsewhere. They will be
complemented by the readings. Students are required to attend all lectures online. We will take
your attendance three to four times during each lecture!!! If students must miss lecture due to
sickness or other unchangeable obligations, they must inform the TA’s as soon as possible. You
are required to send explanations for absences to the TA’s email
(onlineAFR303ta@austin.utexas.edu) in advance when possible, and no later than 24 hours after
lecture. If a satisfactory explanation does not arrive at the attendance TA’s email within 24 hours
of lecture, the student will be graded down for an unexcused absence. You must attend lectures!
In-Person Studio Attendance:
Although this is an online class, a self-selected group of students will attend each day. For those
who will attend class in the studio, please be at the building by 12:30 p.m. The doors will close
shortly after 12:45 p.m. so we can talk to you about studio rules. You will also get a chance to talk
with the instructors, TA, and the other students who will be part of this. Please note that food and
drinks are not allowed in the studio. Make sure to go to the restroom before you enter. When the
live broadcast is in session you will only be able to leave in the case of an emergency.


The studio classroom is in Mezes (MEZ) 2.206. Enter the building from the west main entrance
and walk up the stairs. Walk straight through the hallway and there will be an area for you to wait
near the end of the hallway. A TA will be there to greet you and let you in to the classroom. Be
sure to bring a laptop with you.
Course Requirements:
1. Class Attendance and Participation (10 pts.). Students are required to attend class.
        a. Attendance - will be taken three to four times during every class meeting. A TA will
            send you pop-up “Instapolls” throughout the lecture at random times to gauge your
            participation. Students answering 90% or more of all instapolls sent during the
            semester will receive 10 pts. Those answering between 80% - 89% of instapolls will
            receive 7 pts. Those answering between 79% - 70% of instapolls will receive 4 pts.
            Those answering less than 69% of instapolls will receive 0 pts. ANY STUDENT
            WHO MISSES MORE THAN 50% OF THIS COURSE’S INSTAPOLLS WILL
            AUTOMATICALLY FAIL THE COURSE.
        b. 28 self-selected students will attend class in person in the studio for the entire semester.
            For these students, attendance will be taken by a TA with a sign-up sheet. The same
            point system as above applies ie. Students attending 90% or more of in studio lectures
            will receive 10 pts etc.
        c. Students who commit to attending class in studio will receive a 2 point bonus on their
            final grade and will not be required to complete the reading discussion posts.
2. Reading Discussions (5 pts.)
            Students will be asked to participate in on line group discussion over the course of the
            semester focused on sets of class readings. These group discussions will not be
            announced before hand and will be randomly posted on Canvas on Wednesdays and
            are due by 10pm on Sundays.
3. Vox Pops (4 points)
            students will conduct short video interviews with members of the UT population or
            general public. The questions are pre-determined and will be posted on Canvas. The
            videos can be recorded using your camera, smart phone, tablet, or laptop.
4. Quiz (30 pts.)
        a. There will be 3 timed quizzes testing knowledge of African-American history and the
            history of Black Studies within the context of Blacks at the University of Texas, Black
            Studies core concepts and Ethics. Only some of the materials for these quizzes will be
            covered in class. Additional material on these subjects are available online and on
            Canvas. A study guide for each quiz will be available on Canvas.
5. Short Essays (30 points)
        a. There will be three 2-3 page essays covering the main topics discussed throughout the
            semester. The prompts will be posted on Canvas and the essays are to be uploaded to
            Canvas by 11:59 pm on their due date. Each essay should be 2-3 double spaced pages.
            Essays are worth 10 points each. Late essays will not be accepted unless previously
            authorized.
6. Ethics Case Study Essay (20 pts.)


         a. You will write a 3-4 page response essay in which you discuss the ethics presented in a
              Case Study provided for you and determine a position you support regarding the issues
              raised by the Case Study. You must explain clearly why you have chosen the position
              you have taken. In your discussion, you must cite at least two scholarly essays
              assigned as class reading, and you must reference the arguments made during the
              presentation of ethics in class. The essay is due posted on Canvas no later than
              11:59 pm Monday December 9, 2019. NO late essays will be accepted. A rubric for
              writing this essay will be provided on Canvas.
Grades:
The TAs will work to return assignments within two weeks. After receiving each graded
assignment, wait at least 24 hours before bringing concerns to the TAs. Any concerns about
grades must be brought to the TAs’ attention no more than one week after the student receives the
grade. Gordon or Wint will not discuss questions on the grading of your assignment with you
unless you have had a previous discussion with the TA who graded your assignment.
Graded Assignments:
Essays                                                                 30 pts.
Ethics Case Study Essay                                                20
Quizzes                                                                30
Attendance                                                             10
Reading Discussion                                                      5
Video Responses/Vox Pops                                                4
TOTAL                                                                  100 pts.
Points to letter grades for final grade:
A = 94-100 pts.           A- = 90-93 pts.        B+ = 87-89 pts
B = 84-86 pts.            B- = 80-83 pts.        C+ = 77-79 pts.
C = 74-76 pts.            C- = 70-73 pts.        D+ = 67-69 pts.
D = 64-66 pts.            D- = 60-63 pts.        F = 0-59 pts.
Academic Accommodations and Academic Integrity:
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 512-471-6259 or 512-410-6644(video phone).
Academic integrity is central to the mission of the university. Each student is expected to turn in
work completed independently, except when assignments specifically authorize collaborative
effort. It is not acceptable to use the words or ideas of another person without proper
acknowledgement of that source. This means that you must use footnotes and quotation marks to
indicate the source of any phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or ideas found in published volumes, on


the Internet, or created by another student. For more information about the university’s
expectations for academic integrity, see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
We use turnitin’s plagiarism to check all papers for originality and citation.
Course Protocols:
•   Rules for respectful discussion will be followed. These rules will be established and agreed
    upon by everyone early in the semester. If a student violates these rules, that student will be
    counted as absent for the day.
•   Written assignments are due as indicated on the syllabus unless otherwise specified. Late
    assignments will not be accepted unless an acceptable excuse is provided before the due date.
•   The University of Texas rules and regulations regarding plagiarism and intellectual honesty
    will be enforced. For details please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
•   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
    Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
    512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Readings:
Readings for African American History portion of Quiz:
http://www.npr.org/news/specials/blackhistorymonth/timeline.html#pre1800
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African-American_history
http://www.blackpast.org/timelines/african-american-history-timeline-1900-2000
All other readings will be available on CANVAS.
Recorded Lectures:
All live lectures are recorded and made available in Canvas Modules 24 hours after the class.
Students can re-watch the lectures on-demand. To review a recording, locate the Archived
Lectures module in Modules on Canvas.
Sequence of Topics and Readings:
1: Black Studies: Race, Culture, Power, Blackness
Topic 1: Black Studies and Blacks at UT
Wed Aug 28 Blacks in higher education and Black Studies: An Introduction
                Reading: Karenga (1982)
Mon Sept 2      Labor Day Holiday
Wed Sept 4      Blacks and Black Studies at UT
                Reading Marsh Duren (1979)
         Wed Sept 4: Assignment Vox Pop 1
Topic II: Africa, the Black Diaspora and Blackness


Mon Sept 9     Africa and its Invention
              Reading: Davis (1998)
Wed Sept 11    Out of Africa – The Diaspora/ Invented Africa
              Reading: Lovejoy (2000)
       Fri Sept 13: Assignment – Last day to take Quiz 1
Mon Sept 16 Africa and Black Diaspora Cultures/ Slavery and Diaspora
              Reading: Falola (2003)
Wed Sept 18 Cultural Domination, Accommodation and Resistance
       Wednesday Sept 18: Vox Pop #2
Topic III: The Conceptual Toolkit – Race, Gender, Class, and Sexuality
Mon Sept 23    What is Race?
               Reading: AAA statement on race
               http://www.americananthro.org/ConnectWithAAA/Content.aspx?ItemNumber=258
       3
              On genetic ancestry testing: Bolnick et al. 2007
Wed Sept 25    Social Inequality based in race and class
              Readings: Macintosh (1989)
       Friday Sept 27: Essay 1
Mon Sept 30 Race and Racisms
              Reading: Domhoff (2012)
Wed Oct 2     Race and Racisms
Mon Oct 7     Race and Racisms
Wed Oct 9      African Ancestry and Blackness/ Black as Identity
              Reading: Vargas (2004)
Mon Oct 14      Who is Black and who is not?
              Reading: Windance Twine (1999)
Wed Oct 16     African Ancestry and Blackness
       Friday Oct 18: Essay 2 due & Last day to take Quiz #2
Mon Oct 21     Gender: Roles, Ideology and Power
               Reading: Lorber (1994)


Wed Oct 23    Gender and Intersectionality
              Viewing: Kimberle Crenshaw
Mon Oct 28    Black Feminist Thought
              Reading hooks Feminism (2015)
Wed Oct 30 Black Queer Identities
              Reading: Combahee River Collective Statement
       Wed Oct 30: Assignment – Vox Pop #3
                             Section II: Black Cultures in the World
Topic IV: Culture and Power
Mon Nov 4. What is Culture? Culture and Power = Hegemony. What is Cultural Politics?
              Reading: Ngugi (1993)
Wed Nov 6    Black Culture: Culture of Resistance
              Reading: hooks – Plantation Patriarchy (2004)
Mon Nov 11     Black Culture: Culture of Resistance
              Reading: West (1998)
Wed Nov 13 Black Cultural Deficiency = Cultural Racism
              Reading: Moynihan
              Viewing: Vanishing Black Family
       Wed Nov 13: Assignment – Vox Pop #4
Mon Nov 18     Black Cultural Deficiency = Cultural Racism / Gendered Cultural Forms
Wed Nov 20 Gendered Cultural Forms
              Reading: Gordon (1998)
       Friday Nov 22 Essay 3
Mon Nov 25     Black Women and Gendered Cultural Forms
Wed Nov 27 NO Class – Thanksgiving Holiday
Topic V: ETHICS
Mon Dec 2    Introduction to Ethics
              Reading: Axelsen (1977)
Wed Dec 4     Ethics: Critical Black Studies and Affirmative Action
Mon Dec 9     Ethics: Blacks, Criminality, Justice, Ethics
              Conclusions


            Reading: Weaver 2007
December 10: Assignment: Quiz 3 & Ethics Essay Due
