ADV 370J/ PR 367 – Fall 2018                      Integrated Communications Management
06456 - 06916
M 12 - 3 pm BMC 4.212
Text: Integrated Brand Promotion Management: Text, Cases and Exercises; Murphy,
Cunningham and Stavchansky Lewis, Kendall Hunt Publishing, 2011, at UT COOP.
Subscription to the Wall Street Journal (15 weeks) – online
https://store.wsj.com/v2/shop/US/US/60616004?trackingCode=aaqntppl&cid=WSJ_SC_NA_SA
LE_PROF
Professor: Dr.Isabella Cunningham (Dr. Cunningham), BMC 4.330 – (512) 471-8126,
            Isabella.cunningham@austin.utexas.edu
           Office Hours: M: 9:30 – 11:30 or by appointment.
T.A.: Abby C Hendricks abbyhendricks@utexasl.edu; office: BMC 4th floor – Graduate students
           carrels. Office Hours:
Course Description:
           This course requires you to:
           1. Assess problems, isolate key fact and rank-order salient management issues
           2. Think in a quantified and precise manner, then follow a structured decision-
                making process.
           3. Make decisions and create an action plan appropriate for the solution of the
                problem.
           4. Write a persuasive and clear analysis and outline your recommendations
           5. Defend your solution against the criticisms from your peers and others.
          You must come to class prepared for discussion. As you read the text, outside
          readings and cases, do the following: Create a written outline of the material, list
          unanswered questions, summarize the reading down to 4 to 5 sentences, and then
          ask yourself: “How can I use this on a day-to-day basis?” Think of examples to
          illustrate and support your analysis of the case. Find examples that contradict the
          prevailing position. Quantify your position. Inspect extreme solutions first. Be
          prepared to respond to a very simple question at all times: “Why do you recommend
          that?”
Course Objectives:
          This course has two main objectives:
          1. To present you with a wide range of interconnected public relations and
               advertising management decisions that are similar to what you will encounter in
               business.
                                                                                               1


           2. To present you with a structured, field-tested approach to decision-making that is
               a practical and useful method for addressing a variety of communication
               management issues.
Assumptions:
         1. Students in this class have successfully completed all prerequisite courses and have
             a solid foundation of the fundamentals of marketing as well as the various
             advertising and public relations functional areas. Given the wide range of
             prerequisite courses, students are required to quickly identify and resolve any gross
             conflicts, fundamental inconsistencies or background voids. Because this course
             requires a common advertising and public relations foundation, students are
             responsible for timely background leveling.
         2. Advertising and public relations management teams form the basis for a significant
             portion of this course. The ability to work effectively and efficiently within a small
             group is essential to successfully completing the course.
Strategy:
         1. Utilize class discussion of the text cases, outside readings and current events as a
             common framework for the study of advertising and public relations management.
         2. Utilize individual case analyses and individual assignments to demonstrate your
             writing skills and communication problem solving ability.
         3. Utilize the management team case analysis and class presentation to closely
             approximate the work environment of a management position on the client side or
             from within an agency.
Tactics:
        1. Measure individual performance with a subjective evaluation of participants and
            preparedness.
            The narrative portions of the Murphy, Cunningham and Stavchansky text are very
            short and to the point, reflective of the fact that this course integrates information
            and concepts presented in depth by prerequisite courses. Class discussion will
            require your total command of the text material. A demonstrated command of the
            material, coupled with a clear, concise, active presentation style is required to score
            above average in this dimension.
            Significant emphasis is placed on class participation, especially questions, comments,
            and discussion among peers. You must strike a balance between passive, silent
            listening and dominating the discussion with ill-conceived or trivial remarks. Neither
                                                                                                    2


           of these two extreme positions are acceptable. Neither earns you many participation
           points. Come prepared; take a stand. A lively discussion among peers is the
           objective. Air your ideas. Rebut others.
           Thorough preparation and concise expression are valued. Quality overweighs
           quantity. Enthusiasm counts. Contribute, don’t disrupt. Ask questions. There are no
           dumb or wrong questions. Throughout your academic career you have heard this
           phrase, but in ADV370/PR367, it is imperative that you believe it. This course is filled
           with uncertainty, inadequate information and not enough time. If you refrain from
           asking questions, you limit your exposure to fresh insights from others.
       2. Measure individual group participation with a structured peer evaluation system.
           Learning to write peer evaluation is a key management skill. Early in your career you
           will be on the receiving end of many such evaluations. Later, you will be required to
           assess the professional performance of subordinates in measurable, precisely
           articulated, easily understood terms. You will begin the understanding of this
           difficult management task with this required assignment.
       3. Measure individual resourcefulness, organization, and writing skills with
           unannounced crash projects.
       4. Measure individual problem solving and writing skills with case brief assignments.
           The core of this course revolves around case brief analyses. A premium is placed on
           the development of quantitative dimensions in support of case solutions.
       5. Measure management team performance based on major management team
           analyses and presentations.
Evaluation:
       Course participation                                           25%
       Management team peer evaluation                                 5%
       Group crash projects (3)                                       15%
       Case brief assignments                                         25%
       Written team analysis and class presentation                   30%
                       TOTAL                                         100%
       Your first individual case brief is worth 5%, the others are 10% each. Case briefs will not
       exceed 1 page. The outline for case briefs shall include: a brief (1 paragraph) situation
       analysis, statement of the problem, SWOT analysis, brief analysis of at least 2
       alternatives (or no more than 3 alternatives), and conclusion and recommendation.
       Your team case analysis requires a power point presentation and a written case analysis
       (minimum 5 pages) following the outline in pages 6 and 7 of the Textbook. NOTE: If you
                                                                                                   3


       are turning in a Group Case Analysis you are not required to turn in an individual case
       brief.
       Course participation grade will take into consideration your attendance, class and
       lecture discussion, WSJ weekly article analysis, and special assignments discussion. The
       WSJ weekly article analysis must be written in MEMO style. All written assignments for
       course participation must be uploaded to CANVAS 1 hour before they the class day in
       which they are due.
       Crash projects will be handed out in class. Written and/or oral presentations of solutions
       to the crash projects will be required for group grade.
       NOTE: An optional in-class case brief will be available on the last class day for those
       students who elect to substitute a low grade received in an individual case brief.
Course Participation Grade:
Your participation in this course is worth 25% of your grade – TWO letter grades. The 25% is
divided up as follows:
       1. 10% Attendance will be taken every class meeting. If you miss one class, - 90% of the
       grade; if you miss two classes-70%, and so on. Excused absences will require medical
       proof.
       2. 10% Case and lecture discussion – may include work turned in during class.
       3. 5% Wall Street Journal discussion and weekly article analysis you will turn in.
The grading system will be that adopted by The University of Texas according to the following
scale:
       A   =  93.5-100
       A-  =  89.5-93.4
       B+  =  86.5-89.4
       B   =  83.5-86.4
       B-  =  79.5-83.4
       C+  =  76.5-79.4
       C   =  73.5-76.4
       C-  =  69.5-73.4
       D+   = 66.5-69.4
       D   =  63.5-66.4
       D-  =  59.5-63.4
       F    = 59.4 or below
       Note: You must earn a C or higher to move forward to Campaigns – a C- will require that
       you take this course again
Deadlines and Standards:
                                                                                                4


1. All reading assignments must be completed prior to class discussion.
2. Materials are often distributed in class.
3. Attendance is required at all class, presentation, and account team meetings. Given
   the nature of the class, because marketing communication account teams make up
   an essential portion of the course, significant absence from class, team and other
   meetings can reduce your final grade in the course up to 2 letter grades. On our 1st
   class day, I will create a seating chart and name plates. You must always sit in your
   assigned seat. You will be counted as absent and may lose participation points if
   you’re not in your assigned seat – even if you are in class.
4. Everything produced in this class will be your original work. Enlisting aid from
   anyone outside the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and will
   be dealt accordingly.
5. Management team analyses, individual case briefs, crash projects, and peer
   evaluations are due online to CANVAS no later than 1 hour before class begins, on
   the scheduled due date, unless otherwise specified. Late assignments are scored 0.
   If you have difficulty uploading assignments on CANVAS, you must turn in a hard
   copy to my office 1 hour before class, and you must notify me and the TA of your
   difficulty. Turn in cases and assignments early if you have a conflict with the
   deadline.
6. All assignments produced outside the classroom are to be produced on a personal
   computer. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors can reduce your score by one
   letter grade. If you need help writing, please use the undergraduate writing center.
   You will lose points if you do not use a computer for outside work.
7. Team presentations must use Microsoft Power Point or another professional
   presentation program.
8. E-mail policy – As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate in academia
   and in industry, you must learn to use it appropriately. People have been fired from
   their jobs for misuse of this communication tool. Thus, when e-mailing me you will
   address it formally. Communication between professors and students is professional
   in nature, not informal. Begin your e-mail with: “Dear Dr. Cunningham:” and use
   business format. Write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss at work, not
   to your friend.
   I will respond to your e-mail within 24 hours from receiving it on weekdays or
   Monday evening if I receive it on the weekend.
                                                                                          5


9. Any question regarding grades must be asked within 7 days of learning your grade
    – including attendance.
10. The schedule of the course is tentative and can change. Students are responsible for
    changes to the schedule as announced in class.
11. All students must agree to read and abide by The University of Texas at Austin
    Policy on Academic Integrity:
    http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
    If you have any question about what constitutes plagiarism or any other form of
    scholastic dishonesty, ask me or any other member of the faculty. Students are
    responsible for their own conducts and for reporting any violations to their
    instructor or other members of the Stan Richards School faculty.
12. University of Texas honor Code – The core values of The University of Texas at
    Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
    leadership. Each member of The University is expected to uphold these values
    through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness and respect toward peers and community.
13. Document Disability Statement – The University of Texas at Austin provides upon
    request appropriate accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For
    more information contact Services for students with Disabilities at (512) 471-6951
    (voice or (512) 232-2937 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
14. This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
    students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can
    expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects,
    and receive feedback from your instructor to improve your writing. You will also
    have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to
    read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion
    of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag courses meet the Core
    Communication objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
    Personal Responsibility established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
    Board.
15. Religious Holy Days Observance Policy/ Military Duty/ Excused Absences – The
    Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a
    student from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations,
    for the observance of religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
    whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
    absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment
                                                                                          6


    from which the student is excused, within a reasonable period of time after the
    absence.
    If you are in the military and are called for duty for a short time, we will also work
    with you.
    Please read UT’s policy below:
    http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html-
    attendance
    The only other excused absence from class is for an official UT event that requires
    travel or missing a class (UT sports teams, other UT academic teams, TAG, PRSSA).
    You are required to contact Dr. Cunningham in advance to discuss the absence and
    provide necessary documentation.
16. Counseling and Mental Health Services – Taking care of your general well-being is
    an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing
    thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are
    options available for support:
    Visit: Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) M-F 8-5/ SSB 5th floor
    (512) 471-3515 – cmhc.utexas.edu
    CMHC Crisis line – 24/7 (512) 471-2255 cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is Abby Simpson, LCSW
    CMA 4.134 – (512) 471-7642. (Please leave a message if she is unavailable
Integrated Communication Management - ADV 370J/PR 367 – Fall 2018 Schedule
Date                     Topic                                         Assignments
Jan 28           Intro to course, syllabus                             photo/resume
                 class requirements, groups assigned                   seating chart
                 You must turn in a resume, with an                    assignment due
                 Application letter for a job or a fictitious          on CANVAS
                 Job.
Feb.4            The Marketing Context                                 Ch. 3
                 Students Intro/Case method/
                 Case Briefs                                           !st case assigned
                                                                       Case 3.3 p. 55
Feb.11           Research                                              Ch. 4
                                                                       2nd case assigned
                                                                       Case 4.1 p.75
                 WSJ/ discussion/Team presentation                     1st case due
                                                                                           7


Feb.18    IBP Objectives                          Ch. 5
          How companies hire (handout)            3rd case assigned
                                                  Case 5.2, p.117
          WSJ/discussion/Team presentation        2nd case due
Feb.25    Budgeting                               Ch. 6
          WSJ/discussion/Team presentation        3rd case due
                                                  4th case assigned
                                                  Case 6.3, p.151
                                                  2nd crash project
Mar.4     Creative/Media                          Ch. 7/8
          WSJ/discussion/Team presentation        4th case due
                                                  no case assigned
Mar.11    Personal Selling/Promotion              Ch. 9/10
          WSJ/ discussion                         5th case assigned
                                                  Case 10.2, p.299
                                                  2nd crash project
Mar 18-23 Spring Break
Mar.2     Direct Marketing/PR                     Ch. 11/12
          WSJ/Team presentation                   5th case due
                                                  6th case assigned
                                                  Case 12.5, p.381
Apr.1     Event Sponsorship/Branded Entertainment Ch. 13
          WSJ//discussion /Team presentation/     6th case due
                                                  No case assigned
Apr.8     Internet Marketing                      Ch. 14
          WSJ/discussion/Team presentation        7th case assigned
                                                  Case 13.4, p. 439
                                                  3rd crash project
Apr.15    Evaluating Effectiveness                Ch. 15
          WSJ/discussion/Team presentation        7th case due
                                                  8th case assigned
                                                  Case 15.2, p. 509
Apr.22    Client/Agency Relations                 Ch. 16
          WSJ/discussion /Team presentation       8th case due
                                                                    8


Apr.29 Ethics                          Ch. 17
       WSJ/discussion
May. 6 Optional In-class case analysis TBA
                                              9
