American Sign Language I (ASL f601D) Course Syllabus
Department of Linguistics; The University of Texas at Austin
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/linguistics/asl_program/ASL-Program.php
Lecturer: Erica Parker
Date: Summer 2020 (Session I)
E-mail: Use Canvas E-mail Inbox System
Course Number: 81065
Location: RLP 4.222/Online
Class Hours: M-Th 8:00-12:00p
Office Location/Hours: By appointment only
Online course information and assignments available through Canvas: canvas.utexas.edu
Course Description: This course aims to support a student’s learning of American Sign
Language (ASL) and is appropriate for students who have no previous knowledge of the
language. Students work on developing perceptual, attentional, manual, and non-manual skills
necessary to learn ASL. Learn how to manage various uncomplicated communicative tasks in
straightforward social situations. The course introduces the student to vocabulary and grammar
for adding oneself, exchanging personal information, talking about surroundings, giving
directions, and describing various activities. The course also includes the teaching of knowledge
about Deaf Culture, history, values, social norms, communication norms, and the role that those
norms play in the Deaf community.
Course Goals:
This course intends to support a student’s ability to achieve the following by the end of the
semester:
    1. manage a basic vocabulary in ASL, with particular focus on signs for communicating
        information about oneself and school life
    2. manage basic grammatical structures in ASL, including the use of manual (i.e., the
        hands) and non-manual (i.e., the torso, face, etc.) features
    3. comprehend short dialogues and narratives produced in ASL
    4. produce short talks and stories in ASL
    5. demonstrate ASL conversation, facilitating/regulating behaviors such as attention-getting
        techniques, turn-taking signals, leave-taking patterns, etc.


     6. Demonstrate an elementary knowledge of Deaf Culture, including being able to identify
         markers of Deaf Culture in artifacts and behaviors.
     7. demonstrate an understanding of historical topics as they relate to the Deaf community,
         such as influential figures and institutions in Deaf Culture and the role of technology in
         Deaf Culture
 Required Materials:
     •   Signing Naturally, A Student Workbook and Videotext, Units 1-6 (Smith, Lentz, &
         Mikos, 2008)
     •   Introduction to American Deaf Culture (Holcomb, 2012)
     •   Marco Polo Video Chat Application on a mobile device
Course Requirements and Weights:
     1.  Exams (2): 30%
     2.  Quizzes (+/- 5): 30%
     3.  Assignments: 30%
     4.  Electronic Portfolio: 10%
No extra credit will offer.
A. Exams
The course includes two comprehensive exams that contain sensitive and expressive portions (2
exams with two parts each.) Make-up exams will only be given in extenuating circumstances
(i.e., an emergency arises, and the instructor is notified immediately, and documentation is
provided, or the instructor is notified in advance of a planned religious holiday absence, etc.).
Exams are computer-based and will be administered online through Canvas. Additional
information about the exams will be provided online.
B. Quizzes
There will be three types of quizzes in this course:
     1. Comprehension quizzes: These are based mostly on a student’s ability to understand
         ASL. Questions might also found on the understanding of information from the Signing
         Naturally books or videos or linguistic information discussed in class.
     2. Quizzes about cultural information that are based on readings (from the Signing Naturally
         books or from Introduction to American Deaf Culture), or the viewing of videos/movies.
     3. Quizzes about information such as glossing/transcription conventions, how to correctly
         produce an ASL video assignment or information that is contained in the syllabus.


Make-ups for quizzes will not be allowed. If you miss a quiz, you will earn zero points for that
assignment.
C. Assignments
Each student will need to devote multiple hours per week online, completing different
assignments and interactive learning activities through Zoom. This time is vital for optimal
acquisition of ASL, and online assignments constitute a notable portion of each student’s
grade. It is suggested that students plan time in their schedules each week to participate and
complete all of these assignments. Details about each of the tasks will be posted on Canvas.
D. Electronic Portfolio
Throughout this course, each student will create and maintain an electronic portfolio of select
assignments. The portfolio will also include self- and peer-evaluations of progress and
descriptions of the portfolio for the instructor. Much of the content will be produced in ASL,
although there will be some written information included. Students are required to create and
maintain a portfolio through which the instructor can monitor their progress. Due dates for
specific parts of the portfolio will be provided as they approach, and the complete portfolio
evaluation will be due at the end of the course semester.
Attendance:
Students should plan on attending all scheduled online Zoom sessions through Canvas since the
material covered during these sessions and participation are vital to your performance in this
course. Attendance will be taken every Zoom session. Because this course involves interactive
activities, absences and/or early departures will not be tolerated. For any unexcused absence,
this results in one whole letter grade reduction (i.e., from an A to a B) and a letter grade
reduction for each absence after that (if you started with an A the first absence brings you to a B,
for each absence after that, B-, C+, C, C- and so on).
 Given that the approach to Zoom sessions range from whole class meetings to small cohort
group meetings, and possibly individual meetings. Attending your scheduled sessions on time is
imperative. Tardies and early departures will not be tolerated.
If an emergency or illness causes a student to be absent, the student must provide the instructor
with appropriate documentation (e.g., a note from a physician in the case of an illness), and the
instructor will take that into account when calculating participation based on absences.
Participation in UT-sponsored sporting events: Students must bring an official notification of the
upcoming event to class before the actual event, for the absence to be excused.
Observance of Religious Holy Days: students must notify the instructor at least 24 hours before
holy days. If you must miss a class, a quiz, a work assignment, or a project to observe a blessed
religious day, you will have an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable


time before or after the absence. See UT policy on this matter at
http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf
Participation:
Students must make every effort to attend the Zoom session on time and be prepared to
participate in in-class activities. Attention to different activities is imperative; behaviors such as
using pagers/cell phones, laptops, or doing work for another purpose other than sessions on
Zoom will not be tolerated. Because this is an ASL course, we aim to encourage the
development of signing skills; this also means that talking or voicing during our sessions will not
be allowed.
Assignments:
Students will complete a variety of assignments for this course with a primary focus on
developing productive language skills. This includes developing and creating video projects as
well as giving presentations on Zoom that demonstrate proficiency in target language skills in
ASL. For more information on when specific assignments are scheduled, please refer to the
Canvas modules. Late assignments will not be accepted; if you fail to submit assignments on
time, they will not be considered for a grade.
At Home
Language learning, in particular, requires continuous practice. Since it is a process that relies on
active participation on the part of the learner, do not expect to master the material by merely
coming to class three times a week.
Studying
You should not limit your work at home only to online assignments, which count for a
grade. Instead, you should also study the course material regularly, since attempts to memorize
large amounts of material quickly before quizzes are generally not successful. You should
frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of any items you may not
understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions and resolve issues
before quizzes.
Practice
Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as watching videos of vocabulary
and/or studying handouts/slides provided to you on Canvas. This type of studying is not usually
sufficient in a language course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home
often don’t develop the automaticity necessary to complete quizzes and video compositions
within a limited time frame. Therefore, regularly, you should also set aside time to actively
engage with the course material by producing signs yourself as well as viewing relevant videos
along with opportunities to interact with others practicing ASL. Given our current situation,
practicing with others may be limited to online chat sessions.


Zoom Sessions
Your sessions are an essential opportunity for you to interact with your classmates and your
instructor. Participation is an integral component of the course and does not refer exclusively to
attendance. Please keep in mind the following elements of our language courses:
 Interaction
Language courses are not lectured, classes. Instead, lessons are student-centered and rely heavily
on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will be pair
work and group work, where students are the main participants, and the instructor is the
facilitator. All students expect to participate equally in these activities.
Focus
The focus of your attention should be on activities while you are in class. Cell Phones, laptops,
and outside reading materials are NOT allowed during Zoom sessions, as they limit your
participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.
ASL
To improve your expressive communication skills, you must practice both receiving and
producing ASL! Therefore, your instructor will communicate almost exclusively in ASL
(written English may use at the instructor’s discretion), which will not only help you learn new
vocabulary and grammatical structures but will also increase your comfort level over the
semester. In turn, you are expected to reciprocate and use ASL for activities as well as for
primary functional language (e.g., saying hello, asking the instructor to repeat something,
etc.) Don’t be shy! You’ll never grade on the accuracy of your productions in these
situations. You are, however, expected to make an effort.
Course grades will base on the following total percentages:
A = 93.45% - 100% A- = 89.45% - 93.44% B+ = 86.45% - 89.44%
B = 83.45% - 86.44% B- = 79.45%-83.44% C+ = 76.45% - 79.44%
C = 73.45% - 76.44% C- = 69.45% - 73.44% D+ = 66.45% - 69.44%
D = 63.45% - 66.44% D- = 59.45% - 63.44% F = 59.44% and below
Notes: There will be no pass/fail grade; this course bases on letter grade only. Rounding up to the
nearest whole percentage is done at the instructor’s discretion


University Notices and Policies:
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students
are responsible for reading their e-mail for University and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the University informed about
changes to your e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly (i.e., daily)
to stay current with class information. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating e-mail addresses at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Documented Disability Statement:
If a student requires special accommodations, they must contact the Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) within the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement (471-6259 or 471-4641 [TTY] for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).


Upon registration with the SSD office, students will be given letters to present to their
instructors to discuss appropriate accommodations. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity.ddce/ssd/.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If a student is worried about someone who is acting strangely, they may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss their concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service provides through a partnership among the office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), AND the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement made. Students should be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation: Students should familiarize themselves with all exit
doors of the classroom and the building. The nearest exit door may not be the one that uses when
a student entered the building.
If a student requires assistance to evacuate, please inform the instructor in writing during the first
week of class. In the event of an evacuation, students should follow the instructions given by the
instructor. Students should not re-enter a building unless they have been given instructions by the
Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
office.


Course Schedule:
*Course schedule subject to change. All changes will be communicated in class or on Canvas.
Dates               Topics                                      Resource & Materials
6/4 Online Zoom     Introduction to the Course:                 SN Unit 1
meeting with an     Requirements, Technology, Syllabus
Interpreter present overview                                     Begin Unit 1 work on Canvas
at 8:00 am
6/8-6/11            Zoom Session Topics:                        SN Unit 1: Zoom Sessions (Mon. &
                                                                Wed, small cohort groups)
                    Unit 1: Personal Information, getting to
                    know you, introducing yourself, asking         •   on Canvas click on People
                    who, specifying where, giving                      to find out your group for
                    commands, and numbers in ASL.                      the week
                                                                Begin Unit 2 work on Canvas
                                                                Unit 1 Quiz
                                                                Film Quizzes
6/15-6/18           Zoom Session Topics:                        SN Unit 2: Zoom Sessions
                                                                (Monday & Wednesdays, small
                    Unit 2: Exchanging Personal                 cohort groups)
                    Information: giving information about
                    yourself, narrating experiences with           •   on Canvas click on People
                    languages, leisure activities, identifying         to find out your group for
                    people, and numbers in ASL                         the week
                    Unit 3: Discussing living situations, real- Begin Unit 3 work on Canvas
                    world orientations, giving commands,
                    basic directions, and number signs with
                    time.
                                                                Unit 2 Quiz
                                                                American Deaf Culture Book Quiz


6/22-6/25 Zoom Session on Monday to Review for SN Units 1-3
          the Exam
          Tuesday - Exam 1 (Receptive)
                                                  Mid-term Exam Week
          Wednesday - Exam 1 (Expressive -
          Groups)
          Thursday- Unit 4
6/29-7/2  Zoom Session topics:                    SN Units 4&5: During Zoom
                                                  Sessions (Monday & Wednesdays,
          Unit 4: Talking about family, negation, small cohort groups)
          numbers involving ages, relationships,
          family members.                            • on Canvas click on People
                                                         to find out your group for
          Unit 5: Telling about activities,              the week begin working on
          agreement verbs, and frequency of              Units 4 & 5
          activities
7/6-7/9   Monday – Unit 5                         SN Units 1-5
          Tuesday - Childhood Story               Exam Week
          Wednesday - Exam 2 (Receptive)          Final Deadlines:
          Thursday- Exam 2 (Expressive) and e-       •   Expressive Exam Video due
          Portfolio                                      Thursday, July 9th at 12 pm
                                                     •   Portfolio Evaluations due
                                                         Thursday, July 9th at 12:00
                                                         pm
