ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
                                                                             School of Architecture
                                                                             West Mall Building 5.114
                                                                             Mondays 9:00-12:00 am
                                                                             Professor: Juan Miró, FAIA
                                                                             jmiro@austin.utexas.edu
                                                                             Teaching Assistant: Ernesto Bilbao
                                                                             ebilbao@utexas.edu
SYLLABUS
This course is a required class for architecture undergraduate students at the School of Architecture. The
course is a companion class for Comprehensive Studio (ARC560T) and all students are expected to be
enrolled in the studio. In addition, all students in this class must have completed all other construction
classes (Construction I through IV).
Course Objectives
As a conclusion to the construction class series, this course’s general goal is to crystallize the accumulated
knowledge and explore further the analysis of how buildings are conceived and detailed, with special
emphasis on material selections, building envelope and assemblies.
More specifically, students are expected to fulfill the following learning objectives with this course:
     1.   Understand the importance of architectural detailing as a critical component of the holistic
          process that constitutes the design of any building. As a consequence, students are expected to
          become better designers.
     2.   Improve the ability to observe, understand and discuss architectural design intent and concepts.
     3.   Learn how to produce architectural details and conduct product research.
     4.   Increase understanding of the role of architects as the coordinators of a complex process.
Class Structure
The class is organized to address the objectives stated above, with approximately 50% of the time
devoted to lectures and site visits and 50% devoted to review and discuss your work. Students are also
expected to participate in one-hour discussion section with the TA per week to review progress of
assignments. Meeting times for discussion sections will be discussed during the first class.
1.- Lectures
The first half of the class will consist of lectures devoted to specific materials and detailing problems, such
as steel, wood, concrete, masonry, foundations, windows, roofing, curtain walls, etc. The goal of these
presentations is to examine numerous drawings and buildings, showing how architects have resolved
design and detailing situations of all types. Some will be similar to the ones you will be facing during your
assignments throughout the semester. The detail is the last phase of the design process, prior to
construction, and we will study how thoughtful detailing and material selection are a critical part of every
successful project.
2.-Site visits
As a complement to the lectures there are two construction site visits planned. Site visits are extremely
beneficial tools to learn about construction and you are expected to attend both of them. You must bring
your sketch book and appropriate shoes to all site visits. After each site visit you must turn in a two-page
field report, describing what you have seen, focusing on what has interested you the most. The report
should have a minimum of 400 words and should include at least three free-hand sketches of details from
the site visit based on your field notes. The details can be scanned from your sketch book and you should
incorporate them in the text of the report.
3.-Class Participation and Readings Discussion
Reading shall be completed prior to class. Participation in class discussion is expected. Evaluation
may include in-class quizzes based on readings and related lecture content.


ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
4.- Drawing Assignments
The second part of each class will be devoted to review your on-going drawings assignments. All students
are expected to present their drawings every Monday, regardless of the level of development. I prefer to
see drawings that are not finished than no drawings at all. We will be reviewing and discussing the
drawings as a group. Please bring pins to be able to pin-up your work.
         First Assignment: My Window
         Draw a free hand section through the window of your room at 3” =1’-0”.
         Due on Friday January 24.
         See Appendix I at the end of the syllabus for details.
         Second Assignment: A Portfolio of Details
         This is an on-going assignment that will last 10 weeks and constitutes 50% of your grade for the
         class. Students will work in teams of two, the same pairs than in the Comprehensive Studio.
         Each team will develop a series of case studies which will include details of different types of
         buildings with specific focus on structural systems and façade assemblies. More detailed
         information about this exercise will be provided during the first class. The assignments will be
         reviewed every Monday in class.
         Third Assignment: Your Studio Details
         The last third of the semester will focus on helping you develop details for your Comprehensive
         Studio work.
See Schedule for the semester at the end of the syllabus
Materials Lab
Located in the West Mall Building, the Materials Lab is a great resource for this class. It is open from 9am
to 6pm every day and it contains a superb collection of materials samples and manufacturer literature.
You can also use its website (http://wnt.cc.utexas.edu/~matlab) to find links to vendors and
manufacturers.


ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
Attendance
There is no final exam for this class. You are expected to learn every week through your own work and
the lectures, class discussions and reviews. Regular attendance and class participation are absolutely
essential. The minimum penalty for two unexcused absences is a full grade letter drop in final grade,
more absences may result in a failing grade. Arriving late to class will also be penalized. Please send an
email to me and to the TA prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class.
A student who misses classes or other required activities for the observance of a religious holy day
should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be
made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who fails to
complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information contact the Office of the Dean of Students at
471-6259.
Grading
The individual components of this course have the following value:
     •    First Assignment 3%
     •    Second Assignment- 50%
     •    Third Assignment -20%
     •    Field Reports, Readings, Class Participation 27%
Each assignment will be graded by the following criteria:
          -Understanding, Thought + Grasp                25%
          -Process + Rigor                               25%
          -Completeness + Resolution                     25%
          -Engagement + Contribution                     25%
Office Hours:
Thursdays 9:30 to 10:30 or by appointment. My office is located at GOL. 4.116, my e-mail address is
jmiro@austin.utexas.edu.
Reference Books
The following books will serve as references for the class:
     -    Materials for Design, by Victoria Ballard Bell (2006). An excellent survey of projects from around
          the world organized in 5 chapters corresponding to 5 different materials. It contains many
          examples of good design accompanied with relevant details. There will be required reading from
          this book (see attached class schedule)
     -    The Architectural Detail, by Edward Ford (2011) Renowned author attempts to answer the
          question: what is a detail?
     -    Architecture in Detail. The Building Design Book of Details (2009), by Graham Bizley. Excellent
          survey of case studies with axonometric details.
     -    Architecture in Detail II (2010), by Graham Bizley. Second book came out after the success of
          the first book.
     -    The Professional Practice of Architectural Detailing, by Osamu Wakita and Richard Linde (1999). A
          complete reference book that covers all aspects of architectural detailing. It will serve as a
          helpful companion when developing details throughout the semester.
All these books will be on reserve at our school’s library.
Bibliography
Allen, Edward. Architectural Detailing. (John Wiley & Sons, 1993)
Allen, Edward. Fundamentals of Building Construction Materials and Methods.
Architecture Graphic Standards
Arieff, Allison and Burkhart, Bryan. Pre-Fab
Ballard Bell, Victoria. Materials for Design (Princeton Architectural Press, 2006)
Ballast, David K. Architect’s Handbook of Construction Detailing. (BNI Publications, 2000)
Boswell, C. Keith. Exterior Building Enclosures. Design Composition for Innovative Facades (Wiley,
2013)


ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
Ford, Edward R. The Details of Modern Architecture. Third printing (MIT Press, 1990)
Frampton, Kenneth. Studies in Tectonic Culture. (MIT Press, 1996)
Moussavi, Farshid and Michael Kubo. The Function of Ornament. (Actar, 2008)
Moussavi, Farshid. The Function of Form. (Actar, 2009)
Peter Erggen, Arne Steel, Structure and Architecture, (Whitney Library of Design, 1995)
Weston, Richard. Materials, Form and Architecture (Yale University Press, 2003)
Grading Scale
This course will use the universities’ +/- system.
Below is the conversion table from points to a numeric grade that will be used to determine your grade in
this course:
          A         4.0 – 3.9         100-96 Points
          A-        3.8 – 3.5          95-90 Points
          B+        3.4 – 3.2          89-84 Points
          B         3.1 – 2.9          83-78 Points
          B-        2.8 – 2.5          77-70 Points
          C+        2.4 – 2.2          69-65 Points
          C         2.1 – 1.9          64-62 Points        Lowest passing grade for SOA undergrads
          C-        1.8 – 1.5          61-58 Points
          D+        1.4 – 1.2          57-55 Points
          D         1.1 – 0.9          54-52 Points
          D-        0.8 – 0.7          51-50 Points
          E         0.0 – 0.7          academic failure No credit earned
Technically, a grade of D- or higher is a passing grade. However, all SOA undergrads must make a C
or better in all SOA courses in order for a course to count toward a SOA degree.
Grade Descriptions
A/A- : Excellence
Work surpasses course and instructor expectations. Work is consistent, inventive,
appropriate, thoroughly resolved, conceptually clear and rigorous. Subject of work
pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Student
demonstrates strong personal growth.
B+/B/B- : Above average
Work is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed.
Subject of work pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and demonstrates
resolve of project objectives. Work shows potential for excellence.
C+/C/C- : Average
Work meets the minimum requirements. Work content is minimally developed but is
appropriate for class objectives. Work is not pursued with dedication nor rigor. Student is
not engaged nor responsive to suggestions for improvement. (Note: C- does not meet
the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree in architecture or interior
design).
D+/D/D- : Below average
Basic skills including graphic skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not levelappropriate.
Student does not demonstrate the required skill and knowledge base.
F : Failure
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will
be assigned with excessive unexcused absences.
X : Excused incomplete
Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments
are not a cause for assigning this grade. An incomplete is assigned after consultation
with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date.


ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS for absences, late work and late arrivals.
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for
your learning:
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Cell Phones, etc.
Cell phones must be put away during class. Students who use digital technology for non-class related
activities will be marked absent and asked to leave for the remainder of that class.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical
need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in order that the
most appropriate accommodations can be determined. For more information, contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e- mail address. You should check
your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions
for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made.
Please be aware of the following Policies Regarding Evacuation
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit
door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate,
inform me in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions
or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin
Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Adobe Software
You may use Adobe software in this course to prepare your presentations and paper. When accessing
Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not
required to purchase Creative Cloud services to sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to
create a free Adobe ID. That can be done here: https://accounts.adobe.com/
Mental Health and Support Services


ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
Taking care of your general well-being is an important part of being a successful student. If something is
getting in your way (e.g. stress, test anxiety, lack of motivation), there are options available for help.
CARE PROGRAM
The CARE Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools they serve in
order to provide better access to support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
The CARE Counselor in the School of Architecture is Abby Simpson, LCSW.
          - Office Hour: Fridays 1230p – 130p | BTL 114B
          - Available by phone: M-F 8-5p | 512.471.3115 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
          - cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
For immediate support:
-      Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-      CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
Services at CMHC:
-      Brief assessments and referral services - cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
-      Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-      MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-      Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
-      Tips on self-care - cmhc.utexas.edu/selfcare.html
Other Helpful Offices at UT
-           Student Emergency Services (SES) - deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
-           Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) – diversity.utexas.edu/disability
-           Office of the Student Ombuds - ombuds.utexas.edu/student
Class Schedule


ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
M 1/27          Lecture: “Introduction” and “Steel”
                Review Assignment #1
                Reading: The Architectural Detail, pages 17-46
M 2/3           Lecture: “Concrete”
                Reading: Materials for Design, pages 53-59
M 2/10          Lecture: “Windows and Curtain Wall”
                Lecture: “Masonry”
                Review Drawing Assignment
                Reading TBD
M 2/17          Site Visit #1
                Materials Lab Visit: Resources available-window catalogues-window samples-skylight
                samples-glass samples-trade industry manuals
M 2/24          Lecture: “Wood”
                Review Drawing Assignment
                Reading TBD
M 3/2           Lecture: “Sheet Metal. Roofing”
                Review Drawing Assignment
                Reading TBD
M 3/9           Site Visit #2
Spring Break
M 3/23          Lecture: “The Construction of the Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao”
                Review Drawing Assignment
                Reading TBD
M 3/30          Lecture: “Sustainable Architecture. Low tech vs. High Tech”
                Review Drawing Assignment
M 4/6           Lecture: “Pre-Cast Concrete”
                Studio Details Review
M 4/13          Lecture: “Specifications”
                Studio Details Review
M 4/20          Studio Details Review
M 4/27          Studio Details Review
M 5/4           Studio Details Review
                All assignments due last day of class
                FINAL REVIEWS FOR STUDIOS on 5/6, 5/7 and 5/8


ARC 335
Construction 5: Architectural Detailing and Materials
Fall 2020
Appendix I
First Assignment: “My Window”
Due on January 24. Please email it to me electronically.
Draw a free hand section through the window of your room at 3” = 1’-0”.
Include the head and the sill.
The section must include all the information that you know (what you can see) but also you should
incorporate your speculation about what you don’t see: what is inside the wall at the head and at the sill
of the window.
Most likely your window would not fit in an 8.5 x 11 sheet at 3” =1’-0”, so you should compress the
section as needed to be able to fit the head and the sill properly.
Include dimensions and notes, describing materials and finishes.
Design a title block with your name, the name of the class, the assignment name and number, the scale
and the date.
Use graph paper to help guide your lines.
Use pencil (HB, sharp) or a fine marker. If you use a marker, draw it first with the pencil and then trace
over with the marker.
To be presented in an 8 ½ x 11 sheet.
