                          THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                         STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number: SWN393T29                         Instructor: Robert Ambrosino, Ph.D.
 Unique Number: 88800                             Robert.ambrosino@utexas.edu
 Semester: Summer 2019                            Office: 3.104A
 Meeting Time/Place: T/TH                         Office Phone: (210) 268-9043
 5:30 pm – 8:00 pm                                Office Hours: T//TH 3:30 pm – 5:00 pm
 SSW 2.132                                        and by appointment
                                  FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This advanced management course will cover the knowledge and skills necessary to guide
nonprofit organizations through a variety of important financial decisions. Students will learn
how to create budgets, analyze financial statements, record common financial transactions
through basic accounting, manage cash flow, analyze costs, and support key financial decisions
in a nonprofit at executive or management levels. The course will examine how financial
management is used in social work practice with case studies and exercises that will be directly
applicable when beginning in a new nonprofit organization. Hands-on experience will include
the opportunity to create one’s own non-profit program budget, practice basic accounting,
interview an Executive Director to better understand how finances are dealt with in practice,
create a financial analysis and sustainability plan on a nonprofit of one’s choosing, analyze cost
structures and recommend revenues for a nonprofit case, and hear from practitioners in the field.
Through readings, exercises, videos, and guest speakers, students will come away with a toolbox
for applying the latest in financial management theories to human service organizations. Students
will learn to define and practice financial management topics to become a social worker with
financial literacy.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
    1. Critically examine and apply theories of financial management to non-profit human
        service organizations.
    2. Explain common financial management concepts and terminology to effectively
        communicate with organizational stakeholders.
    3. Construct and analyze different types of budgets and understand the budgeting process in
        nonprofit and public entities.
    4. Analyze value dilemmas, ethical issues, and social justice issues in the financial
        management of human service organizations.
    5. Explain basic accounting principles, how to record common financial transactions, and
        software that supports this accounting.
    6. Understand how to manage cash flow in an organization and the importance of
        monitoring cash budgets to support financial stability.
    7. Understand different costs in a nonprofit organization and how to conduct a cost analysis
        to develop cost-effective programming.
    8. Analyze financial statements of nonprofit organizations and provide constructive
        feedback on their financial conditions, financial performance, and fiscal vulnerabilities.


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
     9. Describe the multiple revenue streams that finance nonprofits and the advantages and
         disadvantages of different funding sources.
     10. Utilize differential cost-benefit analysis in making executive-level organization and
         policy decisions (e.g., make or buy, keep or stop, expand or reduce, fund or reject).
     11. Understand internal controls and the importance of audits in supporting the overall
         financial health of an organization.
     12. Apply financial knowledge to starting a non-profit business in social work.
III. TEACHING METHODS
The class will use a form of blended learning in which students learn content both in class and
online. Specially-designated “lab days” will serve as protected time for students to work on class
assignments. Course assignments will involve extensive use of widely-used spreadsheet programs,
such as MS Excel and Google Sheets. While prior knowledge of or experience with spreadsheet
programs is not a prerequisite, students will need to be comfortable with using this software during
the course. Introductory MS Excel and Google Sheets tutorial videos will be posted on the course
Canvas site and students who are unfamiliar with the use of these programs should watch the
videos prior to or soon after the beginning of the semester. Students are expected to complete
assigned readings prior to each class period and actively participate in class. Class attendance and
participation are required and essential for successful completion of this course.
Canvas will be used for communication between students and the instructor. The class Canvas
site can be accessed at http://courses.utexas.edu or the Social Work web page (requires Internet
connection and computer UT EID and password). The Help Desk available through the UT home
page (www.utexas.edu/its/help) or at 475-9400 is available to assist students with Canvas-related
questions. Students can access computers through the Learning Resource Center located on the
first floor of the social work building.
IV. REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Zeitlow, J., Hankin, J., Seidner, A., & O’Brien, T. (2018). Financial management for nonprofit
organizations: Policies and Practices (3rd edition). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Note that the 3rd edition of this text is required.
Additional reading material will be posted on the course Canvas site throughout the semester.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
The grade in the course will be comprised of the following:
Class participation (20% of course grade)
The class participation grade includes attendance (see CLASS POLICIES below), online Canvas
postings, and participation in class discussions.
                                                     2


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
Creating a Non-Profit Program Budget (15% of course grade)
For this assignment, students will create a small nonprofit organization with a specific mission
and objectives, select one program provided by the organization, and create a revenue and
expense budget for that program.
The following information is to be provided as part of this assignment:
    • Agency mission (no more than 5 sentences)
    • Agency objectives (2-3 short, one sentence objectives)
    • Brief description of one program that is provided by the organization (no more than one
        paragraph)
    • 12-month calendar or fiscal year budget for the program, with revenues to support the
        program and expenses that demonstrate how the funds will be used (a spreadsheet
        template will be provided to capture this information)
    • Variance report for the first three months of program operation (a spreadsheet template
        will be provided to capture this information)
This assignment is due on or before 11:59 pm on June 25.
Creating a Cash Flow Budget Report (15% of course grade)
Using the program budget identified above, students will create a cash flow management report
for the next year. The budget should include both cash receipts and cash payments, showing the
ending cash balance for each month (a spreadsheet template will be provided to capture this
information).
This assignment is due on or before 11:59 pm on July 9.
Understanding Non-Profit Audits (15% of course grade)
Non-profit financial audits combine the basic financial statements with notes on the organization
and other aspects of operations. Nonprofit executives need to be well versed in the terminology
of audits and be able to understand how the statements and notes combine to paint the overall
picture of the agency.
Two sample audits will be posted on Canvas. Each sample includes a set of questions designed
to help students delve deeper into the audit. Students will choose ONE of the two audits and
respond to the set of questions presented for that audit.
This assignment is due on or before 11:59 pm on July 25.
                                                 3


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
Agency/Organization Financial Analysis & Sustainability Plan (35% of course grade)
Students will work in teams of no more than three students (team membership to be determined
by the course instructor) to assess the finances of a local non-profit organization. The selected
nonprofit must have an annual operating budget of at least $500,000 and been in existence for at
least three years. The non-profit agency selected can be one that a member of the team interacts
with directly as a volunteer, employee, or field placement, or one that members of the team
would like to learn more about. In either case, teams must be able to access sufficient
programmatic and financial information for a fiscal year to complete the assignment.
Each team will prepare a 6 – 8 page written report about the organization based on a review of
financial statements and budget documents, and interviews with key leaders within the
organization such as the Chief Executive Officer or Executive Director, Chief Financial Officer
or Financial Manager, Chief Program Officer or Program Director, and Chief Operating Officer
or Operations Director).
The report is to include the following information:
    • Brief description of the organization (2 pages)
        - Mission and overview of organization (size, age, field of activity, location)
        - Overview of main programs
        - Overview of key agency officials Executive Director, Finance Department, Program
            Directors
        - Revenue streams
        - How finances are communicated within the organization?
    • Current calendar or fiscal year financial position (2 – 3 pages)
        - Liquidity (how much unrestricted cash is on hand)
        - Statement of Financial Position (Balance Sheet)
                o Are unrestricted current assets greater than unrestricted current liabilities? By
                    how much?
                o Are there unrestricted long-term investment assets that could be used as
                    needed?
                o What is the unrestricted net asset position (cumulative impact of each annual
                    surplus or deficit since the organization started)?
        - Statement of Activities (Income Statement)
                o Is there an annual deficit?
                o Are revenue streams diversified?
                o Are management costs reasonable compared to total annual costs?
        - Financial condition of the non-profit (use two of the following ratios in your
            response: liquidity, solvency, efficiency, profitability)
                                                   4


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
    •   Recommendations for sustained or improved finances (2 - 3 pages)
               o Steps agency could take to explore new revenue streams
               o Strategies that agency could deploy to reduce costs while not jeopardizing
                   agency operations
               o Ways that agency could improve communication of agency finances (internal
                   and external)
               o Internal controls used within the organization (accountability and
                   transparency)
    •   Copies of organization documents reviewed as part of the assignment.
Each team will prepare a PowerPoint presentation to be delivered during the last class that
contains an overview of their findings, including recommendations for sustainability. The
presentation schedule will be determined by the course instructor. Each team will have 20
minutes to make its presentation, plus 5 - 10 minutes for questions at the end of the presentation.
The written portion of this assignment is due on or before 11:59 pm on July 30. Class
presentations are scheduled for July 25 and July 30.
A summary of course assignments is contained in the following table.
                                                                                Due        % of
                                 Assignment                                     Date      Course
                                                                                          Grade
  1    Class participation                                                       NA        20%
  2    Creating a nonprofit program budget                                      6/25       15%
  3    Creating a cash flow budget report                                        7/9       15%
  4    Understanding nonprofit agency audits                                    7/25       15%
  5    Financial analysis and sustainability plan                                          35%
                                                              Written report    7/30       25%
                                                         Class presentations    7/25,      10%
                                                                                7/30
                                                                                Total      100%
                                                  5


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
VI. GRADES
The following distribution will be used to assign grades in this course:
        94.0 - 99.999            A              74.0 - 76.999         C
        90.0 - 93.999            A-             70.0 - 73.999         C-
        87.0 - 89.999            B+             67.0 - 69.999         D+
        84.0 - 86.999            B              64.0 - 66.999         D
        80.0 - 83.999            B-             60.0 - 63.999         D-
        77.0 - 79.999            C+             Below 60              F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Conduct and Civility: Social work students adhere to the Student Standards for Professional
Conduct of the NASW Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for their conduct. Scholastic
honesty and integrity are to be consistent social work values. The instructor will comply with
University guidelines regarding scholastic dishonesty, including plagiarism. Social work
practitioners respect others; therefore, differences in values, opinions, and feelings of class
members and guest speakers will be respected. Students will help create and support a learning
environment that does not interfere with the learning of fellow students. When students voice an
opinion with which you do not agree, feel free to voice opinions in a civil manner that can
enhance the flow of ideas and dialog.
Readings and Preparatory Assignments: Students are expected to be active and participate in
the learning process, and in an interactive framework between collegiate students and professor.
Students are also expected to complete readings and preparatory assignments prior to class.
Failure to demonstrate through discussions in class, online, and through assignments that one has
comprehended the readings will be considered when assigning the final grade. Students are
responsible for the material in the assigned readings whether or not the material is covered in
class. Professor reserves the right to conduct quizzes should there be a pattern of students not
demonstrating that they have completed the readings and are not prepared to engage in
thoughtful discussion.
Professional Communication and Interactions: Refrain from private conversations during
class or other disruptive behavior. Disrespect toward the professor, students, or others is
unacceptable and will be handled directly and in the context in which it occurs. Disrespectful
behavior includes overt acts, such as talking over others or making derogatory remarks based on
another person’s age, race, class, gender, sexual orientation, religious preference, and ability.
Moreover, covert acts of disrespect such as sneers and other facial expressions, excluding class
members from classroom tasks, etc. are also unacceptable.
Electronic Devices: All communication devices should be turned off or placed on silent mode
and put away during class. Unless laptops are required for specific class sessions, students may
                                                   6


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
not use laptops during class without prior permission from the professor. Grade is negatively
impacted by student’s failure to comply with this policy.
Class Attendance Policy: Attendance at every class is expected. Attendance is defined as
students’ attentive physical presence in class for the entire class (i.e., no late arrivals or early
departures, unless approved in advance by the course instructor). Students missing more than three
classes without a valid, verifiable excuse will be subject to a penalty of one letter grade. The
instructor should be notified in advance of any planned absence and as soon as possible in the case
of an unforeseen, serious emergency.
Class attendance will be taken at the beginning of the class throughout the semester. It is the
students’ responsibility to ensure that they have signed the attendance sheet. Any student caught
signing an attendance sheet for a missing classmate will be referred to the Dean of Students for
disciplinary action.
Assignments and Grades: Students are expected to turn in all assignments on or before 11:59
pm on the date that they are due using the course Canvas. A penalty of 5 points per day will be
assessed for all late assignments. Penalties for late assignments will factor into the grade
achieved for the assignment.
Writing Style: The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association Sixth
Edition (APA) is the style manual to be used by all students in this course. The manual is
available at the library or for purchase at the UT Co- op.
Use of Canvas: The professor uses Canvas Web-based course management /collective
workspace. An orientation will be given the first day of class. If you do not have a personal
computer and personal Internet access, there are computers available for your use at the SW
Learning Resource Center (LRC), the Flawn Academic Center, and campus libraries.
Course Modification: To ensure achievement for course objectives, the professor reserves the
right to make modifications to any part of this syllabus related to schedule, assignment due dates,
and links to documents and videos available through the Internet. Should any modifications be
made, students will be notified both in class and by email and the modifications will be posted to
Canvas.
                                                   7


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Professional Conduct and Civility in the Classroom. The professor expects students to act as
professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to
participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings
together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and
shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs,
national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an
atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work also deals with complex
and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
Unanticipated Distress. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to
course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform
the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation
in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what
kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of
their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online
at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
Policy on Social Media and Professional Communication. Public social networks are not
private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that
privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to
participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued.
What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and
archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
                                                  8


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the
Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Use of Course Materials. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to exams,
quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
Documented Disability Statement. Any student who requires special accommodations must
obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area
of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the
beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The
student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business
days before an exam. For more information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                                   9


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
Religious Holidays. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the
student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Title IX Reporting. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the
University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, field instructors, staff, and/or teaching
assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, interpersonal violence, or any other forms of sexual
misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources.
Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Liaison for
the SHSSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to
report incidents or to obtain information. Further information, including student resources related
to Title IX, may also be found at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-
programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
Campus Carry Policy. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
Classroom Confidentiality. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal
matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and
is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well.
As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational context is not
permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and
procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards
for Social Work Education.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students. Email is recognized as an official
mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email for
university and course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible for
keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-
mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail address
at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
                                                  10


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
Safety. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL). f students are worried about someone who is acting
differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership between the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required
to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made.
Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
        of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
        Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                 11


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
 Date             Topic                             Readings                     Assignment(s)
 June
   6   ▪ Introductions            No readings                                ▪ My nonprofit
       ▪ Review of course                                                   financial
         assignments                                                        management hero (in-
       ▪ Financial                                                          class exercise)
         challenges                                                         ▪Complete and
         facing contemporary                                                post to Canvas
         nonprofit                                                          responses to survey of
         organizations                                                      specific
                                                                            interests, management
                                                                            experience, and
                                                                            financial understanding
                                                                            (due Sunday, June 9)
   11  ▪ Understanding nonprofit  Chapter 1 of course text
       Organizations
       ▪ Why some nonprofits
       fail in achieving their
       mission
       ▪ Leadership challenges
       in nonprofit organizations
   13  ▪ Managing mission,        Chapter 3 of course text
       strategy, and financial    Posted on Canvas:
       leadership                 Examples of agency/organization strategic
                                  plans
   18  ▪ Understanding the        Chapter 7 (pp. 267 – 305) and Chapter 8
       budgeting process          (all) of course text
       ▪ Different types of
       budgets
       ▪ Developing financial
       reports
   20  Lab Day – work on class    No readings
       assignments
   25  ▪ Understanding financial  Chapter 6 of course text                  ▪ Creating a
       accounting basics and                                                nonprofit budget
       financial statements
   27  ▪ Continuation of topics
       from June 25
  July
   4   Independence Day
       Holiday
       No class
   9   ▪ Developing financial     Chapter 5 of course text                  ▪ Creating a cash flow
       policies and procedures                                              budget report
   11  ▪ Cash management and      Chapter 11 of course text
       banking relations
                                                 12


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
 Date                Topic                          Readings                    Assignment(s)
  16     Lab Day – work on class
         assignments
  18     ▪ Managing risks and       Chapters 4 and 10 of course text
         liabilities, legal issues,
         and human resources
         ▪ Sources of nonprofit
         revenues
         ▪ Nonprofit revenue
         strategies
         ▪ Managing structure,
         accountability, and ethics
  23     Continuation of topics
         from July 18
  25     ▪ Group presentations –    No readings                             Understanding
         schedule TBD                                                       nonprofit agency
                                                                            audits
  30     ▪ Last day of class        No readings                             Financial analysis and
         ▪ Group presentations –                                            sustainability plan
         schedule TBD                                                       (written report +
         ▪ Nonprofit sector                                                 supporting documents)
         financial forecast
         ▪ Celebrating our
         accomplishments
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Additional readings
Alexander, J. (2018). Financial planning & analysis and performance management. Hoboken, NJ:
  Wiley.
Batts, M.E. (2017). Nonprofit financial management oversight: The concise and complete guide
   for boards and finance committees. Orlando, FL: Accountability Press in cooperation with
  Batts, Morrison, Wales, and Lee Certified Public Accountants.
Bryson, J.M. (2018). Strategic planning for public and nonprofit organizations: A guide to
  strengthening organizational achievement (5th edition). Hoboken, NJ. Wiley.
Estrada, E. (2019). Understanding nonprofit law and finance: Forty-eight principles for
  philanthropic leaders. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Freeman, R.J., Shoulders, G.D., McSwain, D.N. & Scott, R.B. (2017). Governmental and
  nonprofit accounting (11th edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Gross, M.J., McCarthy, J.H., & Shelmon, N.E. ( 2010). Financial and accounting guide for not-
  for-profit organizations (7th edition with 2010 cumulative updates). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
                                                 13


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2019
Hutchinson, K. (2016). Survive and thrive: Three steps to securing your program’s sustainability.
  Ottawa, Canada: National Library of Canada.
Lang, A. (2017). How to Read Nonprofit Financial Statements. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Martin, L.L. (2016). Financial management for human service administrators. Long Grove, IL:
  Waveland Press.
McLaughlin, T. (2016). Streetsmart financial basics for nonprofit managers (4th edition).
  Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Nowicki, M. (2017). Introduction to the financial management of healthcare organizations.
  Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press.
Valcik, N.A. (2016). Strategic planning and decision-making for public and nonprofit
  organizations. Washington, DC: American Society for Public Administration.
                                               14
