 Reddick                                                            Exploring UK Education         1
                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                   Course Outline and Syllabus
                                           Maymester 2019
Course:            Exploring UK Education (ALD 379, AFR 372D, ELP 395K, TC 358)
Meeting times:     May 31 – June 27, 2019
Instructor:        Richard J. Reddick, Ed.D.
Office:            SZB 310B
Office hours:      TBA, by appointment.
Telephone:         +1 617 513 5497 (US based cell phone, text available)
E-mail:            richard.reddick@austin.utexas.edu
Twitter:           @DrRichReddick
Instagram:         @thechroniclesofreddick
Skype ID:          richardreddick
Teaching Asst: Mariama Nagbe
E-mail:            mnnagbe@utexas.edu
       NB: This syllabus is accurate as of May 27, 2019. The schedule, assignments, and
                                  activities are subject to change.
                                     Exploring UK Education
Description
This four-week Maymester course will explore primary/secondary and postsecondary education
in the United Kingdom, and provide students with the opportunity to compare and contrast to the
more familiar US systems. Additionally, the course features a special focus on students and
faculty of color in UK higher education (again, with the opportunity to compare/contrast to the
experiences of underrepresented students in the US context) and a focus on expatriate
experiences in the UK (specifically, Department of Defense Education Activity [DoDEA]
Schools for dependents of military personnel). The class closes with cultural reflections on the
Cold War from the late 20th century.
Course Objectives and Themes
    1. To understand the objectives of UK primary, secondary, and higher education and
         compare to the objectives of schooling in the US.
    2. To interpret the experiences of underrepresented and minoritized student and faculty
         populations in the UK postsecondary context.
    3. To understand the structure and function of DoDEA schools, one of only two states
         whose gap was smaller than the nation's average gap in all of the grade and subject areas
         studied in the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP).
    4. To understand the cultural impact of the Cold War on US/UK relations in the late 20th
         century.
This course is additionally organized in a discussion format, in which participation from all
members of the classroom community is required. The course will frequently feature field trips
to educational and historical sites of relevance.


  Reddick                                                            Exploring UK Education       2
Organization
For convenience, you have all been added to the TC 358 section of the course on Canvas
(regardless of which course you are officially enrolled in.) This will facilitate posting,
discussion, collaboration, and access to modules with readings. You will need to accept the
invitation to access readings, so please do this ASAP.
Textbooks
Chapters from these books will be posted on Canvas for your reading or printing. There are no
required books for this course, though you may want to buy the entire books for your own
library. All are available via Amazon (some are available through Amazon.co.uk, and most are
available in Kindle format).
Bryson, B. (2016). The road to Little Dribbling: Adventures of an American in Britain. New
        York: Anchor.
Lodge, D. (1979). Changing places: A tale of two campuses. New York: Penguin
Mac an Ghaill, M. (1988). Young, gifted, and Black: Student-teacher relations in the schooling
        of Black youth. London: Open University.
Suggested pre-reading:
Townsend, S. (2003). The secret diary of Adrian Mole, aged 13¾. New York: HarperTempest.
        Lane.
The remaining readings are available online via UT Libraries and additional web resources.
Readings will be linked in the syllabus and/or posted in Canvas. Please note that some links will
only work if you are logged in to the UT Libraries at www.lib.utexas.edu - or you need to be on
the utexas wireless network.
APA Formatting/Citation Assistance
It is further strongly suggested that all students purchase a copy of the American Psychological
Association’s Publication Manual (now in its 6th edition). This is an essential reference for
students in education.
One of the best APA resources on the Internet is Purdue University’s OWL. The URL is
http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/
Students should avail themselves of the excellent resources at the UT Libraries
(http://www.lib.utexas.edu/). (You can friend them on Facebook and follow them on Twitter as
well!) They offer courses on using research tools such as Google Scholar, databases, and classes
on popular bibliographic management software (EndNote, Zotero). In the 21st century, the
challenge is not so much the collection of data as it is the management of it. I strongly suggest
that students investigate these options – some at cost, some free – to facilitate and manage
your use of data.
Additional readings, if any, will be listed in the readings for each week. There will also be
recommended readings listed for students who wish to explore a topic further – these, of course,
are not required.


 Reddick                                                              Exploring UK Education         3
Course Requirements
Attendance: You are expected to attend all course meetings. In instances of illness or emergency,
contact Dr. Reddick via e-mail, and arrange to borrow lecture notes or materials from a
classmate. You are responsible for finding out what transpires in class (changes to syllabus
and/or assignments, discussion topics, etc.). Obviously it is in your best interest to make it to
class. Absences will result in a grade penalty. As a condition of our study abroad contract,
you are required to sign in and attend all class meetings, fields trips, and events. The
teaching staff must know your whereabouts at all times during class meetings.
If you are sick with a cold or flu, please contact Dr. Reddick and Mariama to discuss options.
Communication: The preferred mode of communication is e-mail. Any requests or questions are
best directed in this manner.
GRADING
Participation (25% of total grade)
Much of the course will be presented in a discussion format. Therefore, it is essential that
students come to class prepared to discuss readings and their implications for higher education.
Student participation will be assessed in three ways:
         • Class attendance: Students are required to attend all class meetings. During the four-
            week period, we will meet between four and five days of the week, usually from 9 am
            to noon or 2:30 pm. The weekends and days that class does not meet is your free time
            to explore Cambridge, other sites in Britain, or continental Europe if you have the
            time, interest, and resources to do so. (20% of participation grade; 5 points)
         •  Discussion provocateurs: Student teams are required to lead a discussion during a
            class session by either posing a question, statement, or a puzzling point from the
            readings, activities, or discussion. Students can also make a point about something
            that is on their mind in relation to the assigned readings. Be thoughtful about what
            truly interested, confused, or dissatisfied you in each weeks’ readings and craft a way
            to infuse your own academic interests into our class discussions. There will be a
            signup for discussion provocateurs during the first week of class. (30% of
            participation grade; 7.5 points)
         •  Participation in classroom discussions: Students will need to establish a sense of
            comfort in participating and leading discussions. There will be several different ways
            to participate in the classroom setting, including: asking questions or provoking a
            topic of conversation; participating in small group conversations; and presenting
            research to class participants. The key to establishing proficiency in these areas is to
            practice. Dr. Reddick strongly encourages the use of study groups to assist in
            strengthening these skills. Note that being disengaged and side conversations will
            result in a deduction of class participation points (50% of participation grade; 12.5
            points).
Written Assignments (40% of total grade)
Canvas posts (10) (35% percent of written assignment grade; 14 points). Four times during the
Maymester, there will be a prompt on Canvas that you will be asked to write a 250-500 word
response to. Typically it will be provoked by a reading, discussion item in class, something a


 Reddick                                                                Exploring UK Education        4
guest speaker shares, a field visit, or something in the media that relates to education in the UK.
Canvas posts must be up by the deadline to receive full credit.
Interpreting and Comparing US and UK Education Experiences (16 points) (40% percent of
written assignment grade):
       • Students will write (in APA 6th format) an essay interpreting and comparing the US and
           UK educational systems. This will be based on readings and your own research as well
           as your individual encounters and/or observations in your personal or professional
           experience. You will share your initial draft with a colleague in class for a peer edit and
           assessment. A reader should be able to understand the context (avoid jargon, excessive
           detail, etc.). Note – you will not turn this in to Dr. Reddick, but to your partner. You
           can share versions electronically if you prefer.
       • When you receive feedback from your partner, incorporate the feedback and submit the
           final version at the end of the course. (The editing process will also serve as an
           opportunity for you to familiarize yourself with your partner’s arguments.) Outside of
           class, you should investigate how you might incorporate readings and/or guest
           speakers.
Understanding Marginalized and Minoritized People’s Experiences in UK Higher Education
(25% percent of written assignment grade; 10 points):
    Based on the perspectives shared by guest speakers and your own investigation (interviews,
    articles, email/social media exchanges, blogs, etc.), share your perspective regarding how
    marginalized and minoritized students, staff, and faculty navigate higher education
    experiences in the UK.
       • Marginalized and minoritized populations in the UK context typically fall under the
           BAME (Black, Asian, Minority Ethnic) umbrella. This is somewhat analogous to the
           US context.
       • Posit what individual, institutional, and structural interventions could improve and/or
           enhance marginalized and minoritized population experiences. In other words, what
           can individual peers do? What can institutions do? What policies and procedures are
           needed?
Multimedia/Creative Presentation: New Revelations, New Understandings (35% of total grade)
This is a very open-ended assignment. How can you (creatively) convey what you have learned
in this course? Instead of the traditional end-of-semester paper, I’m challenging you to creatively
present this learning. Perhaps you will create a short film, a role play, or a game. By the end of
week 2, propose your idea and I’ll review it for feasibility and rigor. If approved, you can then
proceed and present your work the final week. C’mon y’all, I’ve sat through PowerPoint
presentations for 10 years… surprise me with your creativity! The criteria for assessment with be
based on 1) creativity, 2) connection to course content and readings, and 3) quality of
presentation.
Proficiency in writing is expected of all students. While I am happy to work with students to
improve writing, becoming an excellent writer is largely a self-motivating task. Students should
seek out assistance from as many sources as possible. The writing center and peers are great
resources. (If you haven’t joined or formed a peer-writing group, you absolutely should!)
Incomplete Policy:


 Reddick                                                              Exploring UK Education        5
I will not grant incompletes as a matter of course; they will be discussed only in extenuating
circumstances. If you anticipate difficulty in completing the course requirements in time, you
should reconsider taking this course. Plan accordingly so that assignments do not “pile up.”
Guidelines for Submitting Assignments:
Please read this section carefully. Dr. Reddick maintains a “paperless course” and only
accepts assignments via PDF, usually uploaded to Canvas (not Word, Pages, or Rich Text, etc.
formats). Written work is due at the start of class on the due date and should adhere to the
following format (Please note that EndNote has APA 6th templates that you can use):
    1. Papers should be completed with letter size (8.5” x 11”) settings and 1” margins. Font
         size should be 11 or 12 point, using Times New Roman only. All assignments, with the
         exception of memos, should have an APA-style cover sheet with your name, the title of
         the assignment, and the date. All papers should have the date of submission and a title.
         Follow APA rules for page headers. Page numbers (if submitting more than one page)
         should appear at the top of the page.
    2. There is an APA formatted template in Course Documents – feel free to download and
         use to ensure that your assignments are correctly formatted.
    3. All papers should be submitted as PDFs via Canvas by 1 PM on the due date. Students
         should keep an electronic backup copy of all submitted work, in PDF format, with
         accurate time/date information.
    4. Proofread by at least one other person to check for spelling and grammatical errors.
         (Using Word’s spellcheck and grammar check is not sufficient!) For this reason, it is a
         good idea to work with a peer writing group or at least one peer to exchange drafts before
         they are submitted.
    5. Correct citation, in APA 6th edition style. All papers should have a references section
         citing all works used, and citations should appear in text. Poor or spotty citations can
         often lead to charges of plagiarism. Be certain that you cite, even in drafts. If you have
         any questions about the use of APA style consult the APA Publication Manual, or ask Dr.
         Reddick before you submit a paper.
    6. Late papers will receive a point deduction each day overdue.
Feedback on Assignments:
          Papers, annotated with feedback, can be accessed from Canvas Grades.
Communication
Course updates and information will be distributed via e-mail. You will need to regularly check
the Canvas site, particularly the day of class. Be sure that your e-mail address is up-to-date and
one you use on a regular basis
Materials, such as handouts and slides for lectures will typically be available immediately before
class on Canvas. These are the intellectual property of the teaching staff and can be used as
sources, cited thusly:


 Reddick                                                               Exploring UK Education        6
Reddick, R. J. (Year, Month Day). Lecture. The University of Texas at Austin.
Computer and smartphone use is permissible in this course if being used for note taking and
supplemental purposes. Excessive misuse of technology (checking e-mail, Facebooking during
class, etc.) may result in a deduction of class participation points. We are only together for a brief
part of the day – out of respect for your colleagues, please come focused on collaborative
dialogue.
Please silence phones before the start of class.
University Policies
Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
the Services for Students with Disabilities in the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement at 512-471-6259, videophone 512-410-6644. For additional information, please
refer to the Services for Students with Disabilities Web site at: http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University. Policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. When in doubt, always err
on the side of caution – consult the instructor if you have a question about an issue. For further
information, please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
Sexual Discrimination and Sexual Harassment: Students who believe they have experienced
sexual harassment in the academic environment should consult the following website:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/index.php
Interested students are also encouraged to call the Office of the Dean of Students at 512-471-
5017 and ask to speak to the Associate Dean of Students.
University Electronic Mail Student Notification Policy: Official communication with students in
this class will be conducted through e-mail. Course announcements and updates will be posted
on Canvas. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current on class activities and assignments. Unless otherwise notified, the instructor will use the
e-mail provided to the University as the official address. For more information read:
http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/
Course Evaluation: You will be asked to provide the professor with informal feedback regarding
aspects of the course that should be changed for future semesters. At the conclusion of the class,
you will have the opportunity to evaluate the course and the instructor using the electronic
University Course and Instructor Survey. I take course feedback very seriously – if something is
not working for you, please let Dr. Reddick know ASAP.


 Reddick                                                             Exploring UK Education        7
    This section relates to activities that will take place on The University of Texas at Austin
    campus. When we are in the UK, Studio Cambridge, AIFS, and Dr. Reddick will be your
                       primary contacts for any resource and safety concerns.
University Resources for Students: The university has numerous resources for students to
provide assistance and support for your learning:
         • Sanger Learning and Career Center: www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
         • University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
         • ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
         • Counseling and Mental Health Center:
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
         • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
         • Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
         • Canvas: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow
students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050.
Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
    • Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
         building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
         the first week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
         re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
         The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
         can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Guns: Pursuant to SB11 (http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/84R/billtext/pdf/SB00011F.pdf)
and UT-Austin Campus Carry Policy (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/ and
https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/campus-concealed-carry), persons with a current legally
valid Concealed Carry License may carry a concealed legal handgun on or about their person in
this class. Please take note of several provisions:
1. All legal provisions associated with concealed carry on campus must be followed without fail
    at all times. In addition to SB11 and UT-Austin Campus Carry policy, please review at least


 Reddick                                                                Exploring UK Education         8
    the 84 pages of applicable law curated by TX DPS
    (http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/InternetForms/Forms/CHL-16.pdf).
Please take special note of two of the many legal provisions:
    a. Holstering requirements: “A license holder who carries a handgun on campus must carry
         it in a holster that completely covers the trigger and entire trigger guard area. The holster
         must have sufficient tension or grip on the handgun to retain it in the holster even when
         subjected to unexpected jostling” (UT-Austin HOP 8-1060, VII-A-2).
    b. “On or about your person means a person licensed to carry a handgun must carry a
         handgun in a manner that the handgun is close enough to the license holder that he or she
         can reach it without materially changing position” at all times (UT-Austin HOP 8-1060,
         IV).
2. Open carry, including partially or wholly visible guns, is not permitted on campus at any
    time except “under circumstances in which the actor would have been justified in the use of
    force or deadly force” (SB11, Section 4 and Texas Penal Code, Section 46.035(a-1)).
    Violation is a Class A misdemeanor or a third degree felony.
    If any legal requirement is violated at any moment, the person who witnesses the violation
    should leave the classroom and call 911 immediately without waiting to ask me for
    permission.
    Police will respond. This will disrupt the class and may create a dangerous situation for all of
    us.
    Violations may result in criminal penalties and sanction by the university, up to and
    including expulsion.
3. Office visits: You must ask me about my policy regarding concealed carry before entering
    my office and wait for my instructions before entering. Pursuant to UT-Austin policy (HOP
    8-1060, VII-C), I must give oral notice of my prohibition on concealed handguns in my
    office. I mention this policy here for your convenience; however, oral notice must be given
    upon your first visit to my office. Following instructions from Campus Safety and Security,
    once you have been informed orally the first time, my prohibition stands until I revoke it. If
    my instructions are violated, I will call 911 and the police will respond. Violations may result
    in criminal penalties and sanction by the university, up to and including expulsion.


Reddick                                                          Exploring UK Education                                                               9
                                           Course Schedule – Readings and Topics subject to change.
Week    Class Topic                   Readings and/or Activities                                                                  Assignment
0       Fri   Orientation             • Bryson, Chapter 14 “East Anglia” and Chapter 15 “Cambridge”                               • Catch the bus
        5/31                          • Studio Cambridge                                                                              to Cambridge!
1       Mon   Introducing the British • Education System in the UK:                                                               • Interview a
        6/3   Educational System         https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/219167/v01-        British student
              (Primary & Secondary)      2012ukes.pdf                                                                                 about their
                                      • BBC, “Post 16 Qualifications: What Happens after the Age of 16?”                              primary and
                                         https://www.bbc.com/bitesize/articles/z6ws47h                                                secondary
                                      • Film: Tales Out of School (view in class)                                                     education
                                                                                                                                      experience.
                                      • Guest speaker, Ellen Carpenter, on UK Education system
                                      • Visit to King’s College, Cambridge (2 pm – 5 pm)
        Tues  British Higher          • UK Education System Guide, https://www.studying-in-uk.org/uk-education-system-            • Canvas Post 1,
        6/4   Education                  guide/                                                                                       due at start of
                                      • Wilhelm, “How Britain is Trying to Expand Access to Higher Education,” Chronicle of           class 6/10
                                         Higher Education (https://www.chronicle.com/article/Video-How-Britain-Is-                • Provocateur
                                         Trying/234237)                                                                               Team 1
                                      • Lodge, Changing Places, Chapter 1
                                      • Guest speaker: Dr. Mike Mimirinis, Sr. Lecturer in Higher Education, Anglia Rustin
                                         University.
        Wed                           • Visit to Chesterton Community College (ages 11-16)
        6/5
        Thu                           •  Visit to Castle School, Group 1 (9 am – 2:30 pm)
        6/6
2       Mon   Expatriate Experiences  •  Smith, “Why Are Students at Military Base Schools Out-Achieving Their Civilian Peers?”   Submit
        6/10  in the UK: Department      AlterNet (https://www.alternet.org/education/why-are-students-military-base-schools-out- Interpreting &
              of Defense Education       achieving-their-civilian-peers)                                                          Comparing US and
              Activity (DoDEA)        •  Winerip, “Military Children Stay a Step Ahead of Public School Students,” New York       UK Education
                                         Times (http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/12/education/military-children-outdo-public-       Experiences draft
                                         school-students-on-naep-tests.html)
                                      •  Smrekar & Owens, “It’s a Way of Life For Us: High Mobility and High Achievement in
                                         Department of Defense Schools”
                                      •  Reddick, “Sankofa: A Narrative of a Native Son’s Scholarly Homecoming”
                                      •  Guest speaker: Joe Lovett, Superintendent, DoDEA Schools UK
        Tues                          •  Day Trip to Oxford Pembroke College; Guest Speaker Peter Claus
        6/11


Reddick                                                       Exploring UK Education                                                             10
        Wed  Black faculty and staff • Adams, “British universities employ no black academics in top roles, figures show,” The • Canvas Post 2,
        6/12 in UK Higher              Guardian (https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/19/british-universities-         due at start of
             Education                 employ-no-black-academics-in-top-roles-figures-show)                                      Class 6/17
                                     • Ali, “90% of Black Staff at UK’s Colleges and Universities ‘Facing Barriers to          • Provocateur
                                       Promotion’,” The Independent (http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-      Team 2
                                       news/90-of-black-staff-at-uk-s-colleges-at-universities-facing-barriers-to-promotion-
                                       a6860661.html)
                                     • Garner, “More than Half of BME University Lecturers and Staff Have Suffered Racial
                                       Abuse at Work,” The Independent (http://www.independent.co.uk/student/news/more-than-
                                       half-of-bme-university-lecturers-and-staff-have-suffered-racial-abuse-at-work-
                                       9244689.html)
                                     • Field trip to Anglia Rustin University.
        Thu  Asian and Black         • Mac An Ghaill, Young, Gifted, and Black
        6/13 immigration to the      • Guest Speaker: Niki Sol, Course Leader in Student Affairs, ARU
             UK/Schooling
             Experiences
        Fri                          • Visit to Hills Road Sixth Form College, Cambridge (9 am – 2:30 pm)
        6/14
3       Mon  Expatriate Experiences  • Film: Cold War                                                                          • Return
        6/17 in the UK: The Cold     • Milne, “70 Years of Foreign Troops? We Should Close the Bases,” The Guardian,             Interpreting &
             War in the UK and US      (https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/23/seventy-years-time-close-us-       Comparing US
                                       bases)                                                                                    and UK
                                     • (Recommended) Campbell, The Unsinkable Aircraft Carrier: American Military Power in       Education
                                       Britain                                                                                   Experiences
                                                                                                                                 draft to class
                                                                                                                                 colleague with
                                                                                                                                 feedback
        Wed                                                                                                                    • Canvas Post 3,
        6/19                                                                                                                     due at start of
                                                                                                                                 class 6/24
                                                                                                                               • Provocateur
                                                                                                                                 Team 3
        Thu                          • Punting on the River Cam
        6/20
        Fri                          • Visit to Ely Cathedral
        6/21


Reddick                                             Exploring UK Education                                                              11
4       Mon  Presentations • Castle School Visit for Group 2 (9 am - 2 pm)                                           •   Submit
        6/24               • Presentations (ALL) (3 pm – 6 pm)                                                           Interpreting &
                                                                                                                         Comparing US
                                                                                                                         and UK
                                                                                                                         Education
                                                                                                                         Experiences
                                                                                                                         final version
        Tues Presentations • Presenters 8-15                                                                         •   Provocateur
        6/25                                                                                                             Team 4
        Wed                • Afternoon Tea, Grantchester (2 pm)
        6/26
        Thu                • PROGRAM ENDS
        6/27
                           • Canvas Post 4, due at end of term
                             Understanding Marginalized and Minoritized People’s Experiences in UK Higher Education, due at end of term
                                See pp. 12-15 for detailed AIFS schedule of events.
                                     SCHEDULE IS SUBJECT TO CHANGE.


  Reddick                                                                        Exploring UK Education                                                                        12
                                                                                  Program Itinerary
Please see below a detailed itinerary for your program - keep it handy for your reference.
It may sometimes be necessary to make changes to your itinerary, please listen to your faculty and check your emails for announcements.
If you have any questions or concerns during your stay, please do not hesitate to contact Studio Cambridge or AIFS.
The Studio Cambridge Student Services Centre is open Monday - Friday, 9am - 5pm.
Address: 6 Salisbury Villas, Station Road, Cambridge CB1 2JF
Telephone: 01223 369701 (office hours only)
Your dedicated staff member at Studio Cambridge is Guy Trussell.
Email: guy.trussell@studiocambridge.co.uk
In emergency situations, Studio Cambridge staff can be contacted 24/7 on 07817 907 911 (or 011 44 7817 907 911 if calling from a US cell phone).
The AIFS Student Services team is based in London but is more than happy to respond to any questions you may have.
Email: studentinfo@aifs.co.uk
AIFS Emergency number: 07715 373 105 (or 011 44 7715 373 if calling from a US phone)
Please bear in mind that Studio Cambridge should be your first point of contact while you are in Cambridge as they are on site and will therefore be able to offer a speedier
response.
Enjoy your stay!
  Date              Time                         Program Activities and Notes
  Fri, May 31       6:00AM – 7:00AM              Program Starts
                                                 Welcome to Cambridge and the start of your program!
                    11:00AM – 1:00PM             Transfer to Cambridge
                                                 Students who arrive at London Heathrow at 10am or before will be met by AIFS staff and taken by private bus transfer to
                                                 Cambridge.
                    1:00PM - 2:00PM              Welcome meal
                                                 Self-service welcome lunch in the Studio Cambridge canteen.
                    2:00PM - 4:00PM              Orientation
                                                 Orientation meeting with AIFS and Studio Cambridge staff. Important information will be given out about your program,
                                                 including safety and security advice. Please make sure you have your passport to hand as AIFS staff will need to make a copy.
                    5:00PM - 7:00PM              Taxi transfer to homestay
                                                 Studio Cambridge will organise pre-paid taxis to take you to your homestays. Please remember that Friday is a working day for
                                                 most of your homestay families so you won’t be able to check in until after 5pm.
  Sat, June 1       10:00AM - 12:00PM            Walking tour of Cambridge
                                                 Meet your guide outside Studio Cambridge for a guided walking tour of the city.
                    12:00PM - 11:00PM            Free afternoon
  Sun, June 2       6:00AM - 11:00PM             Free day
  Mon, June 3       9:00AM - 10:30AM             Activities: Class
                                                 Rooms: LAB 220
                                                 Notes: Class with Professor Reddick
                    10:30AM -12:00PM             Activities: Class
                                                 Rooms: LAB 220
                                                 Staff: Ellen Carpenter
                                                 Notes: Guest lecture on the UK Education System
                    12:00PM - 2:00PM             Free time
                    2:00PM - 5:00PM              Activities: King's College, Cambridge


Reddick                                                         Exploring UK Education                                                                     13
                               Notes: Meet at King's College.
                               See Map in Welcome Pack.
Tue, June 4  9:00AM - 10:30AM  Activities: Class
                               Rooms: LAB 220
                               Notes: Class with Professor Reddick
             10:30AM -12:00PM  Activities: Guest lecture
                               Rooms: LAB 220
                               Staff: Mike Mimirinis
                               Notes: Guest lecture from Dr Mike Mimirinis, Senior Lecturer in Higher Education, Anglia Ruskin University.
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Wed, June 5  9:15AM - 2:30PM   Activities: Visit to Chesterton Community College
                               Notes: Chesterton Community College is a state school for 11 - 16 year olds.
                               Please make sure you are respectful when visiting any school.
                               Address: Chesterton Community College, Gilbert Road, Cambridge, CB4 3NY
                               See map in your Welcome Pack.
                               For more information about the school, please visit: https://ccc.cambridgeshireeducationaltrust.org/
Thu, June 6  9:15AM - 2:30PM   Activities: Visit to Castle School
                               Notes: Castle School is a special educational needs school for all age groups.
                               Please make sure you are respectful when visiting any school.
                               You will be split into two groups for this visit. The second group will be visiting on Monday, June 24th
                               Address: Castle School
                               Courtney Way
                               Cambridge
                               CB4 2EE
                               See map in your Welcome Pack
                               For more information about the school, please visit; https://www.castleschool.info/
             2:30PM - 11:00PM  Activities: Free afterrnoon
                               Notes: If you are planning on going traveling over the weekend, please make sure you respond to any emails from AIFS/Studio
                               Cambridge asking for your travel information.
Fri, June 7  6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Sat, June 8  6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Sun, June 9  6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Mon, June 10 9:00AM - 10:30AM  Activities: Class
                               Rooms: LAB 220
                               Notes: Class with Professor Reddick
             10:30AM -12:00PM  Activities: Guest Lecture
                               Rooms: LAB 220
                               Staff: Joseph Lovett
                               Notes: Guest lecture from the Community Superintendent for the DoDEA Schools in the United Kingdom.
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Tue, June 11 8:15AM - 11:30AM  Activities: Travel to Oxford
                               Notes: Meet outside Studio Cambridge for your private bus transfer to Oxford.
             11:30AM - 12:30PM Activities: Visit Pembroke College
                               Staff: Peter Claus
             12:30PM - 1:30PM  Activities: Lunch Break


Reddick                                                          Exploring UK Education                                                                14
             1:30PM - 4:00PM   Activities: Walking tour of Oxford
                               Staff: Nuala Young
                               Notes: To include entrance to Christ Church College
             4:30PM - 7:00PM   Activities: Travel to Cambridge
                               Notes: Return to Cambridge by private bus. You should be back in Cambridge by 7pm.
Wed, June 12 9:00AM - 12:00PM  Activities: Class
                               Rooms: HEL 109
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Thu, June 13 9:00AM - 10:30AM  Activities: Class
                               Notes: Class with Professor Reddick
             10:30AM -12:00PM  Activities: Guest Lecture
                               Rooms: HEL 109
                               Staff: Niki Sol
                               Notes: Course leader for the MA in Student Affairs in Higher Education.
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Fri, June 14 9:15AM - 2:30PM   Activities: Visit to Hills Road Sixth Form College
                               Notes: Visit to Hills Road Sixth Form College. Please be respectful when visiting any school.
                               Address: Hills Road Sixth Form College, Cambridge, CB2 8PE
                               See map in your Welcome Pack.
                               For more information about the College, visit: http://www.hillsroad.ac.uk/
             2:30PM - 11:00PM  Free evening
Sat, June 15 6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Sun, June 16 6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Mon, June 17 9:00AM - 12:00PM  Activities: Class
                               Rooms: LAB 112
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Tue, June 18 6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Wed, June 19 9:00AM - 12:00PM  Activities: Class
                               Rooms: LAB 112
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Thu, June 20 10:00AM - 12:00PM Activities: Punting
                               Notes: Chauffeured punting on the River Cam. Meet outside Studio Cambridge.
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Fri, June 21 9:00AM – 10:00AM  Activities: Travel to Lakenheath Military Base
                               Notes: Your private coach, Cambridge Tours will pick you up from outside Studio Cambridge to take you to the Lakenheath
                               Military Base for your tour.
             10:00AM – 3:30PM  Activities: Visit to Lakenheath Military Base
             3:30PM – 5:00PM   Activities: Return to Cambridge
                               Notes: After the tour, your private bus will take you back to Cambridge.
Sat, June 22 6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Sun, June 23 6:00AM - 11:00PM  Free day
Mon, June 24 9:15AM - 2:30PM   Activities: Visit to Castle School
                               Notes: Second Group
                               See map in your Welcome Pack.
             3:00PM – 6:00PM   Activities: Class


Reddick                                                       Exploring UK Education                                                                        15
                               Rooms: LAB 112
             6:00PM – 11:00PM  Free evening
Tue, June 25 9:00AM – 12:00PM  Activities: Class
                               Rooms: LAB 112
             12:00PM - 11:00PM Free afternoon
Wed, June 26 6:00AM – 2:00PM   Free morning
             2:00PM – 5:00PM   Activities: Afternoon tea
                               Notes: Meet outside Studio Cambridge to walk to Grantchester for afternoon tea at the Orchard Tea Rooms.
             5:00PM - 11:00PM  Free evening
Thu, June 27 8:00AM – 9:00AM   Activities: Check out of accommodation; Program Ends
                               Notes: You will need to check out of your homestay by 9am. Please ask Studio Cambridge if you need any advice for your onward
                               journey.


Reddick                              Exploring UK Education                              16
                                SCHEDULE AT A GLANCE
                                    Orange: Class days
                                     Green: Free days
          Sunday   Monday   Tuesday     Wednesday            Thursday   Friday  Saturday
                                                                      31       1
        2        3        4            5                    6         7        8
        9        10       11           12                   13        14       15
        16       17       18           19                   20        21       22
        23       24       25           26                   27
