                                                                                              Page 1 of 7
Syllabus, Class Policy Statement,
and Schedule
Summer 2019 – RHE 306: Rhetoric and Writing
Instructor: ​Danielle Dye
Unique number: ​83385
Class Time and Place: ​M-F 11:30-1; BEN 1.124
E-mail: ​ddye@utexas.edu
Course Website​: ​Canvas​ - ​http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Office: ​Caffe Medici
Office hours: ​W and Th 1-2:30 in Caffe Medici (Cal 405 after July 1st) and by appointment
TEXTBOOKS
    ● Controversies​. 40 Acres Press, 2016.
    ● The Little Longhorn Handbook​. Norton, 2014.
    ● Other readings available on Canvas or by instructor.
ABOUT THE COURSE
UT’s motto is “What starts here changes the world.” In RHE 306, Rhetoric & Writing, you will take
the first step in changing the world by learning how to argue effectively in the public sphere.
In this class, you will learn how to examine a public controversy, analyze various positions that
people hold in that controversy, and effectively advocate your own position. You will also explore
the ethics of argumentation, explaining what it means to “fairly” represent someone with whom you
disagree, or how responsibly to address a community with particular values and interests. Your work
in this course will help you advance the critical writing and reading skills you will need to succeed in
courses for your major and university degree.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the communication component of the university
core curriculum and addresses the following four core course objectives established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and
personal responsibility.
You will learn how to:
    ●    Understand a range of positions in a local controversy
    ●    Analyze and evaluate an argument about a local controversy, using rhetorical tools
    ●    Argue that the controversy needs a solution and/or argue for a particular solution
    ●    Recommend a specific, implementable solution based on collaborative research


                                                                                               Page 2 of 7
COURSEWORK AND GRADING
You will be graded on the following assignments this term:
     ●   Project 1: Annotated Bibliography: 15%
     ●   Project 2.1: Rhetorical Analysis: 10%
     ●   Project 2.2: Rhetorical Analysis Revision: 15%
     ●   Project 3.1: Persuasive Argument: 15%
     ●   Project 3.2: Persuasive Argument Revision: 15%
     ●   Final Presentation: 10%
     ●   Short Writing Assignments 10%
     ●   Participation: 10%
     ●   Peer reviews: Mandatory
Grades
Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness, all numbers
are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For example, a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
     ●   A=94-100                            ●   C+=77-79                         ● D-=60-63
     ●   A-=90-93                            ●   C=74-76                          ● F=0-59
     ●   B+=87-89                            ●   C-=70-73
     ●   B=84-86                             ●   D+=67-69
     ●   B-=80-83                            ●   D=64-66
Major Assignments (projects and presentation)
You will write an annotated bibliography and two essays ranging from 4-7 pages each (above
designated Rhetorical Analysis and Persuasive Argument). You will also be graded on your revision
of the two essays based on peer and instructor feedback. In addition, you will compose three formal
short writing assignments and a number of short, informal assignments for participation as they
come up (both in and outside of class time). Finally, you will present your solution proposal to the
class in a 5-7 minute presentation.
In order to receive a passing mark for the course, regardless of your performance on other
assignments or total average of all your grades, all major assignments must be completed to my
satisfaction.
Participation (minor in-class writing assignments)
Active participation is an essential part of ​RHE 306​. To receive full credit for participation, you
should come to class on time having read the material for the week; bring your books and assigned
reading with you; participate in class​ ​activities; and complete any short writing assignments. This
does not mean that you must speak in front of the class every meeting if that makes you
uncomfortable; rather, I ask that you come prepared to engage with the material and contribute to
small group and partner work as those situations arise. Participation will be calculated based on the
work you produce in class and the effort you put into that work (usually short written prompts on


                                                                                                Page 3 of 7
the material for the day). Please note that excessive tardiness will affect your ability to actively
participate in this course. Arriving late for ​four​ classes will lower your participation grade by 5%, as
will each subsequent late arrival (from a 100% to a 95%, and so forth).
HELPFUL RESOURCES
The following websites will be helpful this semester:
     ●   Department of Rhetoric and Writing​ - ​http://www.drw.utexas.edu/
     ●   University Writing Center​ - ​http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     ●   UT Libraries​ - ​http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     ●   University Health Services​ – ​http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu
     ●   Counseling and Mental Health Centre​ -- ​https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     ●   Services for Students with Disabilities​ -- ​http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
CLASS POLICIES
Accessibility
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you
from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop
strategies to meet both your needs and course requirements. If you need specific
accommodations, let me know. Any conversations we have about accommodations are
confidential. I am happy to take extra steps to ensure accessibility for all students.
Behavior
Be respectful of your colleagues. There is zero tolerance for slurs or derogatory language. In general,
don’t discriminate based on race, gender presentation, marital status, religion, disability, age, or
sexual orientation.
It is never okay to laugh at, belittle, or harass a colleague because of their opinion or point of view.
Always think about how your comments will support our learning as a group​. But safe doesn’t
mean operating in an environment where beliefs and ideas go unchallenged. Challenging colleagues
to explain their arguments in a thoughtful manner is key to creating an engaging learning
community.
     ● Make a commitment to understand unfamiliar positions from the context or point of
         view of your peers.
     ● Speak for yourself rather than for a group (use your “I” statements).
     ● Be present – really listening to your colleagues will dramatically improve your in-class
         experience and prevent most understandings.
     ● Take risks in speaking honestly; this will help the learning of the group.
Late Work
The assignments that you will do for this course are designed to build on each other. As such,
projects and assignments must be turned in by their scheduled due date to prevent you from
falling behind. If you are unable to turn in an assignment due to an emergency, however, please


                                                                                               Page 4 of 7
contact me at least 24 hours in advance of the submission deadline so that we can discuss a
solution together. Assignments submitted late without having contacted me beforehand will
receive one letter grade lower than what the assignment would have initially received. Any
submissions one week after the deadline, unless previously discussed with me, will receive a zero.
Technology Policy:
We will frequently use laptops or other electronic devices (tablets preferable, but smartphones
can be used in a pinch)for a majority of class activities. If you have access to one of these
devices, please make sure to bring it along with the other required materials for each class
meeting. If, however, you do not have access to one of these devices, please see me as soon as
possible so that we can find an alternative for you. I ask that when we do use electronics, you
stay on task with the assignment at hand and refrain from using your device for personal or
non-class activities (e.g. social media, emails, browsing the web, etc.). Use of electronics outside
of class activities will negatively affect your participation grade subject to my discretion.
DEPARTMENT OF RHETORIC ​&​ WRITING
RHE COURSE POLICIES STATEMENT, 2018-19
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses. Any questions or
appeals concerning this policy must be made directly to the department Associate Chair. You are
expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing, and to
participate in all in-class editing, revising, discussion, and conference sessions. ​Should you miss the
equivalent of ​five​ class sessions this semester, ​excused or not​, you will ​fail​ the course​. If you
find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you should contact your
instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let him or her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, at least one week before the absence, so that alternative
arrangements can be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this
reason, provide your instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University
specifies very few other excused absences (e.g., jury duty).
When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from a classmate.
SCHOLASTIC HONESTY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to ​all​ drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University.


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 7
So, take care to read and understand the ​Statement on Scholastic Responsibility​, which can be found
online at ​http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php​ If
you have any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help ​before​ handing in the
assignment.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More
information is available on the ​Services for Students with Disabilities​ website at
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will use this medium
to communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email account and to
check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to the ​IT Services​ website
at ​https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/​.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found on the
UT emergency page​ at ​http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
Other important Emergency Information
You can find more information about planning for emergencies on the ​Emergency Preparedness site
at ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. You can learn more
about the ​Behavior Concerns Advice Line​ on their site at
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
Questions about these policies should be addressed to​:


                                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                               Department of Rhetoric & Writing
                                The University of Texas at Austin
                                       Parlin Hall, Room 3
                                   rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu
                                          (512) 471-6109
Semester Schedule: ​note that unless otherwise stated, assignments are due before class begins;
Canvas will not accept assignments turned in after 11:30 am that day.
WEEK        DAY           LESSON                   ASSIGNMENTS DUE          READING
1           Th 6/6        Course
                          Introduction
            F 6/7         Researching a            Controversy Journal      Controversies, i​ ntro
                          Controversy              Post
2           M 6/10        Research Skills                                   Controversies, C ​ hap. 1
            T 6/11        Summarizing,                                      Controversies, C  ​ hap. 2
                          Bias & Credibility
            W 6/12        Synthesis &              Research Summary 1       Controversies, C   ​ hap. 3
                          Annotations
            Th 6/13       P1 Workday
            F 6/14        P1 Peer Review           P1 Draft (two
                                                   physical copies)
3           M 6/17        Introduction to          Project 1                Controversies, C    ​ hap. 4
                          Unit 2
            T 6/18        Con/textual
                          Evidence
            W 6/19        Reasons to Trust                                  Controversies, C     ​ hap. 5
            Th 6/20       Reasons to Feel                                   Controversies, C      ​ hap. 5
            F 6/21        Reasons to               Research Summary 2       Controversies, C       ​ hap. 5
                          Believe
4           M 6/24        Evidence,                                         Controversies, C        ​ hap.
                          Argumentation,                                    6-7
                          Organization


                                                             Page 7 of 7
  T 6/25  P2.1 Peer Review P2.1 Draft (two
                           physical copies)
  W 6/26  Intros,
          Conclusions,
          Thesis
          Statements
  Th 6/27 Sentence Style,  Project 2.1
          Transitions, &
          Quotations
  F 6/28  Revision
          Workday
5 M 7/1   Introduction to  Project 2.2 (revision)  Controversies, C​ hap. 8
          Unit 3
  T 7/2   Refutation /     bring in RS3 article                  ​ hap. 9
                                                  Controversies, C
          Concession
          /Rebuttal
  W 7/3   Arrangement      RS3                     Controversies, C ​ hap.
                                                   10
  Th 7/4  NO CLASS         HOLIDAY
  F 7/5   Individual       MANDATORY
          Conferences
6 M 7/8   P3 Workday
  T 7/9   P3 Peer Review   P3 Draft (via
                           Canvas)
  W 7/10  Final
          Presentation
  Th 7/11 Final
          Presentations
  M 7/15                   Project 3 by 10 am
