                                                  SUMMER 2019
                       PR 378/ADV378 Pop Star Activism from the Beatles to Beyoncé
INSTRUCTOR: Dave Junker, junker@austin.utexas.edu; Office Hours TBA
TA: Nichole Bennett, nichole.lynn.bennett@gmail.com; Office Hours TBA
This is an asynchronous Web-based class. This means there is no set class time and you can take the
class remotely from anywhere IN THE WORLD!
Is Beyoncé a committed feminist or a cunning marketer? Why is Sam Smith’s use of the pronoun “he” of
social significance? When pop stars speak out politically, how do they do so without jeopardizing their
commercial appeal? Why does pop-culture and celebrity activism so often come from the music world?
In what ways did music advance the civil rights and black consciousness movements, and how do pop-
star activists of today help identity-based movements and causes? How does a pop-star’s politics factor
into the marketing strategies of brands and causes?
Such questions about the nature of issue advocacy in popular music provide the focus of this class in
strategic communication, an umbrella term for the study of persuasion and influence in public relations,
advertising, marketing, and political and social advocacy. With significant attention to cultural diversity,
this communication and culture class explores the role of popular music at the intersection of commerce
and cultural politics, from the freedom and civil rights struggles of the 1960s to the identity politics of
today.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     • To provide an engaging and deep historical context for studying strategic communication and
         cultural diversity, specifically elements of issue advocacy, cause marketing, identity-based
         advocacy, cross-cultural communication, and celebrity branding and activism
     •   To sharpen your critical thinking, listening and communication skills
     •   To help you become more critical and empowered as media consumers, and more effective and
         ethical as media producers
     •   To introduce you to some awesome music that will enrich your life
READINGS, TEXTS, MATERIALS
     •   Online articles posted to Canvas.
     •   Playlists via Spotify. Spotify for Students is only $4.99/month and if you don’t like it you can
         cancel your subscription when the class is over. I will post playlists each week.
     •   Documentary Films and Videos. Some are available for free, others you’ll have to pay for. All are
         available online. All are listed in the calendar.
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADE DISTRIBUTION
  4 Quizzes                                                40%


  Weekly Music Chats                                      10%
  1 Short Paper                                           20%
  Final Playlist Group Project                            30%
FINAL GRADES
Final grades will use the plus/minus grade system and follow this breakdown:
         A        94-100
         A-       90-93.9
         B+       88-89.9
         B        84-87.9
         B-       80-83.9
         C+       78-79.9
         C        74-77.9
         C-       70-73.9
         D+       68-69
         D        60-66
         F        0-59
PROTOCOL AND ASSIGNMENTS
Modules: We will not be meeting in a classroom or at any specific or designated time. The class will
instead be organized around weekly online modules. You will be responsible for a specified amount of
material each week but free to complete the work at your own pace. Work will be due by 12 p.m. CST
each Friday. Late work will lose points.
Content: The reading load is light but there is a brief digital reader plus weekly articles available online.
Links will be provided for the articles. Much, though not all, of this material will be reviewed in short
video lectures that will be uploaded to Canvas. Lectures will also discuss key songs and videos. You will
also be responsible for listening to a playlist of songs every week via Spotify. Spotify for Students is only
$4.99/month and if you don’t like it you can cancel your subscription when the class is over. Music
videos and 2-3 documentary films will also be required, but these too will be available online.
Assignments: You will have a A) Four Quizzes (weeks 2,3,4 and 6)on the content from weekly modules.
On average, the quizzes will be about 10 multiple-choice questions. B) Three Music Chats in which you
answer a prompt on Canvas – these are brief and will be graded based on effort and thoughtfulness
rather than polish and perfection. C) 1 Short Paper in which you will analyze the use of music in an
advertisement. This will require deeper analysis of the material in 400-500 words, or roughly 2-3 pages
double-spaced. Your final project, will be a D) Playlist and Listening Guide assignment that you will
complete in pairs. It will be between roughly 4-5 pages and no more than 1,200 words. *This assignment
is explained in full at the end of this document.
HELP and OFFICE HOURS: I love talking about music and I love talking to students. Please visit my office
hours or Pratik’s office hours whether or not you have a pressing question or concern.


UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Please
read more information at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external
site.).
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
Notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious
holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
timeframe.
COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support: Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th
floor. 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services
Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html


Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
COURSE CALENDAR
   Wk    Dates        Topics and Lectures     Readings                  Other Media        Assign Due Friday
                                                                                           by 12 pm CST
   1     Week 1       Frameworks of           “The President Meets      Playlist 1         Music Chat--Take
         June 6-7     Understanding: Pop-Star the Rock Star” (pp. 1-                       Music Survey
                      Activism 101            29) from Celebrity
                                              Influence: Politics,
                                              Persuasion and Issue
                                              Advocacy (Canvas)
                                              Two short articles on
                                              Celebrity Activism
                                              (Canvas)
   2     Week 2       Music and Social        “You can’t Scare Me,      Playlist 2         Week 2 Quiz
         June 10-14                           I’m Sticking to the
                      Movements
                                              Union” from Music and     Documentary Film:  Music Chat
                                              Musicians in the Service  “The U.S. vs. John
                      The Beatles, John       of Social Movements       Lennon”
                      Lennon and the
                      Radical 60s                                       Nike “Revolution”
                                                                        ad
   3     Week 3       Nina, James and Aretha: “Letter from a            Playlist 3         Week 3 Quiz
         June 17-21   The Sounds of Black     Birmingham Jail” by
                      Activism                MLK (Canvas)              Documentary Film:  Short Paper-Ad
                                                                        “What Happened,    Analysis due
                                              “Ballot or the Bullet” by Miss Simone?”
                      Hip Hop Activism and    Malcolm X                 Netflix
                      Black Lives Matter
                                                                        Documentary Film:
                                                                        “Stay Woke: The
                                                                        Black Lives Matter
                                                                        Movement
                                                                        Documentary”
   4     Week 4       “I Woke up Like This”:  “The Riot Grrrl           Playlist 4         Week 4 Quiz
         June 24-28   Intersectional Feminism Manifesto” by Kathleen
                      from Riot Grrrl to      Hanna                     “Flawless” Video   Music Chat
                      Beyoncé
                                              “Your Musical Guide to    “If I Were a Boy”
                                              the Blackness of          Video
                                              Beyonce's
                                              'Homecoming'” by          “We Should All Be
                                              Naima Cochrane            Feminists,” TED
                                              Billboard magazine        Talk by
                                                                        Chimamanda Ngozi
                                                                        Adichie


                                                            “Formation” Video
                                                            “Homecoming”
                                                            trailer
                                                            “Freedom”
                                                            performance at
                                                            BET awards
                                                            “Freedom” iWatch
                                                            ad
5 Week 5    LGBTQ+ Music Advocacy   “25 Pivotal LGBT        Playlist 5        No Assignments Due
  July 1-5  from the Margins to the Moments in Music”                         this Week
            Mainstream                                      “Born This Way”
                                    “The Original Born This video
                                    Way”
            Ariana Grande and Pride                         “Same Love” video
            Fest                    “Sam Smith is the
                                    Voice of Freedom”       “Him” video
                                    “Janelle Monae Chats    Chely Wright
                                    With Lizzo About        interview with
                                    Coming Out, Sexual      Ellen
                                    Fluidity & More”
                                                            Sam Smith
                                                            interview with
                                                            Ellen
6 Week 6    No new material                                                   Week 6 Quiz
  July 8-11
                                                                              Advocacy Playlist and
                                                                              Listening Guide
