                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                            INTRODUCTION TO BLACK STUDIES
                                        AFR 303, ANT 310D
                                           78720 & 78530
                          Ethics, Cultural Diversity, Global Cultures Flags
                                           Online Streamed
                                      Summer 2020 – session 1
Instructor: Traci-Ann Wint
Email: trwint@utexas.edu
Instructor: Dr. Edmund T. Gordon
email: etgordon@austin.utexas.edu
Discussion Sections: W 12-1pm, Th 11am-noon OR F 6-7pm (choose a time that works for you)
Discussion Sections and Office hours will also be held through Zoom Videoconferencing at
https://zoom.us. Please see the segment in Module 0 in Canvas titled “Online Office Hours” for
specific instructions on how to schedule a video conference.
Technical Support: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu.
Course Description:
This course provides students with an introduction to Black Studies. In the first section of the
course we consider the history of Black Studies in the U.S. using the integration and development
of Black Studies here at the University of Texas, Austin as a case study. We then turn to
considerations of the historical construction of Africa, the Black Diaspora, and the idea of
Blackness. Building on this foundation the course provides students with the analytical tools to
critically explore canonical Black Studies literature, themes, and theories. This section of the
course interrogates race, gender, class, sexuality, and their intersections. The second section of the
course focuses on Black cultures, power, and politics. It utilizes the analytical tools provided by
the course to forge an understanding of Black gendered cultural forms. The third section of the
course focuses in on the expression and use of Black Studies and the ethical questions raised by
applying this perspective to everyday concerns in critical areas of social inequity.
Students are encouraged to visit http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html to test their computer
and network connection and learn about the course structure
Description of Online Format:
This is the digital, on-demand version of AFR303. Unlike almost all other courses offered at the
University of Texas, you will be viewing this class online (from the comfort of your own home,


library, or coffee joint) rather than in-person. You are expected to “attend” class by logging into
the course to watch recorded lecture segments that have already been posted to Canvas.
The class is designed to accommodate 100 or more students. The course meets online through
Canvas. Students are encouraged to visit http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html to test their
computer and network connection and learn about the course structure.
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1278954 You can enter directly at this URL or through
Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you will need
your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, you can navigate your way to other
areas.
Description of Course Structure:
The course is divided into 6 modules spread across the Summer session Semester. Modules I and
II will be released when the course opens. Modules III and IV will be released on June 10 and
Modules V and VI on June 24. Activities for each segment are found in Canvas modules, which
you are required to move through in order. These activities include watching videos, discussion
board posts and replies, answering poll questions, taking quizzes, and completing assignments.
It is important for you to understand the schedule of this course. It is an on-demand course that
gives you some freedom to complete materials at your own pace. HOWEVER, the schedule shows
due dates built into the course to ensure that you pace yourself with the material. It is your
responsibility to understand the schedule contained in this syllabus and participate in the course
accordingly. The course CANNOT be completed successfully if you do not begin activities as
soon as the course starts.
About Online Class format:
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1240671. You can enter directly at this URL or through
Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you will need
your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, locate the left navigation bar.
Some of the most important links on the left navigation bar include:
     1. Home – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, a help section, and other
         important links you’ll use through the course.
     2. Announcements – You can view major announcements from the teaching team here. Be
         sure to set your notification settings so that you receive an email when a new
         announcement is posted.
3. Modules – The Modules page includes links to the Assignments, Readings, Lecture video
archives and other course documents.
Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Modules tab.


TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
All students are required to have access to a laptop or desktop computer, running
either Windows or macOS operating systems. (Tablets, smartphones, and Microsoft Surface
devices are not supported.) Your computer should meet the following requirements:
    •   Modern and up-to-date operating system (macOS or Windows)
    •   Browser: Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox (If using Safari or Firefox, be
        prepared to download Chrome and use it.)
    •   5 Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
    •   Functional webcam and microphone
    •   Zoom installed and configured
Confirm that your computer is able to stream video by
visiting https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.php
Course communication:
The TAs and professors will often post Announcements in Canvas. Click on the “Settings” link in
the upper-right corner of your Canvas page, to adjust your email address and notification
preferences. This will allow you to receive email updates whenever course Announcements are
made, or when assignments and grades are posted.
If you have a specific, personal or grade-related question, please email your TA or visit them
during office hours.
Even though this is an online course, you are encouraged to communicate with the professors and
TA. Come to our posted online office hours or send an email to set up an appointment if none of
the weekly office hours fit your schedule.
Honor system for quizzes and writing assignments:
By taking this class, you agree to abide by the University of Texas regulations concerning
cheating. During the quizzes you cannot receive help from others or discuss your writing
assignments with other students. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact
the TAs or instructors.
Information and data security:
All quizzes and online interactions in Canvas will be saved and stored. All information will be
kept for educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other
researchers will involve de-identifying the data, including the removal of names, UTEIDs, email
addresses, or other information. To further ensure that your information is secure, please do not
include identifying information in your online interactions with others. Remember that in online
interactions, the instructors and TAs will have access to all information. Please communicate in a
respectful manner.


Reporting technical problems:
If you experience a technical problem during class, your first course of action is to email
gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu. Please provide your name, the course you are taking, and
any detailed information you can provide to describe the technical issue. A technical support
representative will respond within 24 hours to your email and include your instructor when
needed.
Course Requirements:
1. Engagement – attendance for this course is broken into 2 components – instapolls and weekly
    discussion sections. The details for each are as follows
        a. Instapolls (6 pts.). In this course, you will watch several on-demand videos comprised
           of content pulled from lectures that were previously recorded. During these videos, you
           will see pop-ups called instapolls that you’ll be required to answer. The instapolls are
           graded on your participation, you don’t necessarily need to guess the correct answer,
           but you will need to select an answer to get credit. You must watch all of the recorded
           videos in this course to receive full credit for attendance!
        b. Weekly Discussion sections (4 pts)
        c. Starting in week 2 there will be 3 class chat sessions held per week. Students should
           choose the ONE time that works best for them and attend that session where TAs and
           the instructor will guide discussion and activities. During the 5 weeks of discussion
           sessions, students are required to attend ONE session per week, with the ability to opt
           out of week, for a total of 4 sessions attended.
2. Reading Discussions (10 pts.)
           Students will be asked to participate in on-line group discussion over the course of the
           semester focused on sets of class readings. Please read each discussion board carefully
           for details. For each discussion board students will be required to post an original
           response AND respond to a peer.
3. Quizzes (30 pts.)
        a. There will be 6 timed quizzes testing knowledge of African American history and the
           history of Black Studies within the context of Blacks at the University of Texas, Black
           Studies core concepts, and Ethics. Only some of the materials for these quizzes will be
           covered in class. Additional material on these subjects are available online and on
           Canvas. A study guide for each quiz will be available on Canvas. Each quiz will be
           administered in Canvas.
4. Short Essays (30 points)
        a. There will be four 2-3 page essays covering the main topics discussed throughout the
           semester. The prompts will be posted on Canvas and the essays are to be uploaded to
           Canvas by 11:59 pm on their due date. Each essay should be 2-3 double spaced pages.
           Essays are worth 10 points each. Your lowest essay grade will be dropped. Late essays
           will not be accepted unless previously authorized.
5. Ethics Case Study Essay (20 pts.)
        a. You will write a 3-4 page response essay in which you discuss the ethics presented in a
           Case Study provided for you and determine a position you support regarding the issues
           raised by the Case Study. You must explain clearly why you have chosen the position


              you have taken. In your discussion, you must cite at least two scholarly essays
              assigned as class reading, and you must reference the arguments made during the
              presentation of ethics in class. The essay is due posted on Canvas no later than
              11:59 pm July 10, 2020. NO late essays will be accepted. A rubric for writing this
              essay will be provided on Canvas.
Grades:
The TAs will work to return assignments within 2 weeks. After receiving each graded assignment,
wait at least 24 hours before bringing concerns to the TAs. Any concerns about grades must be
brought to the TAs’ attention no more than one week after the student receives the grade. Gordon
or Wint will not discuss questions on the grading of your assignment with you unless you have
had a previous discussion with the TA who graded your assignment.
Graded Assignments:
Essays                                                                 30 pts.
Ethics Case Study Essay                                                20
Quizzes                                                                30
Engagement (instapolls & discussion session)                           10
Reading Discussion post & reply                                        10
TOTAL                                                                  100 pts.
Points to letter grades for final grade:
A = 94-100 pts.           A- = 90-93 pts.        B+ = 87-89 pts
B = 84-86 pts.            B- = 80-83 pts.        C+ = 77-79 pts.
C = 74-76 pts.            C- = 70-73 pts.        D+ = 67-69 pts.
D = 64-66 pts.            D- = 60-63 pts.        F = 0-59 pts.
Academic Accommodations and Academic Integrity:
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 512-471-6259 or 512-410-6644(video phone).
Academic integrity is central to the mission of the university. Each student is expected to turn in
work completed independently, except when assignments specifically authorize collaborative
effort. It is not acceptable to use the words or ideas of another person without proper
acknowledgement of that source. This means that you must use footnotes and quotation marks to
indicate the source of any phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or ideas found in published volumes, on
the Internet, or created by another student. For more information about the university’s
expectations for academic integrity, see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
We use turnitin’s plagiarism tool to check all papers for originality and citation.
Course Protocols:
•   Rules for respectful discussion will be followed. These rules will be established and agreed
    upon by everyone early in the semester. If a student violates these rules, that student will be
    counted as absent for the day.


•   Written assignments are due as indicated on the syllabus unless otherwise specified. Late
    assignments will not be accepted unless an acceptable excuse is provided before the due date.
•   The University of Texas rules and regulations regarding plagiarism and intellectual honesty
    will be enforced. For details please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
•   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
    Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
    512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
•   Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB
    212), the professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further
    investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual
    assault, dating violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or
    employee. Federal law and university policy also requires reporting incidents of sex-
    and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title
    IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such
    incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain
    confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-
    6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-
    2255). We strongly urge you make use of these services for any needed support and
    that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
Readings:
Readings for African American History portion of Quiz:
http://www.npr.org/news/specials/blackhistorymonth/timeline.html#pre1800
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African-American_history
http://www.blackpast.org/timelines/african-american-history-timeline-1900-2000
All other readings will be available on CANVAS.
Sequence of Topics, Readings and Assignments
Please note that you have at least one assignment due at the end of every module. All assignment
submission windows will close 11:59pm on their due date.
Sequence of Topics and Readings:
 Module Topics                    Readings                   Assessments                Due Date
 0          Pre-Class                                        - Pre-class activities and Jun 4, 2020
            Activities                                       viewing of course


                                             introduction and
                                             guidelines
1. Black Studies and    - Karenga (1982),    - Quiz 1            Jun 7, 2020
   Black UT             - Marsh Duren (1979)
2. Africa, the Black    - Davis (1998)       - Quiz 2            Jun 14, 2020
   Diaspora and         - Lovejoy (2000)     - Discussion Post &
   Blackness            - Falola (2003)      Reply 1
                                             - Essay 1
3. The Conceptual       - AAA Statement race - Quiz 3            Jun 21 2020
   Toolkit pt. I (Race, - Bolnik (2007)      - Discussion Post &
   Racisms, Class and   - Macintosh (1989)   Reply 2
   Blackness)           - Domhoff (2005)     - Essay 2
                        - Vargas (2004)
                        - Winddance Twine
                        (1999)
4. The Conceptual       --Vargas (2004)      - Quiz 4            Jun 28 2020
   Toolkit pt. II       - Winddance Twine    - Discussion Post &
   (Blackness and       (1999)               Reply 3
   Gender)              - Lorber (1991)      - Essay 3
                        - hooks (2000)
                        - Combahee River
                        Coll.
5. Culture and Power    - Ngugi (1993)       Quiz 5              July 5 2020
                        - hooks (2004)       Discussion Post &
                        - West (1998)        Reply 4
                        - Moynihan (1965)    - Essay 4
6. Race, Class,         - Axelsen            - Quiz 6            July 10 2020
   Gender and Ethics    - Pojman             - Discussion Post &
                                             Reply 5
                                             -Ethics Case Study
                                             Essay
