                               THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                 STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number: SW n393R                                           Instructor: Starla Simmons, LCSW
Unique Number: 88770                                                                 she/her/hers
Semester: Summer 2019                                             Email: Starla.simmons@utexas.edu
Meeting Time/Place: Mon/Weds                                      Office Phone: 512-232-2703
                            8:30am-11:00am                        Office: 3.124 D
                            SSW 2.11                              Office Hours: Tues, 11-1pm
                                                                                     & by appointment
                 Assessment and Treatment of Traumatized Populations
I.       STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
The course is designed as an advanced clinical selective for graduate students in the School of Social Work
who wish to increase knowledge and skills for practice with traumatized populations. Students will
develop a working understanding of traumatized populations from diverse backgrounds, affirming and
respecting their strengths and differences. Although the assigned readings and focus of class sessions will
be on traumatized adults, supplemental readings will be identified for students aspiring to work with
traumatized children or adolescents. Such students will have the option of focusing their role plays on
applying the treatment modalities covered in this course to work with children or adolescents, based on
the supplemental readings. This course is grounded in the identification, analysis, and implementation of
empirically-based intervention strategies. It will focus on skill building and will include multiple
perspectives in the advanced application of theories, models and skills utilized in varying treatment
modalities, with emphasis placed at the micro and mezzo levels of practice. The framework of the course
is based on social work values and the ethical decision-making process, as illuminated by the NASW Code
of Ethics.
II.      STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
At the end of this course students will:
     1.  develop assessment skills for the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
         as well as the impact of trauma on other disorders;
     2.  demonstrate understanding and skills in the core components of the treatment
         of trauma, such as treatment stages, psychoeducation, the therapeutic relationship, and
         safety and arousal reduction techniques;
     3.  describe the key features distinguishing alternative evidence-based treatment
         approaches for trauma-related symptoms;
     4.  demonstrate skills in at least one trauma treatment modality;
     5.  demonstrate evaluation skills by accurately appraising how well others evince skills
         in at least one trauma treatment modality;
     6.  identify steps practitioners can take to prevent or ameliorate
         their own vicarious/secondary trauma;
     7.  demonstrate the ability to adapt intervention models and strategies to reflect an
         understanding of persons from diverse backgrounds, including (but not limited to)
         race, ethnicity, culture, class, gender, sexual orientation, religion/spirituality,
         physical or mental ability, developmental level, age, and national origin;
     8.  demonstrate the ability to tailor and integrate clinical interventions based on the
         context in which they are delivered; and
     9.  demonstrate advanced knowledge of social work values and ethical decision-
         making processes as they relate to ethical dilemmas in clinical intervention with traumatized
         adults.


III.   TEACHING METHODS
       This class will be taught using a variety of methods with an emphasis on experiential learning for
       the purpose of building skill and confidence. The nature of the course content requires a didactic
       approach as well. Therefore, PowerPoint lectures, role-plays, videos, class discussions, small
       group and dyad exercises, and guest speakers will all be utilized. For success in this class, you
       must be willing to participate, take risks and “stretch” out of you comfort zone. You are expected
       to ask questions to clarify expectations, provide me with constructive feedback in a timely manner
       and meet with me individually as needed and/or when requested. All in-class discussions related to
       personal values, beliefs, or life experiences must be kept confidential.
       Use of Canvas for this course: This class uses Canvas – a Web-based course management system with
       password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu - for confidential communication such as
       posting and submitting assignments. Readings that are not in the required text, assignment guidelines
       and assignment grading rubrics are all posted to Canvas. Students can access Canvas Help 24/7 by
       calling 855- 308-2494. Students are expected to set notifications in Canvas so they receive
       announcements updates as soon as they are posted. If anything is getting in the way of your
       learning, let me know as soon as possible so we can discuss it and problem solve!
IV.    REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
    •  Van der Kolk, Bessel A., 1943, & Milton H. Erickson Foundation. (2013). The body keeps
       score: Integration of mind, brain, and body in the treatment of trauma. Phoenix, AZ: Milton H.
       Erickson Foundation.
       Additional assigned readings will be uploaded to Canvas.
V.     COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Participation and Attendance:                                                           10pts
       Being present, on-time and engaging in class is very important. I will be keeping track of
       attendance, participation, and timeliness of assignments. A pattern of absences, late
       arrivals or early departures (more than 3), or a pattern of poor preparation or
       participation may result in disciplinary action.
Self-Care & Trauma Stewardship                                                          10 pts
       Understanding the impact of one’s own trauma responses is critical in providing ethical,
       trauma-informed care services. You will complete the Self-Care Assessment &
       Maintenance Sheet created by the University of Buffalo School of Social Work and
       complete short answer questions from the book Trauma-Stewardship. See Canvas for
       worksheet and questions.
Collective Trauma Impact Paper:                8-10 pages, APA format                   20pts
       The purpose of this paper is to take a deep investigation into the historical, cultural and
       generational trauma that marginalized communities have experienced. You will choose
       which marginalized community to focus on; examples will be discussed in class. You will
       identify individual, family, and community experiences and symptoms of the trauma, as
       well as the societal outcomes that have resulted. In addition, you must provide examples
       and discussion of specific evidenced-based & other relevant interventions that address


       community healing at the micro and macro level. Assignment details and rubric can be
       found in Canvas.
Evidence-Based Trauma Intervention: Student Choice                             30pts.
   1. Online Certification in Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
   There is an online training for $35 called Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (TF-
   CBT), available through the website of Medical University of South Carolina. The 10-hour
   course trains you in the basics of using TF-CBT model that is widely accepted in therapeutic
   practice. You can complete the course for 25 points credit. Upload or bring your printed
   Certificate to the class. Link to the training is:
   2. Create an Evidence-Based/Informed Intervention Guide:
   You choose a specific trauma intervention and create an interactive training guide for social
   work students. The training guide should be an organized package of information that
   includes: a detailed overview of the intervention and theories/frameworks that shape it,
   examples and explanation of specific skills clinicians use and the components of how it
   facilitated; summary of research that show its effectiveness with appropriate populations,
   additional resources (videos, links, published handouts) that offer more, and ethical
   considerations. Additional assignment details are posted in Canvas.
Group Project: Trauma Profile & Clinical Intervention Demonstration: 30pts.
       The purpose of this project is for students to perform an assessment of a public figure
       who has experienced trauma and demonstrate appropriate clinical interventions. This
       project will be completed in small groups of four. Students will need to provide a
       detailed assessment of this person, creating an in-depth profile that tells their “story”: a
       bio-psycho-social-spiritual assessment, history of trauma, trauma responses & criteria
       met for diagnosis. Students will also select clinical intervention(s) that address their
       client’s needs & demonstrate the intervention methods to the class. The clinical
       intervention must be strengths-based, evidenced-informed with a research analysis on
       why this method was chosen with this particular client. See detailed assignment
       requirements and rubric in Canvas.
                Assignment:                                                Points
                Participation & Attendance                                 10
                Self-Care and Trauma Stewardship                           10
                Collective Trauma Impact Paper                             20
                Evidence Based Interventions:
                Complete Online Training or Invention Guide                30
                Group Project: Trauma Profile & Demonstration              30
                Total                                                      100 pts.


VI.       GRADES
          94.0 and Above                   A
          90.0 to 93.999                    A-
          87.0 to 89.999                    B+
          84.0 to 86.999                    B
          80.0 to 83.999                    B-
          77.0 to 79.999                    C+
          74.0 to 76.999                    C
          70.0 to 73.999                    C-
          67.0 to 69.999                    D+
          64.0 to 66.999                    D
          60.0 to 63.999                    D-
          Below 60.0                        F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Social work students must adhere to the Student Standards for Professional Conduct of the UT School of
Social Work and the NASW Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for their own conduct.
Find the MSSW Handbook at http://www.utexas.edu/ssw/current/forms/
   A. Professional Conduct in Class: The professor expects students to act as professionals in class.
   This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class
   discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. We will not, nor should we, always agree
   with one another. In this environment we should be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and
   sometime we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. However, the professor does
   require that students engage one another with respect and professionalism.
   B. Student Privacy & Confidentiality: Class discussions or role plays can on occasion bring up
   strong emotions or raise issues of a personal nature. For student privacy, it is recommended that
   students not discuss matters of a highly sensitive nature in class. If you need to talk, come see me
   after class. Your privacy and confidentiality will be protected unless the matter must be reviewed by
   the School of Social Work or must be reported by law (please refer to the MSSW Handbook and Title
   IX requirements). I will connect you with resources in the community if your personal needs exceed
   what can be provided by me or by UT services.
   C. Client Privacy & Confidentiality: If class work prompts you to reflect on past or current client
   contact, and sharing information about that contact is necessary for the learning process, it is your
   professional obligation to protect the client’s privacy and confidentiality as much as possible by
   sharing judiciously and anonymously (this applies to information shared about staff at your field
   agency as well).
   D. Classroom Civility: A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various
   backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
   abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We
   expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social
   Work deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
   uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not
   include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues.


   Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect
   to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation,
   gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
   legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun.
   Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my
   records.
   E. Unanticipated Distress: Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to
   course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform
   the instructor. The instructor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in
   course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind
   of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students can contact a service provider of their
   choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at
   https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
F. Grading Policies: If you are confused by a grade or the feedback you receive on an assignment,
   please make an appointment to meet with me. I enjoy talking face to face with students about how
   they can improve and may give some credit back on the assignment.
   Assignments are due on the posted date by midnight. (except presentations due by class time).
   Assignments turned in after due date are considered late. Students will lose 5% of the
   assignment point value per calendar day that an assignment remains un-submitted. On
   subsequent days, papers must be submitted to Canvas by noon to avoid the additional 5%
   penalty. If you anticipate a problem turning in an assignment on time, please contact me in
   advance. You have one free late day per semester to be used at your discretion, but you
   must indicate in Canvas that you are using your “pass” when you submit the assignment
   or it the pass will not be applied.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
      A. THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at
      Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
      Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
      trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
      B. PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT & CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects students
      to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to
      participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings
      together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and
      shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs,
      national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an
      atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work deals with complex and
      controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
      impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
      conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
      ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
      Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect and
      professionalism.
      C. UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
      reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
      encouraged to inform the instructor. The instructor can be responsive and supportive regarding
      students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
      communicating clearly what kind of support is


desired. If counseling is needed, students can contact a service provider of their choosing, including
the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
D. POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are
not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that
privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate
in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said,
posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing
potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of electronic
communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived by
clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to
minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in
training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most
private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their
professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material
should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to
the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students
must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional
relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the
Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics. Social work students
should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as well as the
University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the university
community, and the broader area communities.
E. POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean
of Students (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/).
F. USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to,
exams, quizzes, and homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions
being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific,
express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an
act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among
other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with
other current or future students.
G. DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations
must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities
area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY
for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). Present the letter to the professor at the beginning of
the semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed. The student should remind the
professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
H. RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student
must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
                                                                                                            6


 day, the professor will excuse the absence.
 I. TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the
 University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from
 discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their
 supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment,
 sexual violence, or sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
 University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the
 Title IX Deputy for the SHSSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor
 Voss to report incidents or to obtain information. Further information, including student resources
 related to Title IX may also be found at https://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-
 programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf
 J. CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
 https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You may also find this information by accessing the Quick Links
 menu on the school’s website.
 K. CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
 personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on education supervision,
 and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights & Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As
 such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted.
 Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedures
 for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social
 Work education.
 L. USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as an
 official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email
 for university and course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible to keep
 the university informed about changes to their e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail
 regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-
 related communications, some of which may be time- sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies
 and instructions for updating their e-mail address at
 http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
 M. SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
 involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present
 some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's
 responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or
 community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
 N. BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone who is
 acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns
 about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
 of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
 Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
 visithttp://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
 O. EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
 required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is
 made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
   nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
• If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of
   class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
• Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions to do so by the Austin Fire
   Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
                                                                                                          7


IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
All readings, assignment guidelines, grading rubrics and other essential information will be on the Canvas website.
Check Canvas regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule. Changes to the schedule may be
made at Professor Simmons’ discretion and as circumstances require. It is your responsibility to note these changes
when announced. Professor Simmons will make every effort to announce changes with as much advanced notice as
possible
       Date                 Topic                Assignment Due                  Readings
    Monday           Course & Syllabus
     June 10               Review
     June 12         What is Trauma?                                      Van der Kolk, Part I:
                                                                           The Rediscovery of
                        ACES Study                                            Trauma, p1-47
    Monday          Identifying Trauma              Self-Care &           VDK, Part II: Brain
     June 17           Assessments, &                 Trauma              on Trauma, pgs. 48-
                      Interviews, DSM               Stewardship           102
                          Diagnosis                  Reflection
     June 19        Trauma Responses:                                       VDK, Part III: The
                      Trauma of Abuse:                                      minds of Children
                      Sexual, Physical,                                         pg103-169
                          Emotional
                   Developmental
                   Trauma
    Monday         Community Trauma                                         VDK, Part IV: The
     June 24          & Generational                                       Imprint of Trauma,
                           Trauma                                              pg. 170-201
                   Mass shootings,
                   Natural Disasters,
                   Targeted Violence
     June 26       Complex Trauma & Collective Trauma                         VDK, Part V:
                   Intervention Planning           Impact Paper             Chapters 13-15pgs
                                                                                 204-262
                   Components of
                   Trauma Interventions:
                        Guest Speaker:
                   Seanna Crosbie, LCSW-S
    Monday          Secondary Trauma                                        VDK, Part V: 16-
      July 1        Compassion Fatigue,                                       18pgs 263-308
                          Self-Care,
                     Countertransference
      July 3                 NO                       CLASS
    Monday         Trauma Focused CBT                                         VDK, Part V:
      July 8                                                                Chapters 19,20 pg
                                                                                 309-336
                                                                                                                  8


   July 10                                                      Epilogue and the
                 Somatic Experiencing                                Appendix
                    & Mindfulness
   Monday             Trust Based           Evidenced Based       Readings TBD
   July 15             Relational          Intervention Paper
                      Intervention            OR TF-CBT
                                              Certification
                 Guest Speaker, Mary        Completion Due
                     Beer, LCSW
   July 17               EMDR                                    Shapiro: EMDR
                                                                      Article
                    Guest Speaker:
   Monday           Trauma Profile         Trauma Profile &         No reading
   July 22           Presentations          Demonstrations
   July 24          Trauma Profile         Trauma Profile &        No Reading
                     Presentations          Demonstrations
   Monday               Wrap Up                                        none
   July 29
IX.     Bibliography
Badenoch, B. (2008). Being a brain-wise therapist: A practical guide to interpersonal
neurobiology. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. [Also has a workbook for therapists.]
Bovin, M., Marx, B., & et. al. (2016). Psychometric properties of the PTSD Checklist for
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders–Fifth Edition (PCL-5) in veterans.
Psychological Assessment, 28(11), 1379-1391.
Courtois, C. A., & Ford, J. D. (2009). Treating complex traumatic stress disorders: An evidence-
based guide. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fosha, D. (2000). The transforming power of affect: A model for accelerated change. New York,
NY: Basic Books.
Geller, S., & Porges, S. (2014). Therapeutic Presence: Neurophysiological Mechanisms
Mediating Feeling Safe in Therapeutic Relationships. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration,
24(3), 178–192.
Hanson, R. (2009). Buddha’s brain: The practical neuroscience of happiness, love, & wisdom.
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
                                                                                                 9


Jobes, D. A. (2016). Managing suicidal risk, 2nd Edition: A collaborative approach. New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
MacLaren, C., & Freeman, A. (2006). Cognitive behavior therapy model and techniques. In
Ronen, T., & Freeman, A. (Eds.), Cognitive behavior therapy in clinical social work practice (pp.
25-44). New York, NY: Springer.
Montgomery, A. (2013). Neurobiology essentials for clinicians: What every therapist needs to
know. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.
Osterman, J. E., & de Jong, J. T. (2014). Cultural issues and trauma. In Friedman, M. J., Keane, T.
M., & Resick, P. A. (Eds.), Handbook of PTSD (pp. 425-446). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Shapiro, F. (2014). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Basic principles, protocols,
and procedures, 2nd edition. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Siegel, D. J. (2010). The mindful therapist: A clinician’s guide to mindsight and neural
integration. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.
Talkovsky, A., & Lang, A. (2017). Meditation-based approaches in the treatment of PTSD. PTSD
Research Quarterly, 28(2), 1-3.
Tantia, J. F. (2013). Mindfulness and dance/movement therapy for treating trauma. In
Rappaport, L. (ed.), Mindfulness and the arts therapies: Theory and practice. London, UK:
Jessica Kingsley Publishing.
Tervalon, M., & Murray-García, J. (1998). Cultural humility versus cultural competence: A critical
distinction in defining physician training outcomes in multicultural education. Journal of Health
Care for the Poor and Underserved, 9(2), 117-125.
van der Kolk, B. A. (2014). The body keeps the score: Brain, mind, and body in the healing of
trauma. New York, NY: Viking.
van der kolk, B. A., et. al. (2013). Yoga as an adjunctive treatment for posttraumatic stress
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 75(0), e1-e7.
Online resources about trauma:
    1. National Center for PTSD: www.ptsd.va.gov
        Created by the Veterans Administration (VA). A wealth of information and resources,
        especially for PTSD in vets but applicable to other populations too. Offers continuing
        education, some for free. Listing of evidence-based treatments, although somewhat
        limited. Citations for research papers.
    2. The Professional Consultation Program: (866) 948-7880 or PTSDconsult@va.gov.
        Very helpful program associated with the National Center for PTSD at the VA. Offers free
        phone or email consultations with experts in PTSD for anyone treating any veteran in
        any setting. This service is also extended in some cases of mass trauma such as natural
                                                                                                 10


        disasters and mass shootings. Can ask questions or request a virtual consultation
        meeting.
    3. National Child Trauma Stress Network: www.nctsn.org
        A trauma-focused non-profit funded by several federal government departments. Good
        source for working with trauma in children. Articles, training, a list of evidenced-
        practices, sections for parents and school personnel, and more.
    4. Other places to find resources include federal agencies such as SAMHSA or the National
        Institute for Mental Health (NIMH), international groups such as the Red Cross and
        World Health Organization (WHO), and specialized groups such as Traumaweb, an
        evidence-based Israeli center for the study of trauma.
    5. For information about specific therapeutic approaches, there are often international or
        national associations that give information specific to that approach. For example, the
        EMDRIA (EMDR International Association) is a good source for information about EMDR,
        and the Somatic Experiencing Trauma Institute has information about SE.
Recommended books about trauma:
Waking the tiger by Peter Levine
In an unspoken voice by Peter Levine
Somatic experiencing by Peter Levine
Trauma-proofing your kids by Peter Levine
The courage to heal (and workbook) by Laura Davis
A terrible thing happened (for children) by Holmes et al
Black & blue by Anna Quindlen
A general theory of love by Lewis, et al
My stroke of insight by Jill Bolte Taylor
Healing trauma by Dan Siegel & Marion Solomon
Mindsight by Dan Siegel
The developing mind by Dan Siegel
Brainstorm by Dan Siegel
The whole-brain child by Dan Siegel
Parenting from the inside out by Dan Siegel
Growing up again: Parenting ourselves, parenting our children by Clarke & Dawson
Wherever you go, there you are by Jonathon Kabat-Zinn
Meditation for beginners by Jack Kornfield
The new people making by Virginia Satir
Feeling good by David Burns
The dance of anger by Harriet Lerner
Daring greatly by Brene Brown
The gifts of imperfection by Brene Brown
The power of vulnerability by Brene Brown
Tiny beautiful things: Advice from love and life by Dear Sugar by Cheryl Strayed
Trauma competency: A clinician’s guide by L. A. Curran
The body remembers: The psychophysiology of trauma and trauma treatment by B. Rothschild
                                                                                                11
