General Microbiology Laboratory
Summer 2019
BION226L Syllabus
Instructor: Eric D. Cambronne, Ph.D.
               eric.cambronne@austin.utexas.edu
               Office hours: Monday 10:00-11:00 AM /1:30 – 2:30 PM - NMS1.124 or by appointment
Lecture: Mon 12:00 - 1:30 PM Ernest Cockrell Jr. Hall (ECJ) 1.308
Laboratory: Biomedical Engineering Building (BME)
Section                                              Graduate Teaching Assistants
 85045 Tue PM 12-3          2.106               Shahima Islam        shahima@utexas.edu
          Thu PM 12-3       2.106
 85050 Tue PM 12-3          2.204               Zhina Shen           zns@utexas.edu
          Thu PM 12-3       2.204
         (Office hours for Graduate TA’s to be determined by individual instructor)
Undergraduate Teaching Assistants
                                  Tammy Nguyen
                                  Michelle Hoang
After hours laboratory access
                                                   1


Week Begins:              Laboratory (Tue/Wed/Thu)                  Lecture (Mon)
      June 6 Jun 6 – Thu:      Introduction to the Lab
 1                             Check-in
     June 10 June 11 – Tue:    Project I:                          June 10: Lecture 1
                               Streaking out for isolated colonies
 2                             and sampling of soil for bacteria
             June 13 – Thu:    Project VI:
                               Mutagenesis of W3110 with UV
     June 17 June 18 – Tue:    Project II:                         June 17: Lecture 2
                               Initialize characterization of an
                               isolated soil organism
 3           June 20 – Thu:    Project VII:
             Quiz 1            Growth curve and Induction of β-
                               galactosidase
     June 24 June 25 – Tue:    Project III:                        June 24: Lecture 3
                               Characterization of soil organism
 4                             (continued)
             June 27 – Thu:    Project VIII:
                               Assay for β-galactosidase
      July 1  July 2 – Tue:    Project IV:        DATA SET 2 DUE    July 1: Lecture 4
             Quiz 2            Characterization of 16S rRNA;
                               Quorum sensing; Streptomyces;
 5                             Biofilm Set-up
              July 4 – Thu:    No Laboratory Sessions
      July 8  July 9 – Tue:    Project V:                           July 8: Lecture 5
                               Agarose gel electrophoresis of PCR
                               product; DNA sequencing; Biofilms
 6           July 11 – Thu:    Project IX:
                               Bacteriophage induction and
                               enumeration
     July 15 July 16 – Tue:    Project X:         DATA SET 1 DUE   July 15: Lecture 6
             Quiz 3            Conjugation and transduction
 7
             July 18 – Thu:    No Laboratory Sessions
     July 22 July 23 – Tue:    Project XI:                         July 22: Lecture 7
                               Isolation of plasmid DNA
                               and digestion with restriction
                               enzyme SspI
 8           July 25 – Thu:    Project XII:
             Quiz 4            Characterization of plasmid DNA by
                               gel electrophoresis; Bacterial
                               motility and chemotaxis
     July 29 July 30 – Tue:                       DATA SET 3 DUE        July 29:
                                                                      Final Exam
                                       FINAL EXAM                   Review Session
 9
             Aug 2 – Fri:      Retrieval of Materials
                               Location: NMS1.124
                                          2


General information:
1. Objective: This course will provide training at the introductory level in the manipulation and
characterization of microorganisms from the perspective of modern experimental microbiology.
Prerequisites: Credit with a grade of at least C- or registration for BIO326M or BIO326R (or 226R).
BIO326R is recommended.
2. Laboratory Manual: The accompanying paperback workbook is mandatory and required for each
student in the course. It is available for purchase at the UT COOP (beginning 06.07.19). Copies are
reserved by unique section number so have that available with you for pick-up.
3. Section site on UT Canvas: There are Section sites on UT Canvas reserved for use by each section.
Important announcements, course documents, and other information for students in the course will be
posted on Canvas. PowerPoint presentations that accompany Monday lectures will also be posted in
the Lecture module prior to the beginning of class. Please check your section site regularly.
    *Make sure you can access the site for your section (you must be enrolled to do so). Please
    confirm your notification settings to make sure you receive notifications for announcements.
    You will be responsible for loss of points resulting from failure to receive notifications.
4. Lab Sessions: You will need to photograph many of your results during this course, including
pictures taken through the microscope. A cell phone or digital camera will be adequate for this. These
pictures will be needed to complete the data sets. Please also bring a fine-point, felt-tip marker and a
USB flash drive.
    *Always back up your data in a safe location. No considerations will be given for data lost
    due to technical issues resulting in incomplete data sets.
5. Attendance: Attendance at each meeting of your laboratory section is mandatory. Attendance at
the weekly Monday lecture is required for successful execution. In addition, continuity of group effort
from week to week and sharing results within each section are important in this course.
    *Attending other sections on a casual basis or switching with other students is not allowed
    and will count as an absence. Each unexcused absence in lab will result in a loss of 12
    points from the final grade.
Occasionally a medical/family emergency or another essential activity (interviews for jobs/admissions,
travel for conferences, competitions) makes missing a lab, leaving the lab early, or arriving late,
unavoidable. If you foresee an absence, send us (Eric Cambronne and your Graduate TA) an e-mail
stating (a) your name and the unique number of your section (b) a clear description of the nature of the
conflict with appropriate supporting documentation. You should do this as soon as you are aware of
the conflict. Be sure to include all of this information or your absence may remain unexcused.
    If your absence is due to a sudden, serious emergency, then contact us as soon as you know when
    you will be able to resume your normal activities. You should plan on providing evidence of the
    emergency, including disclosure of your situation with Student Emergency Services (512) 471-5017
    studentemergency@austin.utexas.edu in the Office of the Dean of Students.
In such unavoidable or unforeseeable events, you may be offered a make-up lab (typically in after
hours), depending on the availability of material and feasibility. Please note for this consideration
the reason for absence must be of an extraordinary nature. As a general guideline, minor illnesses,
activities of social clubs, or exams scheduled outside of normal class time are not justifications for an
                                                       3


absence. If an exam in another course is scheduled during your lab period, the instructor of that course
is required to offer you a make-up.
6. Data sets. You will submit three (3) data sets for this course. They are worth a total of 110
points, each question worth 2 points. Refer to the ‘Data Set Template’ on the Canvas Site before each
lab to make sure you collect all the required data each week.
*You must provide a hard copy of each set, which will be due at the beginning of your regular
laboratory class time, during the weeks indicated on the calendar. When you submit a data set,
you are certifying that all the results are original and obtained by you (alone or as part of a group). The
use of someone else’s data without attribution is a form of plagiarism and will be referred to Student
Judicial Services with a recommendation for failure in the course.
     LATE DATA SETS: Sets turned in late, but on the same day they are due, will incur a 2-point penalty.
     If the report is turned in the following day, but at or before your regular class time, there will be an
     additional 2 pt. penalty. After that time, there will be a 2-pt. penalty for each 24-hr period the report
     is late. It is your responsibility to arrange with the instructor a time when a late report can be turned
     in. Reports will not be considered as submitted until a hard copy is received by the instructor.
7. Lectures. M 12:00 – 1:30 PM ECJ 1.308. The lectures will place the experimental work you are doing
in the lab within the broader context of current understanding and knowledge in microbiology.
PowerPoint slides will be posted on the Lectures page of the Canvas site prior to the lecture, but these
are not intended to substitute for your attendance at the lectures. You will be responsible for mastering
all the material covered in the lectures, including information not shown on the visuals. If you are having
difficulty with the lecture material, then see me (Eric Cambronne) during office hours or make an
appointment. The lab TAs are not responsible for helping you with the lecture material.
8. Quizzes. There will be 4 written quizzes during the semester. These quizzes will be administered
and completed at the beginning of lab sessions indicated on the calendar. The quizzes will be 10 points
each (total of 40 points, lowest quiz will be dropped = Net 30 points). Quizzes will be free response
style as short Q and A format. Graded quizzes will be returned to you for your reference. The quizzes
will draw largely from the material presented in Monday lectures. Topics covered in lecture that directly
relate to activities in the laboratory will be prioritized. You will only be responsible for material covered
in lectures prior to any given quiz week.
     *There will be no make-up quizzes except in cases of documented serious illness or critical
     family emergency. Keep in mind that your lowest quiz score is dropped from your final tally.
9. Final exam. There will be a 65 minute practical exam (50 points) during your designated lab period.
The exam format will cover the theory and experimental aspects of the lab. This final exam will be held
in the lab itself. There will be stations set up for answering theory questions and performing basic lab
procedures (taught during the course). A study guide will be provided and discussed during a review
session of lecture. (06.29)
Final exams may be examined and discussed during office visits (NMS 1.124) on Friday August
2, 2019. A key will be available in my office for your perusal. If you believe a question on the exam
was improperly graded, you can discuss this with me at that time only. After this final office hours,
you will not have a chance to view or discuss the exam with me. Pending a final resolution, exams
must remain with the instructor.
                                                          4


10. Performance in class. Performance in class is taken seriously, and students will be evaluated
according to whether they come to class on-time and prepared, participate actively in the lab exercises,
contribute information and results when called upon to do so and show through their performance
increased skill and understanding. Instructors observe students carefully and draw conclusions about
the quality of their overall participation and their contributions to the success of the class. Some of the
questions that are considered in evaluating student performance are: (1) Is the student punctual and
ready for class? (able to answer questions about the week’s work, has read the lab manual prior to the
session and is not struggling to determine the day’s activities). (2) Is the student a participant or a
passive observer over the course of the laboratory session? (3) Does the student post data on time for
the class, and carry out the needed calculations in a timely manner? (4) Is the student courteous and
helpful to others, able to keep the workspace clean and functional and follow laboratory rules without
prompting? (5) For assignments that must be completed after hours, is the student involved or is a
proxy consistently assigned to carry out the necessary tasks?
*A total of 10 points have been assigned for ‘Performance and Participation’ in the course and
will be evaluated by your Graduate TA or Instructor. You should feel free to discuss your
performance at any time with your Graduate TA or Instructor.
For certain labs you will work in pairs of two or groups of four, and others individually. Lab partners will
be changed during the course.
The document ‘Lab Safety Rules and Guidelines’ is available on Canvas and will also be posted in the
laboratories. Students are responsible for adhering to the procedures outlined in this document. A
summary of lab procedures will be given during the first week.
11. Grading concerns. If you feel that one of the quizzes or data sets was improperly graded, you
should address the issue with me or the Graduate TA within seven days after the report was returned,
during normal office hours or make an appointment. After the one-week period, there will be no
reconsideration of grades.
12. ‘After hours’ lab work. Students will need to return to the after-hours lab (adjoining main labs)
outside of their normal lab hours to complete work (there is a significant amount of after-hours lab work).
This includes Monday to Friday, and either a UGTA, Graduate TA or member of the kitchen staff will
be present to supervise the work. All ‘after hours’ work must be supervised, so you should plan to come
in only at scheduled times. Unless specifically stated otherwise, there will be no ‘after hours’
scheduled on weekends. To access the building during ‘after hours’, you will need a UTID proximity
card. If you are enrolled in the course, the locks will be programmed to allow you to enter the building.
*A schedule indicating when the lab will be open and supervised during these ‘after hours’ times
will be posted on Canvas.
13. Academic honesty. All students are expected to adhere to the highest standard of academic
honesty. Principles of academic integrity at the University are outlined by the Dean of students at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
14. Disabilities. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-
6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ If you have been granted specific accommodations
please notify me in writing by the twelfth class day. Arrangements for extra time or a non-distracting
                                                       5


environment during examinations must be made well ahead of time and must coincide as much as
possible with the regularly- scheduled exam time.
15. Religious holidays. UT Austin policy requires that you notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holiday. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holiday, you will be given
an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Grading:
A maximum of 200 points can be earned in the course. Points will be assigned as follows…
Data Sets:             110 points 2 points per item (55 total items in 3 Data Sets)
Quizzes:               30 points total (4 quizzes X 10 points each – Lowest quiz score dropped)
Final Exam:            50 points - Theory and experimental aspects.
Performance:           10 points
Final grades
Final cumulative scores >/= 0.5 will be rounded up to next integer.
(i.e., 179.8 will be rounded to 180 but 179.4 will not)
                                 A         200 – 186       A-     <186 – 178
   B+       <178 – 172           B       <172 – 166        B-     <166 – 160
   C+       <160 – 154           C       <154 – 148        C-     <148 – 142
   D+       <142 – 136           D       <136 – 130        D-     <130 – 124
   F        <124
                                                      6
