PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
ADV 319
PSYCHOLOGY OF
ADVERTISING
TEACHING TEAM
Professor Lee Ann Kahlor, Ph.D.
Office Hours: Mondays 1:30 – 2:30 p.m. and by appointment
Office: BMC 4.370
512-791-5726 (this is my cell so call or text only 9 am -7 pm when you need
immediate response, otherwise email me at Kahlor@austin.utexas.edu)
Teaching Assistants
Justin Graeber
jgraeber@utexas.edu
Office hours: 3-4 p.m. on Tuesdays and by appointment
Elaine Almeida                                             Contact TAs for
elaine96almeida@utexas.edu                                 meeting location.
Office hours: 2-3 p.m. on Mondays and Wednesdays
Na Yu
yuna96@utexas.edu
Office hours: 9-11 a.m. on Tuesdays
                                                                             1


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
REQUIRED TEXT, INTERNET ACCESS
                            Solomon, Michael R. (2017), Consumer Behavior:
                            Buying, Having and Being (12th edition), New Jersey:
                            Pearson-Prentice Hall. This book is available as an
                            ebook, value edition or as a bound hardcover. You can
                            find it at the Co-op, Amazon, Pearson Higher Ed, and
                            other venues, but it is vital you buy the correct
                            edition as chapters and their contents map directly
                            onto our weekly quizzes. GET THE BOOK ASAP!
                            Also required – you must have a way of accessing
                            Canvas and the Internet in class – a phone or laptop
                            will work.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course is designed to help students understand the psychology of
persuasion and consumer behavior. It is an overview of key psychological
concepts and theories as they relate to marketing, advertising and public
relations. The ultimate goal of this course is to provide an understanding of the
psychology behind advertising and public relations planning, execution, and
impacts.
This course meets your 3-credit UT Core Requirement for Social and
Behavioral Science (SB).
                                                                                 2


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
COURSE FORMAT
Lectures supplement and complement the readings by providing focus and
additional insight on the major topics. You will take weekly online quizzes via
Canvas on the readings each week. Required coursework also includes in-class
polls (which will count for attendance), in- and out-of-class Canvas discussion
posts, earning 2 points for participation in research studies, and three in-class
exams (see schedule for dates).
CANVAS: Students should keep up daily with their performance in the class,
pick up lecture materials, check for other course content and new assignments,
participate in quizzes and discussions and check grades and announcements
on Canvas https://utexas.instructure.com.
        e  n   c  e s                            a ny
A bs                e  r e sp o  n sibl e  f o
                                             g
                                              r
                                               an
             ts  a r                d u ri n                ous
 Studen tion missed s from previ
             a                       e
  inform . Lecture not from the
     bs e n c  e             a il ab le              t o  s e nd
   a
               re  n ot av             o t n  eed
   days     a
                          o u  d  o n
                                                 e )   to   us
        o fe  s s or. Y           o r t h e lik          n to the
    pr                       s  (                  l t i
            t o r s’ note             h a v e b ui           m a ke
     d o c                nt. W    e             eith    e r
                  a b se                 y s t o
      when tructure wa dless of
                    s                     ar
       course op work reg
                     r
        up or d tance.
                     s
        circum
                                                                                3


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
GRADING
      QUIZZES                       10%
      POLLS                         10%
      DISCUSSION POSTS              15%
      EXAMS                         63%
      RESEARCH                      2%
      FINAL GRADES are NOT rounded up or down. For example, a B- is
      inclusive of all scores 80.000 through 83.999%.
      A = 94-100              A- = 90-93               B+ = 87-89             B = 84-86
      B- = 80-83              C+ = 77-79               C = 74-76              C- = 70-73
      D+ = 67-69              D = 64-66                D- = 60-63
           Note: I do not respond the way you hope when you email me at the
           end of the semester about your need for an extra .2 point to get a
           certain grade. Cutoffs are listed so you can work from day 1 to ensure
           you are not on the edge by the end. J
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
      The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
      academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For
      more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-
      6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
      If your accommodations include testing time and control of
      distractions, please arrange to take your exams in the SSD facility.
      Remind me to send the exam there 24 hours before the scheduled
      exam, and ask SSD to email your completed, scanned exam back to
      me.
                                                                                       4


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
COURSEWORK
Weekly Online Quizzes - 10% of your grade
      The quizzes are available on Canvas, are timed for 10 minutes, focus only
      on the book, and consist of 8 questions each.
      Quizzes are due by class time on the days noted on the class schedule
      below.
      Quizzes disappear after the deadline and are not available for future
      studying, so look at results carefully.
      If a quiz is accidentally left up and you take it late, it will eventually be
      changed to a 0.
      It is suggested that you complete the readings for the week, take notes
      and then take the quiz.
      I will drop your one lowest quiz grade – this includes forgotten quizzes,
      sick days, travel, emergencies or technical failures. You have one week
      from the day a grade is posted to resolve disputes.
      NOTE: Sometimes Canvas crashes or freezes – I am not likely available
      the hours right before class.
In-class polls & Canvas Discussion Posts - 25% of your grade
                                 We will collect data using in-class Qualtrics
                                 polls to serve as periodic attendance. These are
                                 NOT announced ahead of time and record geo-
                                 location, so you have to be in-class to get credit
                                 for participating. I will drop two.
                                 I also require periodic discussion posts on
                                 Canvas. These will be responses to questions, ads
                                 I want you to critique, etc. I will drop one.
                                                                                    5


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
Examinations - 63% of your grade
      Three in-class exams are scheduled during the term. See the Canvas
      Calendar for the scheduled dates.
      Exams will cover materials presented in class and from assigned
      readings. Each in-class exam will multiple choice and cover the 1/3 of
      the class up to that day.
      A study guide will be provided about one week prior to each in-class
      exam.
      After the exams are graded and the grades are posted, students will be
      given ONE WEEK to look over the exam during office hours. Any concerns
      about the grading of each test must be resolved during this one-week
      period.
      The only make-up option is
                                             There is no way to know now if you
      a cumulative optional final
                                             will want to take the optional final,
      exam – this policy applies to
                                             so schedule travel at your own risk.
      anyone who has missed one of
      the in-class exams or for
      anyone who wants to try to improve an existing exam grade.
      The optional final grade will replace the lowest in-class examination only
      if it is higher. Otherwise, it will not be included in the calculation of the
      final grade. If anyone misses a regularly scheduled examination for any
      reason, then she/he must take the optional final exam. The exam is given
      during our scheduled final exam time.
                             The makeup exam will be the same length as
                               other exams and students will receive a study
                               guide. It will be Tuesday, May 21, 9:00 am-
                               12:00 noon.
                                                                                    6


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
Professionalism & Research Participation - 2% of your grade
      Professionalism
      Please use a respectful tone when addressing me or your peers. Remain
      attentive and engaged in lecture. Arrive at class on time, do not pack up
      early, and stay for the entire class period (or until dismissed). Please
      refrain from distracting behaviors like watching movies in class or surfing
      the web.
      Students are responsible
      for any information
      missed during an
      absence. Lecture notes
      from previous days are not
      available from the
      professor.
      Attitude and
      professionalism will be
      considered in determining
      final class professionalism
      grade.
      Research Participation
      As research is a big focus in this class, you are required to earn 2 credits
      through participation in research studies that I will make available to
      you throughout the semester. I do not honor research points from other
      departments or schools. Do not take a study more than once (e.g., to meet
      another class’ requirements) or the credit will be voided.
      You will not receive extra credit in this class for earning more than 2
      credits, although you may have additional research requirements in
      other classes.
                                                                                   7


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
   COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
         Taking care of your general well-being is an important
         step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
         racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting
         in your way, there is support!
         For immediate support:
               • Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center
                  (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515
                  |cmhc.utexas.edu
               • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
                  cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
               • CARE Counselor in the Moody College of
                  Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW CMA 4.134 |
                  512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is
                  unavailable)
               • Mental health & wellness articles -
                  cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
               • MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
               • Classes, workshops, & groups -
                  cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
                                                                          8


     PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
     Notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
     to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
     miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
     order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an
     opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
     timeframe.
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
     The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
     learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
     opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university
     is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
     trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
     The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating,
     plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic
     records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in
     the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes,
     but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
     information to receive a postponement or an extension on
     a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
     essentially the same written assignment for two courses
     without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting
     this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must
     adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the
     student's learning experience and readiness for the future
     demands of a work-career. Students who violate University
     rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
     penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
     and/or dismissal from the University. Please read more
     information
     at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                                     9


      PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
COURSE CALENDAR
Students are responsible for schedule changes announced in
class. Note quizzes are on readings for the corresponding week. In-
class assignments are not announced ahead of time. Quizzes are due
by class time on due date.
 Wk     Dates        Topic                     Reading     Quiz         Exam
 1      Jan. 22      Intro                     Ch. 1
 2      Jan. 29      Consumer & Well-          Ch. 2
                     being
 3      Feb. 5       Perception                Ch. 3       Q1-Ch 3*
 4      Feb. 12      Learning & Memory         Ch. 4       Q2-Ch 4
 5      Feb. 19      EXAM                                                 1
 6      Feb. 26      Motivation & Affect       Ch. 5       Q3-Ch 5
 7      Mar. 5       Self                      Ch. 6       Q4-Ch 6
 8      Mar. 12      Personality, lifestyles   Ch. 7       Q5-Ch 7
                     & values
 9      Spring break woo hoo!
 10     Mar. 26      Attitudes, Dec            Ch. 8, 9    Q6-Ch 8-9
                     Making
 11     April 2      EXAM                                                 2
 11     April 9      Buying, Groups &          Ch. 10, 11 Q7-Ch 10-11
                     Social Media
 12     April 16     Income & Class            Ch. 12      Q8-Ch 12
 13     April 23     Subcultures               Ch. 13      Q9-Ch 13
 14     April 30     Culture                   Ch. 14      Q10-Ch 14
 15     May 7        EXAM                                                 3
      *Quiz 1 will only be on chapter 3.
      Optional Final: Tuesday, May 21, 9:00 am-12:00 noon
                                                                     10
