                       Sociology of Criminal Justice (SOC F325L)
                                       Summer 2020
Welcome to Sociology of Criminal Justice. This course analyzes various components of
the U.S. criminal-legal system in the United States, including criminalization, policing,
bail, probation, parole, courts, and incarceration. Special attention is paid to how power
operates through punishment and (re)produces inequalities on the basis of gender,
sexuality, race and ethnicity, and social class.
Course Objectives
    • Develop frameworks for thinking sociologically about the criminal justice system.
    • Trace the history and function of the criminal-legal system in the United States,
        and understand how class, race, and gender shape its development and
        maintenance.
    • Evaluate consequences of mobilizing the criminal-legal system as a solution to
        social problems.
    • Explore resistance to inequalities and alternatives to past and present systems of
        punishment in the United States.
Note: Topics addressed in this class include rape and sexual violence, drug use, police
brutality, and mental health. These topics may be triggering for some people. If you
anticipate these topics might be an issue for you, please think carefully about enrolling
in this course and consider an alternate if need be. Please also be mindful that some of
us in this room may connect with certain topics in deeply personal ways, and engage
with respect and compassion.
Required Course Materials
    • Course readings are all posted on Canvas.
    • Access to Zoom
Assignments and Grading
Individual Participation    20 pts (20%)
Group Participation         30 pts (30%)
Quizzes                     50 pts (50%)
Weekly Reflections (Individual Participation)
Every week, students are expected to write one (double-spaced) page on their
reflections of the week’s readings. Reflections will begin for Week 2 readings and are
due on Monday June 8th at 5 pm. Week 3 reflections are due Monday June 15th. So on
and so forth. Your goal is to demonstrate that you have read and thought about the
readings including agreement, disagreement, and summary of key points. Each
reflection is worth 4 Points. Taking these seriously will help you check your own
                                              1


understanding of course content and keep pace to prepare for Quizzes. Late reflections
will not be accepted under any circumstances.
Team Activities (Group Participation)
We will assign you to a team with approximately 5 of your fellow classmates. Each week
you will have a group assignment, usually answering group discussion questions. You
will complete the assignments using whatever method you prefer (Zoom, Google Docs,
e-mailing back and forth, etc) but at the end of each week starting with Week 2 you will
submit a document completing the assignment and listing everyone who participated.
Participating in these activities on a weekly basis will give you 6 points per week or 30
points.
Quizzes
At the end of every week, you will be expected to take a quiz on course materials
covered during that week. You will have 6 quizzes but you are only required to complete
5. If you take all 6 your best 5 grades will count. Each quiz is worth 10 points. Quizzes
will be open book and note but work must be completed alone. Plagiarism or copying
other’s work will result in an automatic zero.
Grading Scale
Scores will not be rounded up or down (e.g., an A- includes all scores 90.000 through
92.999).
A 93-100 B+ 87-89            C+ 77-79 D+ 67-69         F (59 and below)
A- 90-92       B 83-86       C 73-76     D 63-66
               B- 80-82      C- 70-72 D- 60-62
Course Policies
Course Readings
Complete all reading assignments in advance of the upcoming week. This is essential
because the readings are the foundation of the course. I do not expect you to agree with
everything you read, but rather to develop the skills to think sociologically about the
criminal justice system. Some texts are more challenging and time-consuming than
others, so try to budget a comfortable amount of time for reading them. I suggest
reading actively: take notes, underline/highlight, and comment in the margins.
Email Policy
We strive to answer emails within 24 hours in the order they are received. This does not
include weekends. Emails received after 5pm on Fridays will receive a response the
following Monday. Look first in the syllabus for the answer, then ask a classmate, before
                                              2


contacting myself or your TA. If the answer to your email can be found on the syllabus,
you may not receive a response. Email is not an effective medium for discussing
grades or course concepts. Please come to virtual office hours.
Disability Statement
Students requesting accommodations from Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
should make arrangements with SSD and speak with me at the earliest possible point in
the semester so that your needs may be appropriately met.
Late Work
Work is not accepted late unless documentation of emergency is provided. You have
plenty of time and flexibility in completing your assignments.
Academic Integrity
In accordance with University of Texas at Austin policies on academic integrity, students
are expected to conduct themselves ethically and produce their own work in this class
without unauthorized aid or resources. If you are unsure whether an act constitutes
academic misconduct, it is your obligation to clarify the question before committing or
attempting to commit the act. All assignments submitted by you and labeled with your
name are presumed to be your original work. Zero credit will be given to assignments
violating these expectations. Additional information about plagiarism is available at
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/cwgs/_files/pdf-4/ai2012.pdf.
Campus Resources
Please get in touch with me as quickly as possible should you experience difficulty with
this course. We will do our best to assist you and/or direct you to campus resources that
can.
    • Sanger Learning Center: Academic support services to help you learn, like one-
        on-one tutoring, study skills specialists, peer coaches, and classes.
        (https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc)
    • Services for Students with Disabilities: Accommodations for documented
        disabilities (medical, learning, or psychological). If you need an accommodation,
        contact      SSD    (512-471-6259)      in   the     Student   Services  Building.
        (http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/)
    • Counselling and Mental Health Center: Health, counseling, and wellness
        services for students. Contact CMHC (512-471-3515) in Student Services.
        (http://cmhc.utexas.edu)
    • Information Technology Services: Computer support and information. Contact
        ITS        (512-475-9400)        in      the     Flawn       Academic     Center.
        (http://www.utexas.edu/its/helpdesk/)
Week 1— Introduction and Deviance
Becker, Howard. The Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance.
(Chapter 1)
                                               3


Rios, Victor. Punished: Policing the Lives of Black and Latino Boys. (Chapter
3)
Quiz on June 8th
No Reflections
No Group assignment
Week 2—History and Theory
Garland, David. "Foucault's Discipline and Punish: An exposition and critique."
Murakawa, Naomi. The first civil right: How Liberals Built Prison America.
Wacquant, Loïc. Punishing the poor: The neoliberal government of social insecurity.
Reflections due June 8th at 5 pm
Group Assignment due June 12th at 5 pm
Quiz on June 12th
Week 3—Policing
Stuart, Forrest. "Becoming “Copwise”: Policing, Culture, and the Collateral
Consequences of Street-Level Criminalization."
Steinmetz, Kevin F., Brian P. Schaefer, and Howard Henderson. "Wicked overseers:
American policing and colonialism."
Malone Gonzalez, Shannon. "Making It Home: An Intersectional Analysis of the
Police Talk."
Required Reading: https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-
nation/wp/2015/03/04/the-12-key-highlights-from-the-dojs-scathing-ferguson-report/
Suggested Reading: Full DOJ Ferguson Report
Whose Streets? Documentary Viewing
Reflections due June 15th at 5 pm
Group Assignment due June 19th at 5 pm
Quiz on June 19th
Week 4—Incarceration
Pettit, Becky and Bruce Western. 2004. “Mass Imprisonment and the Life Course:
Race and Class Inequality in U.S. Incarceration.”
                                             4


Coates, Ta-Nehisi. “The Black Family in the Age of Mass Incarceration” (Available at
The Atlantic website)
Davis, Angela. Are Prisons Obsolete? Chapters 1, 3, & 6
Watch 13th Documentary (Available on Netflix and Youtube)
Reflections due June 22th at 5 pm
Group Assignment due June 26th at 5 pm
Quiz on June 26th
Week 5— The Courthouse
Kohler-Hausmann, Issa. "Misdemeanor justice: Control without conviction."
“Opening the Courthouse Doors” from Crook County: Racism and Injustice in America’s
Largest Criminal Court, Nicole Gonzalez Van Cleve
Slavinski, Ilya. “Predatory Rehabilitation: Misdemeanor Courts as Neoliberal Institutions of
Control.”
Listen to Serial Podcast, Season 3, Episode 1. Available on serialpodcast.org.
Reflections due June 29th at 5 pm
Group Assignment due July 3th at 5 pm
Quiz on July 3rd
Week 6—Probation, Parole, and Bail
Miller, Reuben J. 2014. "Devolving the Carceral State:
Race, prisoner reentry, and the micro-politics of urban
poverty management."
Phelps, Michelle S. "The paradox of probation: Community
supervision in the age of mass incarceration." 2013
Page, Joshua. “Desperation and Service in the Bail
Industry.” 2017
Reflections due July 6th at 5 pm
Group Assignment due July 9th at 5 pm
Quiz on July 9th
                                               5


6