                                           SED F386 (74850)
             11-Foundations of Positive Behavior Support and Classroom Management
                       Course Syllabus — (Web-Based Course) Summer 2019
________________________________________________________________________________
Instructor:              Amanda Little, Ph.D., BCBA-D
Contact:                 amandalittle@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant: Cayenne Shpall
                         cshpall@gmail.com
                         Please email Cayenne with any questions. Put “PBS” in the subject line.
Office Hours
On Campus SZB
532/via Canvas:          By appointment
Class dates/
Meeting dates:           See calendar at end of syllabus
                                       Prerequisite Coursework
Graduate standing, 12 semester hours of upper-division coursework in special education and
consent of the instructor are required.
                                          Course Description
In this course you will become familiar with and critically examine the conceptual and applied
aspects of positive behavior supports as they are discussed in the current literature. Through
assigned readings, class discussions, conferences, and activities, this course will create opportunities
for you to learn about and engage in hands on practice of the processes behind planning and
delivering positive behavior supports in schools, homes, and community settings.
                                           Course Objectives
The student will gain:
• An understanding of the basic principles of human behavior and the application of those
  principles to develop, implement, and evaluate behavioral support programs based on the results
  of functional behavior assessment
• An understanding of teaching strategies to develop functionally equivalent replacement skills and
  to facilitate the generalization and maintenance of skills for students with and without disabilities
• Comprehension of strategies to prevent the development or worsening of challenging behavior and
  to improve aspects of the student’s environment related to challenging behavior
Additionally, students who are planning on obtaining their board certification in behavior analysis
may complete this course to fulfill necessary coursework hours as mandated by the Behavior
                                                                                            SED 386: PBS
                                                                                   Course Syllabus, Page 1


Analysis Certification Board. For more information about the BCBA and BCABA certification
process, see http://www.bacb.com
BACB Behavior Analyst Fourth Edition Task List/Course Objective
Concepts and Principles (20 hours), Identification of the Problem and Assessment (10 hours),
Measurement (5 hours), Implementation, Management, and Supervision (10 hours)
                               Course Materials--Required Reading
O’Neill, R. E., Albin, R. W., Storey, K., Horner, R. H., & Sprague, J. R. (2015). Functional
       assessment and program development for problem behavior: A practical handbook (3rd
       ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
       ISBN-10: 1285734823 | ISBN-13: 9781285734828
** Additional readings will be available on Canvas.
                                         Course Requirements
Your grade for the course will be based on the following:
(1) Class Meetings (Required to pass the course)
       Class Meetings: Students will attend the initial face-to-face meeting on June 6, 10am-
       12pm OR 5pm-7pm (SZB 324) AND a second face-to-face meeting on June 27 at 10am-
       12pm OR 5pm-7pm (SZB 324). Students who cannot attend physically are responsible for
       attending via Skype, Face Time, or other mode of acceptable videoconference from a fellow
       student. Full participation in at least one face-to-face class meeting each date is required to
       pass the course.
(2) Pre- and Post-Assessment (5 points each, 10 points, all or none)
       Students will complete a pre-assessment of their skill level at the beginning of the course
       and also following the course. This will not be graded. Students will earn all points (or
       none) for simply completing both the pre- and post-assessment and submitting all
       documents on time. The pre-assessment consists of a multiple-choice test, a vignette and
       corresponding competing behavior diagram, and a concept map. Answers to the multiple-
       choice test can be typed out rather than written on the page and scanned. The documents
       should be saved as one file and uploaded to the designated assignment on Canvas. The post-
       assessment will follow a similar format. Work should be done on your own without the
       use of outside materials for both the pre- and post-assessments.
(3) Module Assignments (40 points total)
       Each module has a number of assignments that must be completed before moving on to
       subsequent activities, assignments, quizzes, etc. within the modules. However, you may skip
       around to different modules if you would like to. These assignments are defined below.
       Conferences about the Readings: After reading the required readings for the module,
       students will develop critical points in the readings, experiences related to the readings,
       concerns with the topics, and issues in need of clarification based on questions posed. This
       should be done prior to the conference. Students will then meet on a synchronous
       “conference” AS SCHEDULED and discuss their points. Students will take turns as the
       “moderator” for one module. See specific instructions in the modules labeled “conferences”.
       Up to 20 points (5pts for each conference time;) will be given when the student has been a
       “moderator” once and participated in 3 other discussions.
                                                                                            SED 386: PBS
                                                                                   Course Syllabus, Page 2


        Guided Reading: Though there are several assigned readings, some readings have an
        assigned reading assigned (8 total). Guided readings are untimed (and called a “quiz”) in
        order to confirm that you completed the assigned reading. This is not a “quiz” of the
        students’ comprehension of the material necessarily. Students have unlimited untimed
        attempts to access the guided readings to get all of the points. One word, fill-in-the-blank
        questions make up the guided reading. A total of 8-guided readings are worth a total of 8
        points
        Video Presentations: Modules 4, 7, and 13 have a video presentation assignment related to
        the Module material. See specific instructions in the assignment. Each of these videos is
        worth 4 points each for a total of 12 points.
        Checkpoint: This assignment is pass/fail and will be done in the second face-to-face class.
(4) Behavior Intervention Plan (Parts I, II, III, and IV) (18 points) and Critique (2 points)
        Students will work together in pairs to develop a behavior intervention plan based on your
        given scenario. Students will work together to develop a plan. This can be done through
        correspondence through Canvas, Skype, Google docs, or other online format or face-to-face,
        if students prefer. A scoring rubric will be provided to students. Various parts are due at
        varying times throughout the semester and should be submitted through Canvas under the
        assignment link by only ONE person in the group. All students will be emailed feedback.
        Students can correct any missed items as the entire finalized plan will be submitted at the
        end of the semester. Each student will also write a critique of their experience of this
        assignment including how the assignment was completed, their group members’
        participation, etc. It will be submitted through a separate assignment link on Canvas.
 (5) Quizzes (5 points each; 30 points total)
        Students will be quizzed 6 times throughout the semester. The quizzes will be short, though
        comprehensive (i.e., may cover any of the readings, activities, lectures, etc. up to that class
        session) and made up of true/false and multiple-choice questions. The quizzes will be
        embedded within the modules. Students will have 15 minutes to complete each quiz for up
        to two attempts and only the highest of the two scores will count for points.
Grading Criteria
Pre- and Post-Assessments                              10 points
Module Assignments                                     40 points
Behavior Intervention Plan                             18 points
BIP Critique                                           2 points
Quizzes                                                30 points
Total                                                  100 points
A=90-100 points                  **Plus/Minus grading will not be used for this course.
B=80-89 points
C=70-79 points
D=60-69 points
F=59 points or below
Please let me know in advance if you have difficulty completing the assignments by the due dates.
It is advantageous with the short summer session to work ahead. Students will be allowed to
                                                                                            SED 386: PBS
                                                                                   Course Syllabus, Page 3


work ahead. The instructor will require assignments are submitted on time before the class session
corresponding to the due date, unless prior arrangements are made. Points may be deducted for
assignments submitted late.
                                        Course Website--Canvas
All course materials will be available on Canvas: http://canvas.utexas.edu/. All course materials are
in Microsoft Word, Windows Media Player, and pdf files. Students who do not have a personal
computer or who do not have this software on their personal computers may access the course
materials on Canvas from any computer in any UT computer lab. All UT computers have this
software.
                                      A Comment on Attendance
You should complete all relevant readings, assignments, and exams by the date listed on the
syllabus schedule. Though the format of this class is online and flexible (i.e., asynchronous), the
intensity of this course is great. You are expected to read and reflect upon the assigned readings and
lectures and ask questions if concepts are unclear. By reading others’ responses, your learning can
be further enhanced.
The University has a policy about holy days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence. Please contact the professor if this applies to you.
                                           Academic Policies
Incompletes
Incompletes will be given only in cases of verifiable emergency. In order to receive an incomplete,
the student must have completed at least 75% of the class work and the observations and have a
current passing grade. If you have a verifiable emergency at the end of the course, please contact the
instructor and we will decide what the best course of action is for you.
Academic Honesty
It is assumed that all work is done alone, by the student. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
scholastic dishonesty are strictly enforced. Plagiarism means using the words and/or ideas of an
author without citing the original source. Consulting and quoting authorities is an appropriate and
useful academic activity, but you must avoid plagiarism by using quotation marks for direct quotes
and by citing all sources. For further information please visit the Student Judicial Services Website:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs as well as the UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics) and an
explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism (Link to University Honor Code:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html)
                                                                                            SED 386: PBS
                                                                                   Course Syllabus, Page 4


                                     Other Important Information
Course Evaluations
It is the policy of The University of Texas that organized courses be evaluated using an appropriate
Course Instructor Survey arranged through the Measurement and Evaluation Center. A formal
evaluation will be sent via email in the last week of the semester. Student evaluations remain
anonymous. The instructor will not see the evaluations until grades have been officially reported.
As well, at any time throughout the course that you would like to comment or ask additional
questions related to the course or of the instructor, please feel free to do that so we can address
issues before the end of the semester.
University Safety Policy
Please read through the following safety recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from
the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
The link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Academic Accommodations
The University of Texas is committed to a quality education for all students. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students
with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
                                                                                              SED 386: PBS
                                                                                     Course Syllabus, Page 5


                                          CLASS SCHEDULE
DATE    TOPICS                                    ASSIGNMENTS
                                                  Face to Face Meeting at 10am or 5pm
June 6                                            SZB 324
                                                  Conference sign-up
                                                  BIP Group sign-up
        Introduction to the Course: Syllabus,     Module 1:
June 6  Pre-Assessment of Behavior                Syllabus
        Knowledge; Identification of the          Syllabus Quiz
        Problem                                   Pre-Assessments
                                                  Update Profile
        Introduction to PBS: History of Positive  Module 2:
June 10 Behavior Support; Identification of the   Readings on Canvas
        problem                                   Guided Reading
                                                  Module 3 Conferences
                                                  Module 1 and 2 Due at 10pm
                                                  Quiz Due
        Identification of the Problem: History of Module 3:
June 11 Positive Behavior Support,                Readings on Canvas
        Environmental Determinants of             Guided Reading
        Challenging Behavior                      Module 4 Conferences
June 12 Person-Centered Planning: Overview of     Module 4:
        the PBS Process; Identification of the    Readings on Canvas
        Problem                                   Guided Reading
                                                  Video presentation-interdisciplinary team
                                                  activity
                                                  Module 5 Conferences
        Functional Behavior Assessment            Module 5:
June 13                                           Readings on Canvas
                                                  Guided Reading
                                                  Module 6 Conferences
                                                  Module 3 and 4 Due at 10pm
                                                  Quiz Due
        Concepts and Principles                   Module 6:
June 17                                           Readings on Canvas
                                                  Guided Reading
                                                  Module 7 Conferences
                                                  Module 5 and 6 Due at 10pm
                                                  Quiz Due
        Measurement and Interobserver             Module 7:
June 18 Agreement                                 Readings on Canvas
                                                  Video Presentation-Data Collection
                                                  Module 8 Conferences
                                                                                           SED 386: PBS
                                                                                  Course Syllabus, Page 6


June 19 Functional Analysis                     Module 8:
                                                Readings on Canvas
                                                Guided Reading
                                                Module 9 Conferences
June 20 Intervention: Teaching Replacement      Module 9:
        Behaviors and Adaptive Skills Using     Readings on Canvas
        Applied Behavior Analysis Principles    Module 10 Conferences
                                                Module 7 and 8 Due at 10pm
                                                Quiz Due
                                                BIP Part I and II Due
        Long Term Supports: Measurement         Face to Face Meeting at 10am or 5pm
June 24 Procedures and Graphing; Long-term      Checkpoint: CBD Assignment in class
        Supports for Generalization and         Module 10
        Maintenance of Student Outcomes         Readings on Canvas
                                                Module 11 Conferences
                                                Module 9 and 10 Due at 10pm
                                                Quiz Due
        Implementation, Management, and         Module 11:
June 25 Supervision: Extending Behavior         Readings on Canvas
        Support to Home and Community           Guided Reading
        Settings/ Training Staff and Parents to Module 12 Conferences
        Implement PBS Using ABA Principles
        Evaluation of Behavior Intervention     Module 12:
June 26 Plans: Implementation, Management,      Readings on Canvas
        and Supervision                         Module 13 Conferences
June 27                                         Face to Face Meeting at 10am or 5pm
                                                SZB 324
        SWPBS: Implementation, Management       Module 13:
July 1  and Supervision: School-wide PBS,       Readings on Canvas
        Concepts and Principles at Secondary    Video Presentation-School Wide Expect.
        and Tertiary Levels                     Module 11 and 12 Due at 10pm
                                                Quiz Due
                                                BIP Part III Due
        Comprehensive PBS: Implementation,      Module 14:
July 2  Management, and Supervision:            Readings on Canvas
        Evaluating Behavior Intervention Plans  Guided Reading
        and PBS Initiatives                     Module 13 and 14 due (no quiz) at 10pm
July 8  Assessment of Behavior Knowledge-       Module 15:
        Concepts and Principles                 Module 15 due at 10 pm
        Course Wrap-up; Evaluations             BIP (ALL PARTS) Due
                                                BIP Critique Due
                                                Post-Assessments due
                                                                                      SED 386: PBS
                                                                             Course Syllabus, Page 7


                                                ~ June/July 2019~
   Sun            Mon                     Tue               Wed                      Thu            Fri         Sat
Course Starts: June 6 at 10am
Modules due by 10pm
Course Ends: July 11 at 9am
                                                                          6                     7           8
                                                                          10am: Course Starts
                                                                          Face-to-Face Meeting:
                                                                          10:00 am
                                                                          OR 5:00pm SZB 324
9       10                      11                   12                   13                    14          15
                                Module 4 Conferences Module 5 Conferences 10pm: Modules 3&4 Due
        10pm: Modules 1&2
         Due (Quiz)                                                       (Quiz)
                                                                          Module 6 Conferences
        Module 3 Conferences
16      17                      18                   19                   20                    21          22
        10pm: Modules 5&6 Module 8 Conferences Module 9 Conferences 10pm: Modules 7&8 Due
        Due (Quiz)                                                        (Quiz)
                                                                          BIP Part I and II Due
        Module 7 Conferences
                                                                          Module 10 Conferences
23      24                      25                   26                   27                    28          29
        10pm: Modules 9&10 Module 12 Conferences Module 13 Conferences    Face-to-Face Meeting:
        Due (Quiz)                                                        10:00am
        Module 11 Conferences                                             OR 5:00pm
30      1                       2                    3                    4                     5           6
        10pm: Modules           10pm: Modules
        11&12 Due (Quiz)        13&14 Due
        BIP Part III Due
7       8                       9                    10                   11
        10pm: Module 15                                                   9am: Course Ends
        due
        BIP Part I, II, III and
        IV (all) Due
        BIP Critique Due
                                                                                                            SED 386: PBS
                                                                                                   Course Syllabus, Page 8
