                                      E 350R l Victorian Oxford—Great Britain
Instructor: MacDuffie, Allen                                       Areas:
Unique #: 80795                                                    Flags:
Semester: Summer 2019, 2nd Session                                 Restrictions:
Office Hours: Friday 12-2 and by appointment                       Computer Instruction: No
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English or rhetoric and writing.
Description:
“We are all seekers still! Seekers often make mistakes, and I wish mine to redound to my own discredit only, and
not to touch Oxford. Beautiful city! so venerable, so lovely, so unravaged by the fierce intellectual life of our
century, so serene!
And yet, steeped in sentiment as she lies, spreading her gardens to the moonlight, and whispering from her towers
the last enchantments of the Middle Age, who will deny that Oxford, by her ineffable charm, keeps ever calling us
nearer to the true goal of all of us, to the ideal, to perfection,—to beauty, in a word, which is only truth seen from
another side?... Adorable dreamer, whose heart has been so romantic! who hast given thyself so prodigally, given
thyself to sides and to heroes not mine, only never to the Philistines! home of lost causes, and forsaken beliefs, and
unpopular names, and impossible loyalties!”
                                                                             – Matthew Arnold, Essays in Criticism (1865)
As the quotation from Matthew Arnold shows, Oxford in the nineteenth century was a place of contradictions – a
vibrant center for culture and artistic experimentation that always had one foot in the past; a place of inquiry and
learning that was characterized by its many exclusions and restrictions. In this course we will consider the university
and the city of Oxford through the lens of a number of significant nineteenth-century texts set in and around the
region and by artists with local ties. We will read (Oxford professor and librarian) Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in
Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass and visit some of the locales that inspired his famous flights of nonsense.
We will discuss the Pre-Raphaelite movement in poetry and visual arts and take a tour of the Ashmolean Museum
where many stunning paintings by members of this school can be found. We will also consider artists and Oxford
alumni who were affiliated with the group like John Ruskin and William Morris. The Pitt Rivers and Natural History
Museums will give us a sense of the period’s urge for collection and anthropological inquiry and thus provide a
unique window into the culture of the British Empire at its zenith. Thomas Hardy’s Jude the Obscure will give us a
darker picture of life in nineteenth-century Oxford from the point of view of the excluded, while Oscar Wilde will
show us the decadent side of end-of-the-century bohemian life.
Texts Include: Lewis Carroll, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking Glass; Thomas Hardy, Jude the
Obscure; William Morris, selected essays.
Requirements & Grading: Students are required to read, attend class, and actively participate in discussion. They
are also expected to keep a “reading journal” discussing their reactions to the various texts. This will be submitted
on the final day of class and is worth 75% of the final course grade. Plus/minus grades are assigned. Active
participation in class discussion = the remaining 25% of the final grade.


Schedule of Readings and Assignments
Week 1 July 15-18
Monday
Introduction: Oxford in the Nineteenth Century: Medievalism and Modernity
    • Oxford Walking Tour: Depart Wadham 2 pm
Tuesday
John Ruskin, “On the Nature of Gothic”
    • Field Trip: Stratford-Upon-Avon Measure for Measure
Wednesday
Lecture: Museums in the Nineteenth Century
    • Field Trip: Pitt Rivers and Natural History Museums
Thursday
Matthew Arnold, Preface to Essays in Criticism; “The Scholar Gypsy”
Week 2 July 22-25
Monday
Lewis Carroll, Alice in Wonderland
    • Field Trip: London V&A, Measure for Measure
Tuesday
Lewis Carroll, Alice in Wonderland
Wednesday
Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking Glass
    • Field Trip: Lewis Carroll Sites
Thursday
Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure I
Week 3 July 29-August 1
Monday
Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure II
Tuesday
Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure II (continued)
    • Field Trip: Blenheim: Romeo and Juliet
Wednesday
Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure III


Thursday
Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure IV
Friday
    • Field Trip: Dorset + Cornwall
Week 4 August 5-8
Monday
Thomas Hardy, Jude the Obscure V-VI
Tuesday
Poems: Tennyson, “Mariana”; Swinburne, “Hymn to Proserpine”; Dante Gabriel Rossetti, “The Blessed Damozel”
    •  Field Trip: Afternoon excursion to Ashmolean to see PRB murals & paintings
Wednesday
William Morris, “Useful Work Versus Useful Toil”
    • Field Trip: London Midsummer Night’s Dream
Thursday
William Morris, “The Defense of Guinevere”
    • Field Trip to Kelmscott Manor, Morris’s home
Week 5 August 12-15
Monday
Walter Pater, “Conclusion” to The History of the Renaissance
    • Field Trip: Stratford As You Like It
Tuesday
Oscar Wilde, “Les Ballons,” “Symphony in Yellow,” “The Harlot’s House”
Wednesday
Gerard Manley Hopkins, “The Windhover,” “Binsey Poplars,” “Duns Scotus’s Oxford,” “Peace: Oxford, 1879”
Thursday
Conclusion
Reading journal assignment due
Policies: Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone), or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.


Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work.
For additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project
in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
