                     G ENDER , R ACE ,    AND S EXUALITY IN S PORTS       M EDIA
                                       Radio-Television-Film 365
                               Cross-Listed with AMS 325 and WGS 324
                                              Autumn 2018
                 Class Meetings: Mondays and Wednesdays 3-4:30pm in BMC 3.206
                                     Screenings: Streaming Online
Professor: Dr. Jennifer McClearen, Dept. of Radio-Television-Film
Office hours: Mondays 12:45-1:25pm; Tuesdays 3:20-5pm; Wednesdays 4:20-5pm
Office: TBD
Email jennifer.mcclearen@utexas.edu
Twitter: @jmcclearen
Web: jennifermcclearen.com
Teaching Assistant: Latina Vidolova, M.A. Student in RTF
Office hours: By appointment
Email: latinav@utexas.edu
  Note: This syllabus is subject to revision! Please check Canvas and your email frequently for any
                               updates to readings, screenings, or class.
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course examines the cultural politics of sports with a focus on the representation of gender,
race, and sexuality across an array of digital and legacy sports media. We will draw upon critical,
cultural, and feminist theoretical lenses to consider sports as more than “just a game” or mere
escapist entertainment. Rather, sports media culture can be understood as a microcosm of broader


cultural, political, economic, and social forces where power struggles play out on the court, on the
field, in the ring, and across multiple screens. This course investigates how discourses of gender,
race, and sexuality shape who watches, who participates in, and who is represented in the multi-
billion-dollar enterprise of mediated sports. We will specifically scrutinize how discourses socially
construct the sporting body to reinforce social inequalities and how fissures of resistance continue
to erode these constructions.
R E Q UI R E D T E X T S
All readings for this course are available for download on the schedule hyperlinked on the Canvas
home page. There is no required textbook for the course.
S C R E E NI N G S
There are several required screenings to be completed on your own time during the course of the
semester. All of these are available on streaming sites for a fee (Netflix, Amazon, etc.) and in some
cases for free. You can choose to watch these films together to reduce costs if you wish. All
screenings for this course are listed on the schedule hyperlinked on the Canvas home page.
A S S I G N ME N T S
I: Reading and Screening Pop Quizzes. (15% of final grade).
            Throughout the course I will administer pop quizzes on the readings, screenings, and
            lectures to test your basic knowledge of course content. I will not necessarily warn you
            that a pop quiz is coming the next class day and you should be ready to take the quiz on
            any day. The quiz questions will consist of content since the last quiz. Your lowest quiz
            grade will be dropped.
II. Engagement Activities. (10% of final grade).
            Engagement activities are opportunities for you to think about course content more deeply
            and share your insights in writing or with your classmates. These may be short reflective
            writing exercises, pair work, or group activities. Your two lowest engagement activities
            scores will be dropped.
III: Weekly Discussion Posts. (25% of final grade).
            Each Friday you will submit a 300-word discussion post reflecting on some aspect of gender,
            race, and sexuality in sports media covered that week and respond to two other students’
            posts. Each post will cite at least one reading (or a screening that is academic or
            documentary/educational in nature) and one concept discussed in class. Your two lowest
            discussion post scores will be dropped. Please see additional assignment instructions on
            Canvas.
IV: Final Group Project Part 1: Photo Essay (20% of final grade)
            You will analyze found images of a gender in the media topic that interests you using
            concepts, theories, and discussions from this course. This activity will be done in groups of
            two. The photo essay that is essentially a first draft of your final video essay (see description
            below). You will select 8-10 images that help you argue a major thesis about some aspect of


          race in the media. You’ll also provide written descriptions of the images that includes an
          introduction, body, and conclusion. More information on this assignment is on the Canvas
          assignment page.
V: Final Group Project Part 2: Video Essay (30% of final grade)
          Your final project for this class will be a 5-minute video essay and will be completed with the
          same partner and on the same topic as your photo essay. A video essay is similar to a final
          paper in that you have to use analysis skills to make a claim about a particular media
          artifact. The assignment requires you to incorporate photos, video, and your own voices
          into the video essay. This assignment will be completed in pairs and I have reserved some
          class time for you to work with your partners. You do not need to have experience in video
          essays to do this assignment well and there will be dedicated class time for learning video
          editing/how to do video essays. The assignment is divided into three parts.
                      a)   5-minute video essay
                      b)   Feedback on Student Videos
                      c)   Self and Peer Evaluation of Group Assignment
          More information on this assignment is on the Canvas assignment page.
C L A S S P O L IC IE S
Syllabus Revisions: Changes to the course schedule and assignments may occur due to
unforeseen circumstances; please make sure you check Canvas frequently for updates.
Grading system: This class will be graded using the following letter grade system: A (94%+),
A-(90-93%), B+ (87-89%), B (84-86%), B- (80-83%), C+ (77-79%), C (74-76%), D (60-69%), and F
(less than 60%). Final grades that are .5 and above will be rounded up.
Access and Accommodation: Your experience in this class is important to me, and it is the
policy and practice of the University of Texas to create inclusive and accessible learning
environments consistent with federal and state law. Please inform me early in the first weeks of
the semester if you have a learning difference or other issue that could affect your performance
in this class. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Inclusion: Consideration for each other is very important in this classroom. This includes being
respectful of diversity of all kinds: race, ethnicity, sex and gender, sexual orientation,
ability/disability, among others. The diversities that each of us bring to the classroom allow us
to be exposed to other points of view. Please show consideration for each other, and be open
to listening to new perspectives and ideas. If you have any concerns about any of these issues
within this class, please let me know as soon as possible. Conversations will remain confidential
unless you request otherwise. Alternatively, students seeking support around these issues can
find more information and resources


Attendance: Each week we will have pair and group activities that will help you engage more
deeply with course content. Although attendance is not specifically required, active
engagement is a portion of your grade and a major factor in your learning. If you must be
absent, please check with a classmate to find out what you have missed.
Late assignments. For purposes of fairness for all students, you will be given a reasonable
amount of time to complete all assignments. Late assignments will be subject to a grade
penalty.
Digital Devices. Computers and tablets are allowed (and encouraged) in in our media
classroom, but please only use them for class related work! People with laptops should sit in
the middle or back of the room to avoid distracting other students. Cell phones should be on
silent and put away during class.
Mutual Respect: In lecture and discussion sections we will be talking about such loaded topics
as gender and sexism in the media industries and American society. We will also discuss how
other identities such as race, sexuality, class, ability, and other differences are portrayed in the
media. In this endeavor, one of my main responsibilities is to ensure that the classroom is a
space in which everyone can feel safe, speak up, and feel respected. I don’t expect that we’ll
always agree or that conversations will always be comfortable for everyone. In fact, I
encourage discussion and debate in class. What I do ask, is that you engage with me and with
each other with attentive listening and mutual respect. If discomfort ever gives way to fearing
for one’s emotional or physical safety, then please address these concerns with me
immediately.
Academic Honesty: Work turned in by a student should be solely her/his own work. Any time
an outside source is utilized in the writing of a student paper and not properly acknowledged,
this is a form of plagiarism. Plagiarism, cheating on an assignment or exam, or other academic
misconduct will not be tolerated and results in severe sanctions, which can include failing the
course or expulsion from the university. Please don’t put yourself in this position. For more
information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Writing Support: I encourage you to seek writing assistance from the Moody College Writing
Support Program or the University Writing Center. The Moody College Writing Support
Program, located at BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students
seeking to improve their writing in all fields of communication, including film and television
studies. Students may book half-hour appointments at
moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting or drop in during all stages of the writing process.
The University Writing Center, located in Learning Commons, PCL 2.330, also offers
individualized assistance to students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no
charge, and students may come in on a drop in or appointment basis. They are at 512-471-
6222 and uwc.utexas.edu.


Counseling Support: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything
else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
         ▪ Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th
             floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
         ▪ CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
         CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
         ▪ M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is
             unavailable)
         FREE Services at CMHC:
         ▪ Brief assessments and referral services
         ▪ Mental health & wellness articles -cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
         ▪ MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
         ▪ Classes, workshops, & groups -cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CLASS SCHEDULE
(This schedule will change. Please refer to Canvas frequently for revisions to the schedule)
                                     Unit 1: Setting Our Approach
Week 1: Introductions
    Wednesday, August 29: Introductions
         Read:
             ▪ The Course Syllabus
Week 2: Do Sports Matter?
    Monday, September 3: No Class – Labor Day
    Wednesday, September 5: Do Sports Matter?
         Watch:
             ▪ Zirin: Not Just a Game (Streaming for free at UT Libraries)
         Read:
             ▪ Ja'han Jones. (2017). Colin Kaepernick is to the NFL is What Black People are to
                 America.
    Friday, September 7: Discussion Post 1 Due
    Week 3: Foundations


  Monday, September 10: Cultural Studies of Sport
      Read:
          ▪ Ott and Mack: Cultural Analysis
          ▪ Andrews and Giardina: Sport without Guarantees: Towards a Cultural Studies
             that Matters
  Wednesday, September 12: Sports and Identity: Watching Sports Critically
      Read:
          ▪ Dines and Humez: Reading Media Texts Critically
          ▪ Henderson: Representation
  Friday, September 14: Discussion Post 2 Due
                            Unit 2: Sports, Race, and the Color Line
Week 4: The Color Line
  Monday, September 17: Jack Johnson and the Birth of the Black Athlete
      Read:
          ▪ Andrews, Mower, and Silk: Ghettocentrism and the Essentialized Black Male
             Athlete
          ▪ Dodai Stewart. (2016) Here's Why Simone Manuel's Historic Gold Metal is So
             Emotional for Black Americans. http://fusion.net/story/335984/simone-manuel-
             gold-medal-historic-racism/
  Wednesday, September 19: Linsanity
      Read:
          ▪ Park: Race, Hegemonic Masculinity, and the "Linpossible"
      Watch:
          ▪ Long (2013): Linsanity (Available for rent on Amazon or via YouTube
             https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=roPoU6DB5gY )
  Friday, September 21: Discussion Post 3 Due
Week 5: From Ali to La Hoya
  Monday, September 24: Muhammed Ali
      Read:
          ▪ Zirin: ‘I Just Want to Be Free:’ On the Radical Reverberations of Muhammed Ali
      Watch:
          ▪ Siegel (2014): The Trials of Muhammed Ali (Netflix)
  Wednesday, September 26: La Raza Representations
      Read:
          ▪ Garcia: Boxing, Masculinity, and Latinidad: Oscar De La Hoya, Fernando Vargas,
             and Raza Representations


  Friday, September 28: Discussion Post 4 Due
Week 6: O.J.
  Monday, October 1: OJ Made in America Part 1
      Watch:
         ▪ Edelman: OJ Made in America: Parts 1 and 2 (Available streaming on Amazon for
             a fee)
  Wednesday, October 3: OJ Made in America
      Watch:
         ▪ Edelman: OJ Made in America: Parts 3-5 (Available streaming on Amazon for a
             fee)
  Friday, October 5: Discussion Post 5 Due
Week 7: Whiteness
  Monday, October 8: Whiteness
      Read:
          ▪ Leonard: Playing While White: Privilege and Power on and Off the Field
  Wednesday, October 10: The PyeongChang 2018 Olympics
      Read:
         ▪ TBD
  Friday, October 12: Discussion Post 6 Due
                  Unit 3: Sports, Gender Non/Conformity, and Sexual Identity
Week 8: Gendered Ideals
  Monday, October 15: On Men and Idealized Masculinities
      Read:
          ▪ Anderson and Kian: Examining Media Contestation of Masculinity and Head
              Trauma in the NFL
  Wednesday, October 17: On Women and Idealized Femininities
      Read:
          ▪ Jennings: Beauty and Strength: Defining the Female Body in The Ultimate Fighter
              Season 20 Promotional Campaign
  Friday, October 19: Discussion Post 7 Due


Week 9: Fighting for Space
  Monday, October 22: Space Invaders
      Read:
          ▪ Adjepong and Carrington: Black Female Athletes as Space Invaders
  Wednesday, October 24: Girl Fight
      Read:
          ▪ Fojas: Sports of Spectatorship: Boxing Women of Color in Girlfight and Beyond
      Watch:
          ▪ Kusama: Girlfight (Available for rent online at Amazon)
  Friday, October 26: Discussion Post 8 Due
Week 10: Postfeminism and the G.O.A.T.
  Monday, October 29: Postfeminsm + Photo Essays
      Read:
          ▪ Toffoletti: Analyzing Media Representations of Sports Women: Expanding the
              Conceptual Boundaries Using a Postfeminist Sensibility
  Wednesday, October 31: Serena Williams + Group Work
      Read:
         ▪ Rankine: The Meaning of Serena Williams
  Friday, November 2: Photo Essay Due
Week 11: The Gender Binary
  Monday, November 5 Intersex Athletes
      Read:
          ▪ Sloop: “This is Not Natural”: Caster Semenya’s Gender Threats
  Wednesday, November 7: Transgender Athletes
      Read:
          ▪ McClearen: The Paradox of Fallon’s Fight: Interlocking Discourses of Sexism and
              Cissexism in Mixed-Martial Arts
      Watch:
          ▪ Thomas (2015): Game Face (Available on Netflix)
  Friday, November 9: Discussion Post 9 Due
Week 12: Queering Sports
  Monday, November 13: Gay Athletes
      Read:


           ▪   McCune: Michael Sam and the Queer Art of Failure
  Wednesday, November 15
      Read:
           ▪ Holmlund: When is a Lesbian Not a Lesbian: The Lesbian Continuum and the
               Mainstreem Femme Film
  Friday, November 19: Discussion Post 10 Due (last discussion post!)
                           Unit 4: Digital Sports and Sports Activism
Week 13: Digitizing Sports
  Monday, November 19: Digital Bodies and Esports
      Read:
           ▪ Lupton: Digital Bodies
      Wednesday, November 21 – No Class for Thanksgiving Break
Week 14: Activism
  Monday, November 26: #blacklivesmatter and Women’s Sports Activism
      ▪ Modiano: The NFL, Activism, and #blacklivesmatter
      ▪ Cooky: Women’s Sports Activism
  Wednesday, November 28: Video Essays + Group Work
      ▪ No reading
Week 15: Final Projects
      Monday, December 3: Group Work on Final Project
      Tuesday, December 4: Final Project Due 11:59pm on Canvas
      Wednesday, December 5: Screening Final Essays
Week 16: Final Projects
      Monday, December 10 – Screening Final Projects
               Due: Feedback on Video essays due by 11:59pm
               Due: Partner and Self Evaluations due by 11:59pm
