                           EE 362K – Intro to Automatic Control
                                             Summer 2019
Course: EE 362K; Unique Number 76110
Lecture: MWF 10a – 11:30a in EER 1.512
Final Examination: Saturday, August 17, 7p-10p
Instructor
Dr. Al Cuevas, Email: Use Canvas to e-mail
Office Hours/Location:
Graduate Teaching Assistant
Required Text
Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems, by Franklin, Powell, Emami-Naeini, 8e, Pearson, 2019.
(Electronic version).
CHAPTERS PLANNED TO BE COVERED
Chapter 1 Overview of Feedback Control              Chapter 5  Root-Locus Design Method
Chapter 2 Dynamic Models                            Chapter 6  Frequency-Response Design Method
Chapter 3 Dynamic Response                          Chapter 7  State-Space Design
Chapter 4 Analysis of Feedback                      Chapter 8  Digital Control
Software
You will be required to use MATLAB in this course.
Course Website
Use of the cloud-hosted learning management system, Canvas, will be used throughout this course. In
addition, Piazza will be used for Q/A and student discussions.
Course Objectives:
The concept of feedback is central in the study of systems and control. Feedback loops are common in
nature, even in the most basic biological phenomena from the macroscopic (i.e. population dynamics,
climate, etc.) to microscopic (i.e. regulation of glucose levels, temperature regulation, etc.) scales. In
engineering, feedback plays a critical role in mechanical, electronic, chemical and digital systems. More
generally, systems theory and feedback are central to understanding, analyzing, and designing
systems with interconnected components. It is important to understand not only if a system can be
controlled, but in what frequency range and under what conditions.
The purpose of this class will be to gain a basic intuition for and understanding of linear feedback
systems and develop the mathematical tools to understand the basics of design and analysis of single-
input single-output (SISO) feedback control systems.
Catalog Description
Analysis of linear automatic control systems in time and frequency domains; stability analysis; state
variable analysis of continuous-time and discrete-time systems; root locus; Nyquist diagrams; Bode
plots; sensitivity; lead and lag compensation.
                                                                                                 Page 1 of 5


Prerequisites
Electrical Engineering 313 and Mathematics 340L with a grade of at least C- in each.
Grading Policy
In-class assignments/attendance                  5%             Grade Cutoffs
Homework                                        20%             A: 94%      A-: 90%
Exam 1                                          20%             B+: 87% B: 84%         B-: 80%
Exam 2                                          25%             C+: 77%     C: 74%     C-: 70%
Final Exam                                      30%             D+: 67%     D: 64%     D-: 60%
                                                                F: <60%
The numerical course grade is computed by weighting the raw scores as indicated above. A final
course grade may be adjusted on a curve rather than an absolute scale. Final grades will be assigned
using plus and minus increments. A course/instructor survey will be conducted at the end of the
semester via the standard MEC form for the Instructor and the Teaching Assistant.
Homework
There will be about ten homework assignments during the semester. Homework is completed and
submitted through Canvas. No late submission will be graded. Homework will be made available on
Canvas, generally, a week or two before the due date. Announcements will be made in class and on
Canvas regarding changes. Each homework assignment will be equally weighted.
In-class assignments/attendance
You are expected to attend every lecture session. In-class assignments are used to help you prepare
for the upcoming homework assignments and to verify your attend. There are no make-up opportunities
for these in-class assignments.
Examinations
There will be two mid-term examinations and a final examination. The examinations will test your
knowledge of the material presented during lecture, your homework assignments, the book's activities,
and your lab assignments. In addition, I will test your ability to apply the material presented. The two
mid-term examinations will be returned after being graded. The Final Examination will not be returned
but, if needed, you may review it with me the following semester. It will be available until the end of
September 2019. The mid-term dates are scheduled for 7/1 and 7/29 (subject to change) and the Final
Examination is scheduled for Saturday, August 17, 7p-10p.
The examinations will consist of a number of questions to be answered in a given time period. There
are no make-up examinations. Excused absence from an examination must be approved in advance.
Absence is excused only in extreme circumstances (serious illness, death in the immediate family,
etc.). Requests for excused absences should be made in writing and must be supported by appropriate
documentation. Unexcused absence from an examination will result in a grade of zero for that
examination.
There is no re-grading of examinations, unless you feel that there is an error. In this case, you should
submit a written request. Verbal requests will not be considered. An examination grade will not be
changed one week after the exam has been returned.
                                                                                                 Page 2 of 5


Proposed Schedule
#     Date  Lecture Topic                                             Reading    In / Out
                                                                      Assignment
1     6/7   Overview                                                  1.1-1.5
2     6/10  Dynamics of Mechanical Systems                            2.1
3     612/  Models of Electric Circuits                               2.2
4     6/14  Models of Electromechanical Systems                       2.3
5     6/17  Review of Laplace Transforms                              3.1
6     6/19  System Modeling Diagrams                                  3.2
7     6/21  Effect of Pole Locations                                  3.3
8     6/24  Time-Domain Specifications                                3.4
9     6/26  Effects of Zeros and Additional Poles                     3.5
10    6/28  Stability                                                 3.6
      7/1   Exam 1 – Chapters 1-3
11    7/3   Control Equations/Control of Steady-state Error           4.1-4.2
12    7/5   Three-Term Controller: PID Control                        4.3
13    7/8   Feedforward Control by Plant Model Inversion              4.4
14    7/10  Root Locus                                                5.1-5.2
15    7/15  Selected Illustrative Root Loci                           5.3
16    7/17  Dynamic Compensation and Examples                         5.4-5.6
17    7/19  Frequency Response/Neutral Stability                      6.1-6.2
18    7/22  Nyquist Stability Criterion/Stability Margins             6.3-6.4
19    7/24  Bode's Gain-Phase Relationships/Closed-Loop               6.5-6.6
            Frequency Response
20    7/26  Compensation                                              6.7
      7/29  Exam 2 – Chapters 4-6
21    7/31  State-Space Overview/System Descriptions                  7.1-7.2
22    8/2   Block Diagrams ans State-Space/Analysis of State Eqns     7.3-7.4
23    8/5   Control Law Design/Selection of Pole Locations            7.5-7.6
24    8/7   Estimator Design/Compensator Design                       7.7-7.8
25    8/9   Intro of the Reference Input w/Estimator/Integral Control 7.9-7.10
            and Robust Tracking
26    8/12  Digitization/Dynamic Analysis of Discrete Systems         8.1-8.2
27    8/14  Design using Discrete Equivs/Hardware Characteristics     8.3-8.4
28    8/16  Other Digital Control Issues and Topics                   8.5-8.7
      8/17  Final Exam (7p – 10p) – Chapters 1-8
                                                                                    Page 3 of 5


                                           UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Pending Absence
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holiday. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious holiday, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student
of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that
are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you
will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which
can be found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask
for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
                                                                                                  Page 4 of 5


The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of
Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
         week of class.
     •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
         enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
         found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                   Page 5 of 5
