               PUBLIC COPY – SEE CANVAS COURSE SITE FOR FULL SYLLABUS
ANS 372-10/CL 323 Decoding Classical Chinese Poetry                  Dr. Chiu-Mi Lai (Léi 雷)
Fall 2019
Mezes 2.124
MWF 1-2 pm
Office Hours:*
REQUIRED TEXTS:
Maxwell Hearn, How to Read Chinese Paintings (The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2008)
John Minford and Joseph S.M. Lau, eds. Classical Chinese Literature – An Anthology of Translations,
          Volume I: From Antiquity to the Tang Dynasty (Columbia, 2002)
OPTIONAL:
David Hawkes, A Little Primer of Tu Fu (Rpt. Renditions, 1995; New York Review Books, 2016)
Other Required and Supplementary Reading and Translations:
Posted on the Canvas Course Site
Course Description:                Fall 2019 Focus: Landscape Poetry and Painting
          This course will provide an introduction to the classical Chinese poetic tradition and is open to all
students. No previous background in Chinese language, culture or literature is required. Readings in
English translation will encompass a selective sampling of poetry from as early as the seventh century
B.C.E. through the 9th century. Lectures and discussions will focus on the literary, cultural, historical,
social, political, philosophical, and religious background against which these representative works in
poetry arose. While background reading will be assigned, the focus of lectures and discussion will be on
the primary works of poetry, and on the relationship of poetry and painting in the Chinese tradition.
          Course emphasis will be given to poetry of the medieval period of the Tang dynasty (618-907)
which is commonly referred to as the “golden age” of Chinese poetry. Intensive focus and close readings
will be given to poetry by four of pre-modern China’s greatest and most beloved poets, Tao Yuanming 陶
淵明 (or Tao Qian 陶潛) (365-427), Wang Wei 王維 (701-761), Li Bo李白 (or Li Bai) (701-762), and
Du Fu 杜甫 (712-770).
          The poet’s response to the human condition will form the framework within which we will
consider our role as readers and our interpretation of the poetic treatment of the human response.
Lectures, readings and class discussion will examine these ideas and concepts in the context of landscape,
known as “mountains and water” (shan shui 山水) in Chinese literary memory. Through this methodical
process, we will begin to decode the literary language of classical Chinese poetry and poetic craft. It is
through this process of deciphering what can be puzzling or mysterious that the reader may emerge with
yet another response to the human condition. Herein lies the allure of classical Chinese poetry – we can
still find our way to the Chinese poet’s world today.
Global Cultures: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
                                                                                                              1


   Required Class Events:
   Friday 9/13* (8:00 pm) – Mid-Autumn Moon Festival -- Viewing of the Full Harvest Moon
      *in lieu of class 12/9
   6:30-8:00 p.m. Meet in Meyerson WCH 4.118 for optional dinner and landscape painting viewing
   Wednesday 11/13 (class time) – Class held at The Blanton Museum Print Room
   Monday 11/25 (class time) – Calligraphy Demonstration and Practice, class in WCH 4.118
      Course Grade based on:
           There is a class attendance policy
           There is no final exam in this course.
I.    Discussion (20%)
      20% Class and online discussion, participation and “preparedness”
               In-class Informal Writing for discussion
II. Writing and Oral Presentation (75%)
      50% Reading and Discussion Questions / Expanded Written Responses (DQ)
      20% Critical Writing (5% Response Essay; 15% Final Research Inquiry Project)
.     5%       Oral Presentation and follow-up Roundtable discussant work (on selected poet)
III. Creative Writing: imitation and matching poems (5%)
      5%       Creative Writing: imitation and matching poems (evaluated CR/NC)
      Additional Course Expectations:
           This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
           No late assignments are accepted. There is no makeup of missed discussion or presentations.
               Your final course grade will be based on work submitted.
           There is no written final exam for this course.
           Academic honesty is imperative. Acts of academic dishonesty will result in a failing grade.
           Laptop/Tablet Use Policy – Laptops/Tablets may ONLY be used for your designated
               presentation day and for designated final project session days
           Any Other Electronic Devices Use Policy – All devices must be turned off during class. Any
               use of these devices, including texting, social media, internet use etc. will lead to dismissal from
               class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat offenders will result in a filing of a
               report of academic problems.
           There is a class attendance policy for this course.
               Quality class discussion is vital for success in this course and thus attendance is incumbent for
      such participation. As well, class attendance is vital for lectures (on background on cultural, historical,
      and linguistic contexts) and for discussion of language learning and translation concepts, all of which
      cannot be replaced by reading outlines or notes online. There is no make-up for in-class writing and oral
      presentation/lead discussant work.
          Religious Holidays – Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you
          miss an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will
          be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the
          policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen
          days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
                                                                                                                        2


ATTENDANCE POLICY – More than 5 unexcused absences, your final Class Discussion/Participation
grade will result in a grade of 0.
                     It is your responsibility to inform me of extenuating circumstances.
                          More than 10 absences will result in a failing grade for the course.
             Class attendance.
              Attendance is vital for success in this course and I value your contribution to class discussion. As
     well, lectures will be vital for background on historical context and schools of thought, and flesh out ideas
     and concepts for discussion, all of which cannot be replaced by reading on your own.
             IMPORTANT DATES:
              Moon Viewing:             9/13
              Essays:                   9/20, 12/9
              DQs:                      9/27, 10/18, 11/8, 11/22
              Oral Presentations/Roundtable Forums: 10/11, 10/25, 11/1
               By Week 6 Friday 10/4: Sign up for a Roundtable Discussion and Presentation Group
                  on Canvas: go to Canvas/People, select ROUNDTABLE GROUPS, self sign-up opens
                  9/20 (Unassigned students will be randomly assigned to a group by Canvas)
                                                                                                                 3
