Eddie Chambers – draft syllabus
Visualizing the Black Female (seminar, ARH 394, AFR 387D, Unique Number: 20064)
Spring Semester 2019
Wednesday 9:00 to 12:00
ART 3.432
Office 3.324 Art and Art History Building
Office ‘phone 512 471 7554
eddiechambers@austin.utexas.edu
Office hours: Wednesday 1:00-3:00pm
Since slavery, the Black (African/African origin) female has found herself caricatured,
stereotyped and depicted in a variety of often-problematic forms. The seminar will begin
with considerations such as the late 18th/early 19th century persona of Sarah/Sara
Baartman, the most well-known of at least two women from southern Africa who, on
account of their supposedly enlarged buttocks, were exhibited as freak show attractions in
19th-century Europe under the name Hottentot Venus, (“Hottentot” being at the time a
dominant (though offensive) generic name for indigenous people of southern Africa). The
framing of Baartman as deformed, grotesque, over-sexualized, primitive, yet appealing to
European voyeurs seemed to set in place a number of the terms of reference within which
dominant images of Black women would be located thereafter. This seminar will discuss
the ways in which Black women have been visualized by the dominant culture, with
regards to movements such as Orientalism, and with reference to images of Black women
in the media, film and television. The class will look closely at the work of Black women
artists themselves and the ways in which these artists have pushed back against dominant
framings of Black women, within their work. Self-portraiture has been a recurring means
by which certain Black women artists have sought to increase selfhood and artistic
agency, and push back against problematic framings of Black women. As such, self-
portraiture will figure significantly in this seminar. The seminar will look at artists as
varied as Elizabeth Catlett, Faith Ringgold, Renée Cox, and Mickalene Thomas. It will
use texts such as Muse: Mickalene Thomas; Kimberly Wallace-Sanders (ed) Skin Deep,
Spirit Strong: The Black Female Body in American Culture; Janell Hobson Venus in the
Dark: Blackness and Beauty in Popular Culture; Deborah Willis and Carla Williams, The
Black Female Body: A Photographic History.
Note This seminar looks on occasion at some difficult, challenging and deeply
problematic images. Please be mindful of this.
Wednesday January 22
Introduction, Visualizing the Black Female
Texts: Lisa E. Farrington, ‘Reinventing Herself: The Black Female Nude’ Woman's Art
Journal, Vol. 24, No. 2 (Autumn, 2003 - Winter, 2004), pp. 15-23
Charmaine Nelson, ‘Coloured Nude: Fetishization, Disguise, Dichotomy’, RACAR: revue
d'art canadienne / Canadian Art Review, Vol. 22, No. 1/2 (1995), pp.97-107


Wednesday January 29
Hottentot Venus: legacy and pushback
Texts: tbd
Wednesday February 5
Aunt Jemima
Texts: Diane Roberts, “Jemima and Jezebel in the New South: Twentieth-century women
on race”, The Myth of Aunt Jemima: Representations of Race and Region, Routledge,
Taylor & Francis, 1994: 153-192
M.M. Manning, ‘Cracking Jokes in the Confederate Supermarket’, Slave in a Box: The
Strange Career of Aunt Jemima, University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville and
London, 1998: 1-17
M.M. Manning, ‘Someone’s in the Kitchen: Mammies, Mothers, and Others’, Slave in a
Box: The Strange Career of Aunt Jemima, University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville
and London, 1998: 18-59
Wednesday February 12 NO CLASS – SPRING BREAK
Wednesday February 19
Sexual Caricatures and Black Women Pushing Back
Texts: Mireille Miller-Young, ‘Introduction’, A Taste for Brown Sugar: Black Women in
Pornography, Duke University Press, Durham and London, 2014: 2-22
Mireille Miller-Young, ‘Sepia Sex Scenes: Spectacles of Difference in Race Porn’, A
Taste for Brown Sugar: Black Women in Pornography, Duke University Press, Durham
and London, 2014: 2-22
Mireille Miller-Young, ‘Sexy Soul Sisters’, A Taste for Brown Sugar: Black Women in
Pornography, Duke University Press, Durham and London, 2014 pages tbc
Wednesday February 26
Black Women at the Wrong End of Art History
Text: Denise Murrell Posing Modernity: The Black Model from Manet and Matisse to
Today, Exh. cat. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2018. 224 pp.; 177 color ills.
Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Art Gallery, Columbia University, New York, October 24,
2018–February 10, 2019; Musée d’Orsay, Paris, March 25–July 14, 2019
Wednesday March 4
Black Women Still at the Wrong End of Art History
Text: Darcy Grimaldo Grigsby, ‘Still Thinking about Olympia's Maid’
The Art Bulletin, 02 October 2015, Vol.97(4), pp.430-451


& text tbd
Wednesday March 11
Mickalene Thomas, Renee Cox: turning the tables on art history
Text: Mickalene Thomas, Muse: Mickalene Thomas Photographs, Exh. cat. New
York: Aperture, 2015. 156 pp.; 85 ills.
Aperture Foundation, New York, January 28–March 17, 2016
& text tbd
WEDNESDAY MARCH 18 – NO CLASS, SPRING BREAK,
Wednesday March 25
Black Women actors push back against Hollywood, co-opted by Hollywood
Text: Mia Mask, Divas on Screen: Black Women in American Film, University of Illinois
Press, 2009. Chapters tbd
Wednesday April 1
The Enigma of the Wet Nurse: Slavery, Colonialism, and the Visualizing of the Black
Female
Text: Kimberley Cleveland, Black Women Slaves Who Nourished A Nation: Artistic
Renderings of Wet Nurses in Brazil, Cambria Studies in Slavery book series, 2019
Wednesday April 8
Black British Women artists: against the odds
Claudette Johnson, Sonia Boyce
Texts: Emma Ridgway Claudette Johnson, Exh. cat. Oxford: Modern Art Oxford (2019)
& text tbd
Wednesday April 15
Reclaiming Images of Black Women
Heidi R. Lewis, ‘Who will Sing a Black Girl’s Song?: A Case for Black Feminist and
Womanist Exhibit Engagement’, Beyond Mammy, Jezebel & Sapphire: Reclaiming
Images of Black Women – Works from the Collection of Jordan D. Schnitzer and his
Family Foundation, published by Jordan Schnitzer Family Foundation, 2018: -15
Roland W. Mitchell, ‘Beyond Mammy, Jezebel & Sapphire: Reclaiming Images of Black
Women’ – Beyond Mammy, Jezebel & Sapphire: Reclaiming Images of Black Women
Works from the Collection of Jordan D. Schnitzer and his Family Foundation, published
by Jordan Schnitzer Family Foundation, 2018: 17-19


Wednesday April 22
Heavy Lifting: Elizabeth Catlett, Faith Ringgold, and other African American artists of
the 20th century.
Texts: tbd
Wednesday April 29
Archibald Motley, Visualizing Black Women and issues of Passing
Texts: Allyson Hobbs, A Chosen Exile: A History of Racial Passing in American Life,
Harvard University Press, 2014 chapters tbd
Wednesday May 6
Conclusion: Black women artists creating their own image
Text: Lisa Farrington, Creating Their Own Image: The History of African-American
Women Artists, Oxford University Press, 2004, chapters tbd
Wednesday May 13, 10.00am 5000-word paper due
Seminar textbook (optional): Barbara Thompson (editor) Black Womanhood: Images,
Icons, and Ideologies of the African Body, Hood Museum of Art / University of
Washington Press, 2008
Recommended reading:
Beyond Mammy, Jezebel & Sapphire: Reclaiming Images of Black Women – Works from
the Collection of Jordan D. Schnitzer and his Family Foundation, contributions by Heidi
R. Lewis; Roland Mitchell; Takiyah Nur Amin; Velva Boles; Claire Garcia; Jean
Gumpper; Kate Leonard; Venetria K. Patton; Sha'Condria Sibley; Karen Riley Simmons;
Claudine Taaffe. Published by Jordan Schnitzer Family Foundation, 2018
Deborah Willis and Carla Williams, The Black Female Body: A Photographic History,
Temple University Press, 2002
Michael Bennett and Vanessa D. Dickerson (editors) Recovering the Black Female Body:
Self-Representations by African American Women
Particulars
Students are required to produce response papers, relating to the previous week’s classes.
The first response paper is due Wednesday January 29. The reaction papers should be a
word length of no fewer than 750 words. Response papers will comprise 30% of the final
grade. A 5000-word paper, relating to some aspect of the seminar, must be submitted no
later than 10.00am on Wednesday May 13, 10.00am
Unless absences have been notified in advance, students failing to sign the class
attendance sheet will be considered absent. Class attendance and participation will
count towards final grade.


Accommodation.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Students with disabilities may
request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ For more information, contact the Office of
the Dean of Students.
Academic Integrity
University Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: “Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Please see UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics)
and an explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism (Link to University Honor
Code: https://www.utexas.edu/about/mission-and-values). For further
information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
Class Attendance
Students are required to attend all classes. Please inform instructor ahead of time if you
will miss any class. Full attendance is 20 points. For every unexcused absence from class,
a student will drop 5 points. University policy on holy days states, “A student who misses
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence.”
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
Assignments and Grading
Attendance 20 points
Class participation 10 points
Response papers 30 points
Research Paper 40 points
Total…………………………………..100 points
A……………………………………….90-100 points
B……………………………………… 80-89 points.
C…………………………………….... 70-79 points.
D…………………………………… …60-69 points.
E……………………………………….50-59 points.
F………………………………………. Below 50 points.


Seminar readings will be made available on Canvas. Likewise, seminar announcements
will be posted on Canvas - http://canvas.utexas.edu/
No laptop use in class
No cell phone use/texting in class
No note-taking on cell phones
