                                                                                 	  
                                                                                 	  
                                                                                 	  
                                                DEPARTMENT	  OF	  ART	  AND	  ART	  HISTORY	  
                                                      UNIVERSITY	  OF	  TEXAS	  AT	  AUSTIN	  
                                                                                 	  
                             ARH	  339P/AMS	  325:	  PAINTING	  IN	  THE	  UNITED	  STATES	  1860-­‐1913	  
                                                                      SPRING	  2019	  
                                                                                 	  
Professor	  Susan	  Rather	                  	                                                                               Office:	  DFA	  2.116	  
rather@austin.utexas.edu	                                                               Office	  Hours:	  	  T	  1:45-­‐2:45,	  Th	  2:30-­‐3:30	  
prefer	  mail	  via	  Canvas;	  ARH	  339P	  in	  subject	  line	  	                                                         	  	  &	  by	  appt.	  
	                                                                                                                                                             	  	  	  
Class	  times:	  TTh	  3:30-­‐4:45	  (DFA	  2.204)	  
                                                                                 	  
                                    The	  syllabus	  is	  your	  contract	  with	  me.	  	  Read	  it	  carefully.	  
	  
COURSE	  DESCRIPTION	  
	  
This	  course	  offers	  a	  selective	  examination	  of	  American	  painting	  during	  the	  half	  century	  from	  the	  
Civil	  War	  to	  the	  infamous	  New	  York	  exhibition	  of	  modern	  art	  known	  as	  the	  Armory	  Show.	  During	  
that	  period,	  the	  United	  States	  was	  transformed	  from	  an	  agrarian	  nation	  to	  the	  world's	  leading	  
industrial	  power.	  Against	  this	  background,	  we	  will	  examine	  such	  issues	  as	  the	  demand	  of	  America's	  	  
moneyed	  elite	  for	  trappings	  of	  European	  high	  culture	  and	  its	  effect	  on	  native	  artists,	  the	  increasing	  
pressure	  on	  artists	  to	  gain	  European	  training	  and	  experience,	  the	  dialogue	  between	  commerce	  and	  
aestheticism,	  the	  professional	  challenges	  faced	  by	  women	  artists,	  and	  the	  valorization	  of	  
masculinity	  in	  what	  came	  to	  be	  seen	  as	  a	  distinctly	  American	  aesthetic.	  Particular	  emphasis	  will	  be	  
given	  to	  Winslow	  Homer,	  Thomas	  Eakins,	  John	  Singer	  Sargent,	  James	  McNeill	  Whistler,	  and	  Mary	  
Cassatt.	  
	  
A	  successful	  class	  depends	  on	  your	  active	  participation	  as	  we	  engage	  in	  collective	  discussion	  of	  
paintings	  and	  assigned	  readings.	  	  At	  times,	  you’ll	  work	  in	  small	  groups	  to	  assess	  the	  merits	  of	  
particular	  scholarly	  and	  interpretive	  perspectives	  (including	  your	  own),	  which	  you	  will	  then	  
collectively	  present,	  engaging	  in	  reasoned	  debate	  with	  members	  of	  other	  groups.	  My	  aim	  is	  to	  
help	  you	  to	  expand	  your	  capacity	  to	  analyze	  both	  visual	  and	  written	  materials,	  skills	  of	  much	  wider	  
application	  than	  knowing	  artists’	  names,	  dates,	  and	  other	  circumscribed	  facts.	  Rather	  than	  rushing	  
through	  material	  to	  achieve	  any	  illusion	  of	  survey	  comprehensiveness,	  we’ll	  take	  our	  time	  in	  class;	  
the	  goal	  is	  not	  mere	  breadth	  but	  depth	  and	  quality	  of	  knowledge.	  
	  
VISUAL	  AND	  PERFORMING	  ARTS	  CREDIT	  (VAPA)	  
	  
This	  course	  fulfills	  the	  visual	  and	  performing	  arts	  component	  of	  the	  university	  core	  curriculum,	  
addressing	  four	  core	  objectives	  established	  by	  the	  Texas	  Higher	  Education	  Coordinating	  Board:	  
communication	  skills,	  critical	  thinking	  skills,	  teamwork,	  and	  social	  responsibility.	  
	  
	  
	  


CANVAS	  SET	  UP	  
	  
              Announcements	  –	  check	  regularly	  
              Home/Syllabus	  –	  syllabus	  &	  class	  schedule	  READ!	  +	  course	  summary	  (due	  dates	  in	  order)	  
              Assignments	  –	  prompts	  for	  all	  graded	  work	  
              Modules	  –	  class	  schedule,	  various	  writing	  guidelines	  
              People	  –	  all	  class	  members	  &	  teams	  once	  constituted	  
              Files	  –	  all	  readings	  (those	  in	  specific	  assignments	  are	  linked	  in	  those	  rubrics)	  
	  
READINGS	  
	  
Much	  has	  been	  written	  about	  American	  art	  of	  the	  period,	  but	  no	  single	  text	  adequately	  covers	  the	  
range	  of	  material	  we’ll	  engage	  this	  semester	  or	  offers	  a	  sufficiently	  rich	  basis	  for	  discussion.	  
Therefore,	  readings	  comprise	  primary	  sources	  and	  essays	  from	  periodicals,	  books,	  and	  exhibition	  
catalogues—available	  online	  through	  Canvas,	  UTCat,	  free	  Google	  eBooks,	  or	  on	  reserve	  in	  FAL.	  
	  
I	  strongly	  recommend	  acquisition	  of	  Sylvan	  Barnet's	  A	  Short	  Guide	  to	  Writing	  About	  Art,	  useful	  
beyond	  its	  nominal	  subject.	  The	  book	  has	  been	  ordered	  for	  this	  class	  by	  the	  Co-­‐op,	  but	  you	  may	  
use	  any	  relatively	  recent	  edition	  you	  can	  find.	  Beyond	  its	  guidance	  on	  writing	  of	  papers	  (helpful	  for	  
anyone	  taking	  humanities	  courses),	  Barnet	  offers	  tips	  for	  organizing	  your	  thoughts	  about	  art	  in	  
ways	  generally	  appropriate	  to	  all	  of	  your	  work	  in	  this	  class,	  including	  exam	  essay	  composition.	  
Henry	  M.	  Sayre’s	  Writing	  About	  Art	  (which	  I	  have	  not	  ordered)	  addresses	  the	  subject	  at	  a	  
somewhat	  more	  rudimentary	  level,	  but	  is	  also	  excellent	  and	  recommended	  if	  you	  feel	  at	  all	  
insecure	  about	  visual	  analysis.	  You	  can	  find	  copies	  around	  town	  or	  from	  online	  sellers.	  
	  
I	  also	  expect	  you	  to	  use	  a	  superb	  and	  extensive	  online	  writing	  resource,	  which	  the	  author	  has	  
offered	  for	  fair	  use:	  "Reading,	  Writing,	  and	  Researching	  for	  History:	  A	  Guide	  for	  College	  Students,"	  
by	  Patrick	  Rael,	  Bowdoin	  College	  	  http://www.bowdoin.edu/writing-­‐guides/	  
	  
ASSIGNMENTS	  (30%)	  
	  
To	  promote	  class	  discussion	  and	  to	  ensure	  that	  readings	  are	  completed	  with	  care	  and	  on	  time,	  
you’ll	  have	  three	  assignments,	  each	  with	  detailed	  guidelines.	  
	  
        ! Assignment	  1	  takes	  you	  into	  the	  Blanton	  Museum	  for	  a	  formal	  analysis	  of	  a	  landscape	  
               painting	  
        ! Assignment	  2	  requires	  you	  to	  grapple	  with	  two	  pieces	  of	  19th-­‐century	  art	  criticism,	  one	  of	  
               which	  is	  by	  Henry	  James	  (the	  soon-­‐to-­‐be	  famous	  novelist)	  
        ! Assignment	  3	  involves	  analysis	  of	  different	  scholarly	  essays	  about	  the	  same	  painting	  
        	  
SHORT	  PAPER	  (20%)	  
	  
This	  assignment,	  designed	  to	  tap	  your	  creativity	  as	  well	  as	  exercise	  your	  analytical	  skill,	  asks	  you	  to	  
take	  the	  point	  of	  view	  of	  one	  19th-­‐century	  painter	  commenting	  on	  the	  work	  of	  a	  fellow	  painter,	  
whose	  work	  you	  already	  know.	  	  You’ll	  be	  using	  a	  famously	  vivid	  primary	  source	  to	  gain	  a	  sense	  of	  
the	  artist-­‐critic	  and	  you’ll	  also	  be	  able	  to	  study	  his	  work	  in	  DASE.	  
	  


TEAMWORK	  (15%)	  
In	  fulfillment	  of	  university	  requirements,	  we’ll	  have	  several	  occasions	  for	  structured	  teamwork.	  
        !      Teamwork	  1	  is	  designed	  to	  help	  you	  recognize	  how	  well	  you	  understand	  what	  you	  hear	  
        !      Teamwork	  2	  asks	  you	  to	  pose	  questions	  about	  a	  painting	  you	  haven't	  seen,	  by	  an	  artist	  you	  
               know,	  and	  develop	  a	  thesis	  about	  it	  (in-­‐class	  only)	  
        !      Teamwork	  3	  addresses	  issues	  of	  gender,	  with	  talking	  points	  developed	  around	  pairs	  of	  
               slides	  and	  founded	  on	  readings	  from	  a	  pair	  of	  secondary	  sources.	  
	  
LATE	  WORK	  
	  
If	  you	  miss	  an	  assignment	  due	  date,	  it	  is	  imperative	  that	  you	  contact	  me	  as	  soon	  as	  possible	  with	  a	  
clear	  reason.	  I	  accept	  late	  work	  at	  my	  discretion	  and	  reserve	  the	  right	  to	  deduct	  points	  depending	  
on	  circumstances.	  
	  
EXAMS	  (35%)	  
	  
You'll	  have	  two	  prompt-­‐driven	  essay	  exams,	  on	  Thursday,	  March	  14	  and	  Thursday,	  May	  9.	  	  Success	  
depends	  on	  synthesizing	  what	  you’ve	  learned,	  not	  on	  regurgitation	  of	  memorized	  facts.	  	  
	  
All	  visual	  material	  on	  the	  exams	  will	  be	  drawn	  from	  the	  DASE	  image	  databank	  I’ve	  put	  together.	  
You’ll	  need	  to	  identify	  the	  slides	  by	  artist,	  title,	  and	  date;	  but,	  really,	  that	  is	  the	  least	  of	  it.	  I	  strongly	  
advise	  you	  to	  regularly	  review	  your	  notes	  from	  class	  and	  readings	  while	  studying	  the	  images.	  
	  
I	  do	  not	  intend	  to	  give	  make-­‐up	  exams.	  If	  you	  are	  ill	  or	  have	  a	  genuine	  emergency	  at	  the	  last	  
minute,	  you	  must	  contact	  me	  by	  email	  before	  the	  exam	  to	  be	  missed	  if	  you	  expect	  any	  concession	  
(to	  be	  determined).	  	  Leave	  a	  phone	  number	  where	  I	  can	  reach	  you.	  An	  unexcused	  or	  insufficiently	  
explained	  absence	  will	  result	  in	  a	  0	  grade	  on	  a	  missed	  exam.	  
	  
RESPONSIBILITY	  FOR	  SPEAKING	  IN	  CLASS	  
	  
You’ll	  have	  many	  opportunities	  to	  speak	  in	  class.	  I	  realize	  that	  some	  students	  do	  so	  more	  easily	  
than	  others	  (though	  not	  necessarily	  better),	  so	  I	  don't	  want	  to	  quantify	  participation.	  However,	  at	  
the	  end	  of	  the	  semester,	  students	  who	  stand	  out	  for	  obvious	  resistance	  to	  participating	  in	  class	  
may	  receive	  a	  deduction	  of	  5	  points	  on	  their	  final	  grade,	  regardless	  of	  other	  grades.	  If	  you	  speak	  a	  
lot,	  I	  may	  ask	  you	  to	  hold	  back	  to	  let	  others	  contribute,	  which	  won’t	  happen	  if	  the	  same	  people	  
talk	  (if	  you	  are	  on	  my	  radar	  as	  a	  participant,	  don’t	  worry).	  And	  note:	  quality	  of	  participation	  counts	  
more	  than	  quantity.	  “Quality”	  does	  not	  mean	  being	  “right”;	  it	  means	  being	  thoughtful	  and	  willing	  
to	  stretch	  your	  thinking,	  especially	  when	  asked	  to	  do	  so.	  In	  other	  words,	  we	  are	  going	  to	  engage	  in	  
dialogue.	  
	  
ATTENDANCE	  AND	  CLASS	  CONDUCT	  
	  
Arrive	  on	  time!	  	  I	  take	  attendance	  starting	  the	  second	  week,	  at	  least	  initially	  by	  giving	  you	  a	  
notecard	  and	  a	  short	  prompt	  (this	  could	  happen	  at	  any	  point	  in	  the	  class,	  so	  be	  on	  time	  and	  don’t	  
leave	  early).	  	  These	  cards	  help	  me	  gauge	  your	  understanding	  of	  class	  discussions	  and	  readings.	  
	  


If	  you	  reach	  4	  absences	  (15%	  of	  class	  meetings)	  during	  the	  semester,	  you’ll	  loose	  five	  points	  on	  
your	  final	  grade;	  at	  6	  (more	  than	  20%),	  you’ll	  sacrifice	  10.	  	  With	  8	  absences,	  you	  fail	  the	  class,	  
regardless	  of	  grades	  posted.	  	  This	  policy	  is	  more	  generous	  than	  some	  because	  I’m	  don’t	  want	  to	  
have	  to	  make	  distinctions	  between	  “excused”	  and	  unexcused	  absences.	  
	  
If	  you	  have	  ongoing	  personal	  or	  family	  emergencies,	  do	  yourself	  a	  favor	  and	  consult	  Student	  
Services	  in	  your	  College—who	  will	  notify	  all	  of	  your	  instructors	  of	  any	  legitimate	  extenuating	  
circumstances.	  	  A	  considerable	  amount	  of	  flexibility	  is	  authorized	  and	  warranted	  in	  such	  cases.	  
	  
Laptop	  or	  tablet	  use	  during	  class	  is	  for	  note-­‐taking	  purposes	  only,	  unless	  I	  give	  you	  permission	  to	  
investigate	  a	  matter	  under	  discussion	  for	  the	  benefit	  of	  the	  class.	  	  Students	  who	  use	  their	  
computers	  for	  non-­‐class	  purposes	  will	  be	  asked	  to	  leave	  the	  room	  and	  such	  occurrences	  will	  be	  
recorded	  as	  absences	  from	  class.	  
	  
DIGITAL	  IMAGE	  ACCESSIBILITY	  
	  
Class	  discussion	  will	  center	  on	  works	  of	  art.	  Key	  images	  are	  available	  online,	  though	  DASE	  (Digital	  
Archive	  Services).	  	  DASE	  is	  a	  UT-­‐generated	  resource	  accessible	  through	  the	  Databases	  heading	  on	  
the	  UT	  Library	  home	  page.	  You	  can	  also	  access	  DASE	  at	  https://dase.laits.utexas.edu.	  In	  either	  
case,	  you’ll	  need	  to	  provide	  your	  UT	  EID	  and	  password.	  I	  suggest	  you	  bookmark	  the	  site.	  
	  
To	  access	  the	  image	  reserve	  for	  this	  class	  from	  the	  DASE	  homepage,	  click	  on	  “Public/Shared	  Sets”	  
from	  the	  menu	  at	  the	  side.	  Select	  the	  set	  labeled	  "Rather-­‐ARH	  339P	  (to	  midterm)"	  (or	  "to	  final")	  
to	  find	  the	  images	  for	  this	  class	  with	  their	  data	  (artist,	  title,	  date,	  collection,	  size,	  medium,	  etc.).	  	  
You	  can	  see	  them	  all	  together	  or	  click	  on	  the	  first	  image	  to	  isolate	  it	  and	  data	  on	  your	  screen	  (from	  
there	  you	  can	  click	  "next"	  to	  go	  through	  the	  group).	  Alternately,	  especially	  when	  testing	  yourself	  
on	  the	  works,	  click	  on	  slideshow	  from	  the	  layout	  options	  at	  the	  top	  of	  the	  set;	  in	  that	  case,	  you'll	  
get	  only	  the	  work,	  large	  and	  isolated	  against	  a	  black	  background.	  
	  
You	  can	  also	  search	  DASE	  yourself.	  You	  might	  want	  to	  do	  this	  if	  you	  wish	  to	  see	  other	  works	  by	  the	  
same	  artist	  or	  to	  gain	  more	  information	  about	  a	  work	  for	  our	  class	  than	  I	  have	  provided	  in	  the	  
caption	  (e.g.,	  dimensions,	  collection,	  etc.).	  	  Your	  search	  will	  yield	  the	  best	  quality	  images	  if	  you	  
limit	  it	  to	  the	  “Art	  &	  Art	  History	  Visual	  Resources	  Collection”	  or	  the	  “Classics	  Collection,”	  which	  are	  
also	  two	  of	  the	  largest.	  
	  
ACADEMIC	  HONESTY	  
	  
The	  ready	  availability	  of	  online	  information	  has	  contributed	  to	  an	  epidemic	  of	  plagiarism	  on	  
college	  campuses	  and	  elsewhere,	  some	  of	  it	  possibly	  unintended—which	  is	  not	  the	  same	  as	  
"innocent"	  (ignorance	  is	  no	  excuse).	  	  The	  University	  of	  Texas	  has	  clear	  policies	  on	  Academic	  
Integrity,	  including	  a	  concise	  statement	  of	  what	  constitutes	  plagiarism	  
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php).	  	  For	  a	  more	  detailed	  
characterization,	  see	  http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/cwgs/_files/pdf-­‐4/ai2012.pdf	  
	  
	  
	  
	  


ACADEMIC	  ACCOMMODATION	  
	  
Students	  may	  request	  appropriate	  academic	  accommodations	  from	  the	  Division	  of	  Diversity	  and	  
Community	  Engagement,	  Services	  for	  Students	  with	  Disabilities:	  	  512-­‐471-­‐6259	  
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/	  
	  
GRADING	  
Assignments	  (3	  @	  10%):	  30%	  
Short	  paper	  =	  20%	  
Teamwork	  exercises:	  15%	  
Exams	  (2	  @	  20%)	  =	  35%	  
Failure	  to	  contribute:	  -­‐5%	  
	  
Be	  sure	  to	  keep	  all	  your	  graded	  coursework	  until	  your	  final,	  official	  grades	  are	  confirmed	  by	  the	  
university.	  Recording	  errors	  are	  rare,	  but	  do	  sometimes	  happen;	  in	  such	  cases,	  the	  only	  firm	  
evidence	  is	  your	  marked	  papers	  and	  exams.	  
Final	  letter	  grades	  for	  the	  course	  follow	  this	  rubric:	  
	             A	  =	  93-­‐100;	  A-­‐	  =	  90-­‐92	  (UT	  does	  not	  recognize	  A+)	  
	             B+	  =	  87-­‐89;	  B	  =	  83-­‐86;	  B-­‐	  =	  80-­‐82	  
	             C+	  =	  77-­‐79;	  C	  =	  73-­‐76;	  C-­‐	  =	  70-­‐72	  
	             D+	  =	  67-­‐69;	  D	  =	  63-­‐66;	  D-­‐	  =	  60-­‐62	  
	             F	  =	  0-­‐59	  
	  
I	  have	  no	  hesitation	  in	  giving	  C-­‐range	  grades,	  which	  may	  be	  assigned	  even	  to	  work	  that	  shows	  
evidence	  of	  effort	  if	  riddled	  with	  grammatical	  and	  typographical	  errors.	  	  (Failure	  to	  meet	  even	  this	  
minimum	  standard	  will	  result	  in	  grades	  of	  D	  or	  lower.)	  	  Students	  who	  receive	  a	  C	  or	  below	  on	  their	  
first	  assignment	  are	  strongly	  urged	  to	  seek	  assistance	  at	  the	  Undergraduate	  Writing	  Center	  in	  UGL	  
but	  even	  those	  receiving	  higher	  grades	  (including	  As)	  will	  benefit	  from	  such	  assistance.	  
	  
For	  a	  B-­‐range	  grade,	  your	  work	  must	  (1)	  demonstrate	  that	  that	  you	  have	  applied	  yourself	  seriously	  
to	  assignments	  and	  exams	  and	  have	  a	  good	  understanding	  of	  the	  material;	  (2)	  compose	  clearly	  
written	  and	  argued	  papers,	  with	  minimal	  grammatical	  or	  typographical	  errors	  (the	  more	  of	  those	  I	  
see,	  the	  lower	  the	  grade);	  (3)	  participate	  in	  class	  discussions.	  
	  
To	  merit	  an	  A,	  you	  must	  be	  more	  intellectually	  adventurous	  and	  academically	  rigorous,	  performing	  
beyond	  the	  level	  required	  for	  B.	  	  Thus,	  (1)	  demonstrate	  that	  that	  you	  have	  applied	  yourself	  
seriously	  to	  assignments	  and	  exams	  and	  have	  a	  very	  good	  understanding	  of	  the	  material;	  (2)	  write	  
with	  conviction	  and	  flair;	  (3)	  contribute	  substantially	  to	  class	  discussions.	  
	  
