ALD 329       Unique #09080                    Harvey               Acquisition of Language & Literacies
Rosalyn.harvey@utexas.edu                                                   Wednesdays 9:00am-12:00pm
Office: SZB 440B
OH: Wednesdays 12-1pm (by appointment)                                                              SZB 411
                                             Course Description
    This course will provide an overview of theoretical and practical perspectives on the nature of
    language in education, its use and usage. Students will explore principles of discourse, phonology,
    morphology, syntax and semantics as they relate to second language acquisition. We will also cover
    language varieties, social conventions and linguistic structures. The focus of the course is to prepare
    pre-service teachers to best meet the linguistic and academic needs of bilingual English learner (EL)
    students in the K-12 classroom.
    Topics include English structures and analysis, identification of bilingual EL students’ academic and
    linguistic learning needs, and pedagogical strategies to promote language acquisition. Our beliefs
    about the English language and its acquisition shape the kinds of opportunities we provide our
    bilingual EL students and are therefore highly consequential to their academic trajectories. This
    course is structured to support the student in designing, implementing and reflecting on the academic
    language development of bilingual EL students in a variety of contexts.
                                                Course Goals
    By the end of the semester, the successful student will be able to:
    1. Discuss the complexities of the English language.
    2. Explain English language structures and patterns.
    3. Critically analyze the linguistic features of a bilingual EL student’s oral language sample.
    4. Understand language as a sociopolitical and historical construct.
    5. Appreciate varieties of the English language and its ongoing transformation.
    6. Identify the linguistic challenges facing bilingual EL students in the academic context
    7. Design activities to appropriate to bilingual EL students’ linguistic needs in the academic context
    8. Identify attitudes towards, and modes of inquiry regarding language
    9. Articulate theories of language (e.g. variation, phonology, social conventions, use/usage)
    10. Identify instructional strategies to address bilinguals’ academic & linguistic development.
                                              Required Reading
    •    Freeman, D.E. and Freeman, Y.S. (2014). Essential linguistics Second Edition: What
         teachers need to know to teach ESL, reading, spelling, and grammar. Portsmouth, NH:
         Heinemann.
    •    Course Packet available at Paradigm Copies, located inside Melissa’s Boutique 2401 Rio
         Grande.
                                                   Grading
                                                            100-93=A                 79-77=C+
Critical Commentaries                      (10%)            92-90=A-                 76-73=C
Tutoring (10h)                             (10%)            89-87=B+                 72-70=C-
Group Presentation                         ( 5%)            86-83=B                  69-60=D
Mid-Term & Final                           (30%)            82-80=B-                 Below 60=F
Linguistic Analysis                        (25%)
Final Paper                                (20%)
Fall 2018                                      (09080)                                                      1


ALD 329      Unique #09080                 Harvey              Acquisition of Language & Literacies
                                               Canvas
Use of e-mail and Canvas are essential elements of this class. Successful completion of this
course requires that you record a language sample from your bilingual student for transcription
and analysis. Projects and assignments must be submitted electronically, posted to the class
Canvas website. E-mail will be used to communicate with Ms. Harvey and other class members.
A Canvas Site has been established for this course; the site contains a copy of this syllabus,
project guidelines, readings which are not in your textbooks, and general course information.
Announcements, updates, and new documents will be posted throughout the course; students are
expected to check Canvas regularly. Students are encouraged to post their own presentations to
the group presentation folder on Canvas so others in the class may have access to them. All
students must post their weekly critical commentaries by 11:59 PM Sunday prior to our class
meeting.
                                             Attendance
Regular attendance and participation is required. Each unexcused class absence will result in a 3-
point reduction of the final grade.
    If you absolutely have to miss a class session, talk to me (in person or via e-mail) before
    about your plans for keeping up with the coursework and compensating—not eliminating—
    the absence. You are responsible for contacting a class member so that you are prepared for
    the next class session. When you come to class, please sign in on the attendance sheet.
    Tardies will also lower your final grade for this class.
    Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
    least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
    class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
    day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
    after the absence.
    If you must be absent on a day when you are scheduled to present, it is imperative that you
    let Ms. Harvey know prior to class so that adjustments may be made. A letter-grade
    reduction will be given if notification is not received prior to 12:00 noon on the
    appointed date.
Class sessions will include short lectures, small and whole group discussions, virtual responses,
and student presentations. In order to accomplish the goals of the course, classes are designed for
active participation online and in-class. Students are expected to come to class prepared to
discuss the assigned material. Your perspectives are appreciated, needed, and respected, and
should be shared. Students will respect the viewpoint of all class members. Students’ grade will
depend in part on ideas and understandings developed in class.
Fall 2018                                  (09080)                                                  2


ALD 329      Unique #09080                 Harvey              Acquisition of Language & Literacies
                                 University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community. All students are responsible for reading and understanding the University of Texas
Standard of Academic Integrity and definition of plagiarism. By submitting an assignment to
satisfy course requirements, you are indicating that it is your own work. The failure to properly
acknowledge use of another’s work is plagiarism. References must be cited according to APA
guidelines. Plagiarism of any kind will result in a failing grade for the assignment and/or the
class.
                                Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). Students are
responsible to provide a copy of their letter to Ms. Harvey at the start of the semester.
                                      Technology Etiquette
This is a discussion based classroom where your input is part of your grade. Please turn off cell
phones and close laptops during class. If there is a need for everyone to be online, we will all
pull up our laptops together.
                                        Classroom Policies
Our classroom is a safe place to share and develop new ideas and gain understanding; respect of
colleagues’ questions is expected. This syllabus is a work-in-progress, dates and details are
subject to change. Any changes will be confirmed both in class and via class email. As
mentioned earlier, participation plays a critical role in understanding of the material and will
contribute to one’s grade.
                                            Writing Flag
ALD 329 carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you will write regularly throughout the semester,
complete a substantial writing project, receive feedback from your instructor and your peers to
help you improve your writing, and provide like feedback to your peers. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your
peers’ work. A substantial portion of your grade will come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board.
Fall 2018                                  (09080)                                                  3


ALD 329      Unique #09080                  Harvey              Acquisition of Language & Literacies
                                           ASSIGNMENTS
    Organization and planning are essential characteristics of professionalism that will help you
    meet assignment due dates and will influence the quality of your work. Late submissions will
    receive partial credit. A student with an emergency situation preventing a timely submission
    should contact Ms. Harvey immediately.
          Critical Commentaries (10%): ~1 paragraph (max: 1/2 page) per reading
CCs are designed to help you organize, synthesize, and connect course readings—to easily locate
and identify reference materials. for exams and the final project.
            1. Title – Full citation of the reading (in APA format)
            2. Brief Summary – 2-3 sentence summary of key points and note any details, key
                concepts, etc which particularly struck you.
            3. Response – Your opinion of and reaction to the reading. Did the text trigger a
                connection or reaction upon reading? Comment on, dialogue and interact with the
                text. Did you agree / disagree? Why? Did you gain any new insights from the
                reading? Was it helpful? Why / why not? How does it relate to other readings for
                this class or others? Does it relate to your work tutoring your English learner
                student?
            4. Key Question//Critical Concept—At least one idea per week that either (a)
                requires further clarification, or (b) you synthesized in a novel way and will share
                with your colleagues.
            5. CCs must be posted to Canvas by 11:59 AM Tuesday prior to our class
                meeting.
       **While informal, please carefully edit for spelling, grammar, syntax and clarity. **
               You are welcome to bring hard copies to class to facilitate discussion.
                                     Tutoring (10 hours) (10%)
Several tutoring organizers will speak to our class at the start of the semester (Wooldridge, UT
ESL (option available to YCS majors only), Linder); please either sign up them and let Ms.
Harvey know where you will be volunteering prior to the 3rd class meeting. All 10 HOURS are
REQUIRED to receive CREDIT. Up to 3 hours may be classroom observations.
        a) A signature from your supervising teacher will be required on the Tutoring Sign-in
            sheet each time you tutor. Include your teacher and/or supervisor’s preferred contact
            (email/phone) on the form. Submit this form under the tutoring assignment on
            canvas.
        b) You will also log entries describing your tutoring on Canvas Discussion Board.
            These entries will detail the work you so with your student that day, strategies you
            may have used, questions you might have. You will submit two unique posts and
            respond at least twice to other students’ posts across the course of the semester.
        c) At the end of the semester, you will complete a Tutoring Reflection Form, to be
            submitted on Canvas.
If possible, meet your teacher! Ask the tutoring coordinators to set up a time for you to briefly
meet your student’s teacher to better understand your student.
Fall 2018                                   (09080)                                                  4


ALD 329      Unique #09080                  Harvey             Acquisition of Language & Literacies
                                    Group Presentations (15%)
During the first week of class student will divide into groups and choose a presentation topic.
Group presentations will touch on one key aspect of the week’s readings, incorporating one or
more of the English proficiency standards (ELPS). At least 2 group members must meet with
Ms. Harvey during office hours (or by Skype/phone) one week prior to the scheduled
presentation date to generate ideas and materials for the presentation. Presentations should be
engaging, connected to the class readings, interactive, collaborative, and informative. Consider
interactive, non-lecture formats for these presentations. Make sure to start on time and work out
any technical issues prior to presenting. Please see Canvas for the expanded Grading Rubric. The
presentation should foster discussion and should not simply be a lecture.
                        Linguistic Analysis Presentation (25%) Due 11/28
         nd    rd
In the 2 or 3 week of your tutoring experience, you will record a language sample with your
bilingual student. You will not be interviewing your student, rather you will be recording a
regular tutoring session. You will then transcribe this language sample, both your language and
your student’s, and use this as the base of your linguistic analysis.
Ms. Harvey will indicate a class da y for you to bring a printed copy of your transcript to class
with you. You will use the language elicited from the L2 learner to identify various linguistic
features we examine in class. In class, we will workshop our transcripts, looking for examples of:
                 Pragmatic competence
                 Semantic development
                 Phonological development
                 Morphological development
                 Syntactic development
As you work with your EL student throughout the semester, reflect on his/her language growth
and development. At the end of the semester, you will evaluate your student’s English
proficiency based on the SOLOM rubric. The SOLOM allows a teacher to observe an EL
student’s oral English skills in a natural context and identify the appropriate English language
development stage through observation.
In this presentation, students will display their understanding of both (1) the distinct structure
and features of oral English, and (2) the linguistic development of bilingual EL students by
analyzing a language sample from a tutoring session with their student. Language samples will
include approximately 10 minutes of discussion around an academic topic. Claims made in the
linguistic analyses must be supported by references drawn from course readings as well as
external texts.
Final projects will consist of 4 discrete sections:
Introduction
How do you connect with your student? What have you learned about yourself and your student
beyond our course teachings? What kind of EL/bilingual instruction does your student
Fall 2018                                   (09080)                                                 5


ALD 329       Unique #09080                 Harvey            Acquisition of Language & Literacies
experience? How has this experience influenced your perspective on language and culture in the
community? Connect to course readings as possible.
Linguistic Analysis.
Critical analysis of your student’s linguistic development as represented in the language sample:
     1. Phonological development
     2. Morphological development
     3. Syntactic development
     4. Semantic development
     5. Pragmatic competence (e.g., discourse routines, social conventions).
     6. Free choice: anything else that strikes you as important--Analysis of additional features
          not listed but studied this semester are welcome.
Recommended Classroom Practices.
                      i. Describe 2-3 recommended instructional strategies for working with your
                         bilingual EL student.
                     ii. Strategies should target improving content area development and
                         comprehension based on your work together.
SOLOM Results and Discussion.
Throughout your classroom observations and tutoring sessions, take the time to chat in English,
or better yet, observe your student chatting with classmates during academic periods. Make sure
at least one of your observation blocks consists of English instruction- either ESL or core content
in sheltered English. Analyze the how and why of your participant’s SOLOM results. How
(well) does the SOLOM measure a learner’s use of: syntax, semantics, morphology, phonology,
language use/usage? Which features of the EL student’s oral language prompted the rater to
place him/her at each level in each domain? Does the overall rating reflect the EL student’s
abilities in the larger academic context? How well do ratings in the individual language ability
areas reflect the overall assessment? What questions did the SOLOM answer for you as a
teacher? Were any areas of concern left unaddressed? Does the overall rating reflect the bilingual
EL student’s abilities in the larger academic context? How well do ratings in the individual
language ability areas reflect the overall assessment? What questions did the SOLOM answer for
you as a teacher? Were any areas of concern left unaddressed?
Reference list for all three sections combined
         Canvas upload (Final): Linguistic Analysis
                          PowerPoint (Parts 1-4 above)
                          Copy of completed SOLOM, less bilingual EL student name
                          Annotated Transcript of the language sample (scan or hard copy)
                                      Final Exam (30%) On 12/5
          The final exam will consist of multiple choice, essay and short answer questions.
                                     Final Paper (20%) Due 12/12
Fall 2018                                   (09080)                                                6


ALD 329      Unique #09080                 Harvey               Acquisition of Language & Literacies
Your final paper (min. 5 pages) will be a reflection on your learning over the course of the
semester. Topics could include but are not limited to: analysis of your own language
development, history, experiences, and styles; your understanding of linguistic diversity in
society; implications for linguistic diversity in your future teaching. This paper will be due on
December 12th at 11:59 PM.
Week 0                                  Introduction & Overview                               8/29
    • Fillmore-Snow
    • Zeller, et al. (2010). From stranger to friend: The effect of service learning on pre-service
        teachers’ attitudes.
Week 1                           Language: Learning and Cognition                             9/5
    •   Freeman & Freeman (2014a) How Linguists Study Language: Ch.1 (pp. 1-20)
    •   Freeman & Freeman (2014b) First Language Acquisition: Ch.2 (pp. 21-51)
        First Critical Commentary Due Tuesday 9/4 at by 11:59pm (due weekly from now
        on)
Week 2                         Reading, Writing, & Bilingual EL Students                      9/12
                                    Deriving Meaning from Text
    •   Freeman & Freeman (2014c) Second and Written Language Acquisition: Ch.3 (pp.52-83)
Week 3               Language Policy and Bilingual EL Education                               9/19
                          Learning Language, Learning Content
    •   Macias, R. (2014) Benefits of Bilingualism: In the eye of the beholder? In R.M. Callahan
        & P.C. Gándara (Eds.) The Bilingual Advantage: Language, Literacy, and the Labor
        Market, pp. 3-15. Multilingual Matters: Clevedon, U.K.
    •   Hakuta, K. (2011). Educating language minority students and affirming their equal rights:
        Research and practical perspectives. Educational Researcher, 40, 163-174
Week 4                  Language and Pedagogy: Why Bilingual EL Students?                     9/26
    • Goldenberg, C. (2008). Teaching English language learners: What the research does—
        and does not—say. American Educator, (Summer), 8-44.
    • Garcia-Medina (2010), Table 3.1
    • Callahan, R. (2015). Know more than one language? Don’t give it up!
        TheConversation.com
Week 5                   Language as part of Bilingual EL Students’ Integration                10/3
                                 Social, academic and professional
    •   Fillmore, L.W. (2000) Loss of family languages: Should educators be concerned? Theory
        into Practice, 39(4), pp. 203-210.
Fall 2018                                   (09080)                                                  7


ALD 329     Unique #09080                Harvey            Acquisition of Language & Literacies
    •  Suárez-Orozco et al (2008). Networks of relationships. In Learning a new land:
       Immigrant students in American society. Harvard University Press.
    •  Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The standard language myth. In R. Lippi-Green, English with an
       accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, (pp. 53-62). New
       York, NY: Routledge.
Week 6                        Language Variation & Standard English                     10/10
                             Cultures, Contexts and the Classroom
    •  Wheeler, R. & Swords, R. (2010). Code switching lessons. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
    •  Martínez, R. A. (2010). "Spanglish" as Literacy Tool: Toward an Understanding of the
       Potential Role of Spanish-English Code-Switching in the Development of Academic
       Literacy. Research in the Teaching of English, 124-149.
    •  Delpit, L. (2002). The skin that we speak. New York: The New Press.
Week 7                        Phonology, Reading, & Bilingual EL Students                10/17
                           Sounds & Sound-Symbol Correspondence
    •  Freeman & Freeman (2014d) English Phonology: Ch.4 (pp. 89-118)
    •  Freeman & Freeman: (2014e) Implications from Phonology for Teaching a Second
       Language and for Teaching Reading: Ch.5 (pp. 119-145)
    •  Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The myth of non-accent. In R. Lippi-Green, English with an
       accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, (pp. 41-52). New
       York, NY: Routledge.
Week 8                Morphology, Literacy, & Bilingual EL Students                      10/24
    • Freeman & Freeman (2014g) English Morphology :Ch.7 (pp. 180-208)
    • Freeman & Freeman (2014h) Implications from Morphology for Teaching a Second
       Language and Teaching Reading: Ch.8. (pp. 209-229)
Week 9                           Syntax in the Classroom                                10/31
    • Freeman & Freeman: (2014i) English Syntax:Ch.9 (pp. 230-264)
    • Freeman & Freeman: (2014j) Implications from Syntax for Teaching a Second Language
       and Teaching Reading:Ch.10. (pp. 265-287)
Week 10                             Semantics and Pragmatics                             11/7
                                  Language Use & Conventions
    •  Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010). Pragmatics. In
       Why TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, (pp. 71-79). Dubuque,
       IA: Kendall-Hunt.
    •  Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010). Semantics. In
       Why TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, (pp. 81-88). Dubuque,
       IA: Kendall-Hunt.
Fall 2018                                (09080)                                                8


ALD 329     Unique #09080                Harvey              Acquisition of Language & Literacies
Week 11          Access to Rigorous Academic Content and Assessment in the L2.             11/14
    • Diaz-Rico, L.T. (2013). Content area instruction. The crosscultural, language and
       academic development handbook: A complete K-12 reference, (pp. 115-148). Needham
       Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
    • Fang, Z. (2008). Going beyond the Fab 5: Helping students cope with the unique
       linguistic challenges of expository reading in intermediate grades. Journal of Adolescent
       and Adult Literacy, 51(6), pp. 476-487.
    • *Cary, S. (2007). How do I assess a student’s English? In Working with English language
       learners, (p. 9-20). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
    • *Gottleib, M. (2006). Ch.3 Assessing Oral Language and Literacy Development In
       Assessing English language learners: Bridges from language proficiency to academic
       achievement, (pp. 41-61). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
    • *SOLOM
    • ELPS (2014) Texas English Language Proficiency Standards
Week 12                           Linguistic Analysis Presentations                        11/28
Week 13                               Final Exam                                           12/5
Week 14                               NO CLASS                                             12/12
                                   Final Paper Due
Fall 2018                                (09080)                                                  9
