Advertising & Public Relations
                       Law & Ethics
                             ADV/PR353
Instructor: Dr. Erica Ciszek          TA: Rachel Lim
Email: eciszek@utexas.edu             Email: esther7.lim@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Mon/Wed 11:00 – 1:00 pm Office Hours: Tues/Thur 12:30-1:30 pm
and by appointment                    Location: cubicle 4.316A
Where: BMC 4.374


Course Summary:
The course is designed to foster a critical understanding of advertising and PR as promotional
institutions, and their role in communication, society, culture, and our economy. Students develop
a framework in which to understand the continuing dialogue between supporters and critics, and
confront issues related to the institutions’ ethical conduct, regulatory issues, and social
responsibility. The course is set up for interaction and dialogue. You are provided with an
opportunity to try out and develop your ideas. Your job is to read, think, read some more, and
write critically about the role of advertising in society. My job is to help you in the process of
thinking through the material and developing your ideas.
Course Objectives:
 Understanding the larger role of advertising and public relations will make you a much more
 thoughtful and productive professional and consumer. The main objective of the course is to place
 advertising and PR within: a social context, a consumer culture, different economies, a changing
 commercial media system and a global environment.
 You will encounter a number of contemporary issues in advertising and PR, examine controversial
 aspects of content and practice in advertising and PR, and develop a critical perspective that you
 can use to approach the subject. Many views of advertising we will encounter in class will be
 uncomplimentary; others will vigorously affirm contemporary advertising & PR philosophy and
 practice.
 The course is designed to accomplish the following learning objectives:
 •     to read, think and write critically about the role of advertising and PR in society.
 •     to enhance knowledge and understanding of the conflicting arguments surrounding the roles
       and influences of advertising and PR in society.
 •     to provide a macro-perspective of advertising and PR as economic and social institutions.
 •     to introduce contemporary social, economic, regulatory, and ethical issues surrounding the
       practices of advertising and PR.
Prerequisites:
   Students must be Advertising or Public Relations majors, and they must have upper division
   standing.
Course Website:
   The course website is on Canvas. Tutorials for students who are unfamiliar with Canvas are
   available at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/welcome-to-canvas
         Syllabus subject to change to accommodate speakers, weather, class needs, etc.


Course Format:
  The professor will use an interactive lecture/discussion approach. Legal and ethical analysis lends
 itself to a dialog between the professor and student and among students, so class participation is
 important. Cases and team exercises will be used as a basis for class discussion. Team exercises
 will give students opportunities to develop and exercise the skills needed to work successfully
 with others. Students must come to class prepared and participate. It is also in students’ long-
 term interest to prepare thoroughly for each class because the material is cumulative. It is each
 student’s responsibility to attend class. Exams will include material raised during in-class
 discussion and/or examples from the professor, students, guest speakers, and films during class.
Topics:
  The course has four major themes, which will be intertwined throughout the course:
  The Legal Environment of Advertising and Public Relations
  Topics include an examination of commercial speech and the First Amendment, deception, libel,
  copyright, trademark, publicity rights, and industry self-regulation.
  Advertising/Public Relations & Society
  Topics focus on the aggregate effects of advertising and public relations and their social
  consequences such as potentially contributing to the obesity crisis, creating or reinforcing
  problematic stereotypes, or encouraging excessive materialism.
  Organizational Integrity and Corporate Social Responsibility
  Topics include organizational culture, corporate social responsibility, organizational diversity, and
  emerging topics in ethics and law.
  Personal Professionalism and Ethical Decision Making by Individuals
  Topics include an examination of professionalism, personal values, moral myopia and moral
  muteness, theories of moral conduct, ways of putting one’s personal values into action, lying, and
  whistleblowing.
         Syllabus subject to change to accommodate speakers, weather, class needs, etc.


Reading Assignments:
It is difficult to anticipate the pace of the class’ progress and the exact dates upon which guest
speakers will be available. As such, reading assignments for individual class sessions will be
posted on Canvas, and students must check Canvas prior to each class to find out the reading
assignment. Readings that are available in electronic form will be posted on Canvas as will
PowerPoint presentations used in class. If students miss a class session, it is their responsibility to
find out what they missed by contacting another student and checking Canvas. Do not contact the
professor or the teaching assistant for the assignment. Use Canvas and get to know fellow
students.
Reading Materials:
 Controversies in Contemporary Advertising, 2nd edition, 2013, by Kim Sheehan, ISBN-13: 978-
 1452261072
 Legal and Ethical Considerations for Public Relations, 3rd edition, 2018, by Karla K. Gower, ISBN-
 978-1-4786-3581-9
         Syllabus subject to change to accommodate speakers, weather, class needs, etc.


                                      Class Policies
 Attendance
   Reliable and punctual attendance is critical in the workplace. As such, this course is designed as an
   opportunity to begin to practice good workplace habits. In addition, attendance and participation
   are important to learning. The expectation is that students will attend class for the entire session
   and participate in discussions and team activities. Leaving class before the session ends is
   disruptive to other students. As such, students should leave class only for bathroom emergencies
   or sickness. If students know in advance that they will need to leave class before the end, they
   should place a note with an explanation on the professor’s lectern before class starts.
   Attendance will be taken at each session with Arkaive (https://arkaive.com), which is free, and
   requires that students check in on their phones, laptops, or tablets. As noted above, attendance
   will account for 10 percent of the course grade. There will be absolutely no excused absences
   other than those excused by the university (e.g., participation in varsity sports, observance of
   religious holidays). Since students may have up to two absences with no penalty, absences due
   to illness, internships, interviews, weddings, etc., will not be excused. Students may review their
   attendance records on the Arkaive website. Students who contest the recording of an absence
   must do so within one week of the class session in question by e-mailing the TA.
Participation
  Outstanding participation in discussions (frequent and thoughtful participation) and on the Canvas
  Discussion Board can help a student’s final course grade, especially in close situations (i.e.,
  borderline grades).
Email
 Keep your emails formal; write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss at work, not to
 your friend. The TA is your first point of contact for your queries about grades. I am your first
 contact about the course material. The TA and I will try to return your e-mail within 24 hours of
 receiving it on Monday through Friday, or by Monday evening if we receive it on the weekend. E-
 mail is an excellent way to communicate if done appropriately.


Evaluation                                                              Grades
                                                                          Letter       100
 What           How          When
                                                                          Grade       Scale
                Much
                                                                                       (%)
 Class          10%          Daily                                          A        93-100
 attendance                                                                 A-        90-92
 Exam 1         30%          October 4                                     B+         87-89
                                                                            B         83-86
 Exam 2         30%          November 6                                     B-        80-82
                                                                           C+         77-79
 Applied        30%          TBD
                                                                            C         73-76
 Project
                                                                            C-        70-72
                                                                           D+         67-69
 Grading                                                                    D
                                                                            D-
                                                                                      63-66
                                                                                      60-62
 Any disagreements about                                                     F         0-59
 grades MUST be submitted in
 writing within seven days of
 when the grade is posted on
 Canvas.
 Exams
 No make-up exams will be given unless the absence is excused by the university (e.g.,
 observance of religious holidays, participation in varsity sports). Please check the
 dates of the exams for all of your courses. If you are unwilling to take all of the exams
 for your courses as scheduled, then you should rearrange your courses. For reasons of
 fairness and because there is an opportunity for an optional final, no make-ups will be
 given because of illness, other exams, projects, weddings, interviews, etc.
 Exams will be multiple-choice questions. Exams will encompass classroom lectures and
 discussions, presentations by guest speakers, reading materials, and films or videos.
 Applied
 There will be one creative group-assignment for this course. As is the case in the
 professional world, you will work in teams to come up with a creative execution that
 addresses a social issue and relays your knowledge of law and ethics in action. More
 details to come.


Office Hours
   We, the professor and the teaching assistant, encourage students to come by our
   offices during office hours. Please feel free to come by simply to chat. Students
   should not use e-mail as a way of having a conversation with us about substantive
   issues; that is what class discussions and office hours are for. We do not mind being
   contacted by e-mail for administrative purposes.
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy
 The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse
 a student from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations,
 for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
 whose absence is excused under this provision may not be penalized for that absence
 and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which
 the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who
 misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
 of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
 possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
 reasonable time after the absence.
 https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/academic-affairs/_files/pdf/Religious-Holiday-
 Observances.pdf
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
 We, the professor and the teaching assistant, encourage students to come by our
 offices during office hours. Please feel free to come by simply to chat. Students
 should not use e-mail as a way of having a conversation with us about substantive
 issues; that is what class discussions and office hours are for. We do not mind being
 contacted by e-mail for administrative purposes.
University Health Services
The University has considerable health related resources for students. These include a
24-7 Nurse Advice Line (512 475-6877) http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/, a 24-7
Telephone Counseling Line (512 471-2255) http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/, and a
Behavioral Concerns Advice Line (512 232-5050)
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php. Students are encouraged to take
advantage of these resources as needed.


 Drop Policy
 The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
 academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall
 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
 undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any
 course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education,
 unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation
 Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
 evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
 requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of
 each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door
 may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring
 assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
 class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
 instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following:
 Austin Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
 Additional information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
 procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
 Title IX
 a segment of the Education Amendments of 1972, makes it clear that violence,
 harassment, or discrimination based on sex and gender are Civil Rights offenses
 subject to the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to
 offenses against other protected categories such as race, national origin, etc. If you or
 someone you know has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate
 resources at https://www.utexas.edu/student-affairs/policies/title-ix


UT Class Related and Other Policies
 More information can be found at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-
 10/index.html
 Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an
 important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts,
 feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available
 for support.
 For immediate support:
 - Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
 | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
 - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
 CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
 - M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
 FREE Services at CMHC:
 - Brief assessments and referral services
 - Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
 - MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
 - Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Documented Disability Statement:
 Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
 should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or
 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations
 without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
 Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
 accessible (e.g. instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for
 proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
 Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related
 accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the
 arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
 accessibility, etc.).
 Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
 (video phone) of reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
 http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
