ARC 328W / 392W
Wood Design                                                                  Instructor – Mark Maček
Unique # 00765 / 01050                                                          mmacek@utexas.edu
Fall 2018                                                                                  office hours
TTh 2:30 - 5:30 pm                                                                    By appointment
GOL 1.108                                                                                 GOL 1.100
Objectives
Practice woodworking skills: tool sharpening, millwork, joinery, gluing, & sanding.
Learn the characteristics of the material wood, including specific species.
Analyze the strength of wood joints.
Design a piece of furniture based on a program, with materials and techniques in mind.
Understand the point of view of the maker within the design process.
Complete the final project.
Schedule
The first six weeks, we practice solid wood joinery using hand tools and power tools. This is a
crucial time to attend every day and stay current. There will be an assignment each week due on
Tuesday morning. Students sharpen chisels and mill lumber to S4S. Our discussions are grounded
in wood’s cellular structure and anisotropy. Strength derives from long grain, weakness from the
lack of long grain. Changing moisture content creates expansion and contraction parallel to the
annual rings. This is a crucial time to attend every day and stay current. There will be an
assignment each week due on Tuesday morning. We will study furniture design history and visit
the shops of Austin craftsmen to see how they work.
The final project is one piece of furniture of your choice of program. It must be mostly solid wood,
no digital fabrication, and no larger than 20 cu.ft. Plywood is allowed as a secondary material.
Final project design assignments include iterations of sketches, scaled drawings, models at 3”=1’-
0”, and full-scale mock-ups. The class holds two design reviews before construction begins,
allowing seven weeks for completion. The class participates in school-wide final reviews with other
design studios. Begin now thinking about what you want to build for your final project. On the
seventh week, your proposal will be locked in.
Week 1, Sep 3 - properties of wood, milling, sharpen chisel, S4S due Sep 6
Week 2, Sep 10 - half lap joint, Japanese saw, design history, Box due Sep 11
Week 3, Sep 17 - joinery, discuss David Pye, Block due Sep 18
Week 4, Sep 24 - how to buy lumber, field trip, final project Schematic Design review Sep 25
Week 5, Oct 1 - dovetails, glue and fasteners, Handle due Oct 2
Week 6, Oct 8 - species, curved wood, 3”=1’ scale model, Design Development review Oct 9
Week 7, Oct 15 - full-scale joinery details, buy lumber, schedule for final project
Week 8, Oct 22 - work on final project, desk crits
Week 9, Oct 29 - work
Week 10, Nov 5 - work
Week 11, Nov 12 - work
Week 12, Nov 19 - work, Thanksgiving
Week 13, Nov 26 - work
Week 14, Dec 3 – work, Final Review Dec 7
Readings
Required reading: The Nature and Art of Workmanship by David Pye.
There will be handouts. List of bookmarks at www.diigo.com/user/wooddesign
Design History images on Canvas


Grading
First 6 weeks                      25%
Final project                      75%
The first six weeks are graded on effort, timeliness, and craft. I evaluate final project designs
based on intent (expression of a design idea), process (self-criticism, iterations, variations), and
resolution (effort and craft). After the last day of the semester, the wood shop hours are
shortened. A grade of incomplete will only be granted for illness or family emergency.
Safety Training
All students must take two forms of shop safety training. One is John Vekho’s shop safety
orientation. Two is UT’s Environmental Health and Safety department (EHS) online training module
(https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ehs/class.WBX?s_course_comp=0&s_course_prefix=OH&s_course_nu
mber=0500 ) After watching the videos, each student must pass a short exam to complete the
training.
Accommodations
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
Absence policy
Four unexcused absences will result in a full letter drop in your grade for the semester. Contact me
ahead of time if you plan to miss class, and notify me as soon as possible if you are sick or have a
family emergency. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day. You will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. Please keep me informed
so that I can help you.
Required supplies
Lock for desk
Tape measurer, combination square, 1” chisel
Dust masks. The good ones have two straps.
Lumber
Keep the shop clean
CLEAR your bench top and sweep the floor at the end of work day.
The only available scrap wood is in the scrap bins.
When gluing, cover the bench top with newspaper or wax paper.
Observe safety rules and tool maintenance
Wear hearing, eye, and respiratory protection.
No MDF. No reclaimed lumber unless specifically approved.
