 GOV 312L: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT IN CONTEMPORARY TEXAS
                          Summer 2019 - First Session
                           Department of Government
                        The University of Texas at Austin
                                  Unique #81780
INSTRUCTOR: Philip Moniz
EMAIL: pmoniz@utexas.edu
OFFICE HOURS: Tuesdays 2-5 PM in Batts 1.118 and via Skype (philipmoniz)
Contact technical support at: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course provides an in-depth orientation to the actors, processes, and
institutions that make up the political system in Texas with a strong
emphasis on the development of applied knowledge. Instructional material in
the course focuses on how politics in Texas shapes the operation of political
institutions, with particular attention to the interplay between public opinion,
conflict among elites, and the policy environment in the state.
The course is delivered completely online, which gives students more
latitude in completing their work, though the class is NOT entirely self-
paced. The course meets online through Canvas. The course material is
organized by topic (“Modules”), and each module includes reading
assignments, lecture and guest-speaker videos, a segment keyed to recent
events in Texas politics, and a variety of other assignments. Students will be
expected to complete 2-3 modules per week. The course schedule below
contains module assignments and due dates. This design allows students to
complete the work largely according to their own schedule – as long as the
due dates for completion of each module lesson are met. Students are
required to take one scheduled, proctored exam online in a virtual face-to-
face setting. A proctoring fee will apply. Students are encouraged to visit
http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.php to test their computer and
network connection.
The course fulfills the second half of the state-mandated instruction in Texas
and American constitutional government (Texas Common Number GOVT
2302).


COURSE COMMUNICATION and INSTRUCTIONAL SUPPORT
    •  Announcements: Any student communication initiated by instructors
       will be conducted via the Announcements page on our course Canvas
       page. Please make sure to check the Announcements page daily, or
       set your Canvas notifications so that new Announcements are
       delivered directly to your primary email right away (and check your
       email daily).
    •  Private communication: Students who wish to contact the instructor
       can do so either in-person during office hours, Skype office hours, or
       via personal email. Do not assume that the instructor will receive
       communication submitted via Canvas messaging or Canvas comments.
Note: Students should expect the quickest response time to communication
during normal business hours (Monday-Friday 9am–5pm). As a general rule,
students can expect a response to emails within 24 hours of being sent;
however, please note that communications sent after hours, on weekends,
and over University holidays may have a longer response time.
Technical Support
If you experience a technical problem in Canvas email tech support
immediately at gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu. You must
notify tech support immediately. The instructor cannot address the
ramifications that your technical problem might have on your grade if tech
support does not have a record of your problem.
REQUIRED MATERIALS
Texas Politics Course Version online text ($55) available for purchase
through Canvas.
A limited set of additional readings will be provided on the Canvas site for
the course.
NOTE: If you have already completed a course that has used the Texas
Politics webtext, you can have your payment transferred to this course by
emailing Soomo Learning's Student Support at support@soomolearning.com.
Please provide the course information from your previous course.


TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
Laptop or desktop computer
All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled laptop or
desktop computer, running either Windows or macOS operating systems.
This is NOT a tablet, smartphone, Chromebook, or Microsoft Surface. Your
computer should meet the following requirements:
- At least 2GB memory/RAM
- Modern and updated operating System (MacOS or Windows)
- Browsers: Chrome is highly recommended (If using Safari or Firefox, be
prepared to use Chrome as a backup)
- Internet Download Speed: 5 Mbps & Internet Upload Speed: 1 Mbps (check
here: https://www.speedtest.net/)
- Adobe Flash installed and enabled
- Webcam and functioning microphone. Confirm that your equipment meets
the requirements for online exam proctoring by visiting https://test-it-
out.proctoru.com/
(Linux operating systems, including Chrome OS/Google Chromebooks,
Microsoft Surfaces, and Windows 10 "S Mode" are not supported for online
exam proctoring.)
Confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting
https: www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.php
Information and data security. All exercises, quizzes, writing
assignments, and online interactions in Canvas will be saved and stored. All
information will be kept for educational and general academic research. Any
research or data sharing with other researchers will involve de-identifying
the data, including the removal of names, UTEIDs, email addresses, or other
information. To further ensure that your information is secure, please do not
include identifying information in your online interactions with others.
Also, remember that all information is stored on secure UT-Austin computer
servers. In online interactions with the course, remember that the
instructors will have access to all information.
ASSIGNMENTS & GRADE CALCULATION
Course assignments are designed to enable students to make the most of
the online format of the course to effectively assimilate course material and
acquire knowledge of Texas politics though active engagement with the
materials. There will be one (1) cumulative final exam (more information


below). In addition to the exam, grades will be derived from numerous short
assignments aimed at reinforcing students’ assimilation of course material
via frequent knowledge assessment and practical application of the content
in the course materials. Course assignments are designed to be a roadmap
to help prepare students for the final exam.
The following groups of assignments will constitute the graded work of the
course.
    •  Texas Politics “Get the Gist” Practice Questions. The Texas
       Politics webtext includes study questions called “Get the Gist” after
       every page of text and other instructional material (tables, videos,
       etc.). Students are required to respond to all Get the Gist questions,
       and will receive credit for all correct answers. Students are provided
       two (2) attempts to deliver correct answers within the due date. A
       numerical score based on the percentage of total questions answered
       correctly will constitute their Texas Politics reading grades.
    •  Texas Politics Investigations in Canvas. Students will complete an
       investigation in Canvas for each module. Investigations are designed
       to provide students with a deeper dive into important topics.
    •  Lecture Video Quizzes – “Becoming an Insider”. These short
       lecture videos provide context and clarity to the topics in the course,
       with an emphasis on an in-depth understanding of politics in
       relationship to the topic being discussed. Each video set is followed by
       a multiple-choice question quiz designed to reinforce your
       understanding of the content of the lecture.
    •  “Texas Insiders” Video & Reading Quizzes. These short videos
       and readings present political practitioners and insiders providing first-
       hand perspectives on course topics. Each video and reading set is
       accompanied by a multiple-choice question quiz.
    •  Putting It All Together – Short Answer Activities. These
       assignments contain a mix of interactive short answer activities.
       Putting It All Together assignments require students to complete
       structured short answer exercises that develop applied understanding
       of the material. These activities are designed to engage students in
       public policy and politics.
    •  ‘Second Reading’ podcast Quizzes. Published weekly. Each
       ‘Second Reading’ podcast will be accompanied by a quiz that will
       contain 2-4 multiple choice questions, based on the content of the


       week’s podcast. The instructor will post an announcement when the
       podcast and assignment are available in Canvas, with a link to the
       podcast. Students will have about 5 days to complete the assignment
       once it has been published. The ‘Second Reading’ module will be
       located separately, at the top of the modules page.
    •  Exam. There will be one (1) cumulative final exam. See course
       schedule (below) for the exam date. While the exam is cumulative, it
       will be weighted more on the material in the second half of the class.
       The assignments are designed to prepare you for the exam. In other
       words: there will be no surprises and you should do well if you do the
       readings, complete all assignments, and pay attention to where you
       may need to allocate more resources to studying.
Each assignment will be designated a point total based on its length and
difficulty. Final grades will be calculated using the assignment group weights
below.
Assignment Group                                                 Weight
Texas Politics “Get the Gist” Questions                          10%
Texas Politics Investigations in Canvas                          20%
Lecture Video Quizzes – Becoming an Insider                      10%
Texas Insiders Video & Reading Quizzes                           10%
Putting It All Together – Short Answer Activities                20%
‘Second Reading’ Podcast questions                               10%
Final Exam                                                       20%
Students are required to complete 90% of all assignments in order to
receive a passing grade in the course.
Grade scale for final grades:
A 94-100%                 B- 80-83%                D+ 67-69%
A- 90-93%                 C+ 77-79%                D 64-66%
B+ 87-89%                 C 74-76%                 D- 60-63%
B 84-86%                  C- 70-73%                F 59 and below
Without exception, I will round up scores of 0.5 or higher, and round down
score of less than 0.5.
Again: Students must complete at least 90% of the assignments in order to
receive a passing grade for the course. Decimal points will be rounded.


CLASS WEBSITE COMPONENTS AND TERMS FOR THE COURSE
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251969
You can enter directly from the URL above or through the Canvas Dashboard
(https://canvas.utexas.edu/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you
will need your UTEID and password. Once you reach the course Canvas
page, you can navigate your way to other areas. This is an innovative online
course that combines the Canvas learning platform with a webtext authored
by a team at UT-Austin’s Texas Politics Project. Some of the most important
components include:
   •   Home — The homepage will have links to the Modules page, course
       Announcements, as well as important contact information and FAQs.
       On the left-hand side of each page of the Canvas course site are
       navigation tabs to all parts of the website, including the Syllabus,
       Grades, and the proctoring service ProctorU.
   •   Modules — The Modules page includes an orientation module (Module
       0), which must be completed in order to access the substantive course
       content. The Modules page contains the course reading assignments,
       lecture videos, graded assignments, and other course material. Each
       module contains the collection of reading, videos, and graded
       assignments organized around a particular course subject.
          o Assignment — An assignment is an individual piece of work a
             student must complete for a recorded score.
          o Chapter — refers to a chapter in the Texas Politics webtext.
          o ‘Second Reading’ Podcast Module — Regular updates to the
             course content featuring discussion of recent events related to
             the course in a podcast format and quizzes based on content in
             the podcast. Located at the top of the modules page. Updates to
             this module will occur on a weekly basis and will be accompanied
             by an announcement regarding their publication.
   •   Announcements Page — The Announcements feature is the primary
       mode of communication from the instructors to students. You can
       access it on the left-hand side of Canvas or through a link on the
       Homepage. Students should be sure that their Canvas settings enable
       them to receive announcements via email.
   •   Grades — The gradebook will be organized by individual assignment
       as well as by assignment group.
          o Assignment group — Types of assignments that appear in each
             module. Each group has a weight associated with it that will be
             used to calculate final grades (see above for details).


COURSE MECHANICS: How A Completely Online Course Works
This is a paced course that provides students extensive but not unlimited
discretion in terms of when to complete the required work. As described in
the course schedule below, students have to complete each module by
11:59 PM CDT on the assigned due date. Each module must be completed in
sequential order. Within each module, students must complete the textbook
reading and chapter review quizzes before accessing the remaining
assignments.
No Late Assignments. Assignments will be locked on the completion
deadline as described in the schedule. No late work will be accepted
after these deadlines – no exceptions. So, plan accordingly.
Online Exam Proctoring. The exam will be taken online, in Canvas, and
proctored by a testing company, ProctorU, in a virtual face-to-face setting.
This means you will be connected with a live person from one of their
proctoring centers from the time you start the exam until you submit it. You
can take the exam from almost anywhere using a webcam, a microphone,
and a high-speed Internet connection, as long as it is in a quiet, secure, and
distraction-free setting (i.e. the kind of place you should want to take an
exam). ProctorU will confirm your identity and monitor your computer and
work space while you are taking the exam. ProctorU is a student-pay
service.
In order to take the exam, students will need to create an account with
ProctorU (a link will be provided on the course Canvas page). Once students
have created a ProctorU account, they will need to schedule and pay for the
proctoring session. Instructions for creating an account and scheduling exam
session are included in Module 0: Pre-class Activities.
Make-Up Exam Policy. There will be NO early or late make-up exams,
except in cases of excusable absence, DOCUMENTED emergencies,
observance of religious holy days, or properly documented University-
sponsored planned activities. Notice that it is YOUR responsibility to notify
the instructor PRIOR to your expected absence. Missing an exam in all other
cases will result in a score of zero on that exam.
ACADEMIC HONESTY
The GOV 312L online course format allows for multiple methods of identity
verification, collusion, collaboration and plagiarism monitoring and detection.


A violation of the course policy may include (but is not limited to) the
following:
    • Providing your UT EID to any other person
    • Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the
      material on any work assigned to any person in any format or means
      of distributions.
    • Recording any graded questions, prompts, or responses in any format
The University of Texas at Austin Academic Integrity Principles call for
students to avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of
yourself or another student:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/index.php
Grade-related penalties are routinely assessed ("F" in the course is not
uncommon), but students can also be suspended or even permanently
expelled from the University for scholastic dishonesty.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
Honor system for quizzes and assignments. By taking this class, you
agree to abide by the University of Texas regulations concerning cheating.
While working on your activities, you cannot receive help from others or
discuss your short answer assignments with other students. If you observe
others cheating, you are honor bound to contact the instructor.
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-
6644 (video phone) or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.


COURSE SCHEDULE*          (TX = Texas Politics webtext chapter)
 Module                Topic           Open Date     Due Date   Reading
            Political Culture and
     1                                     6-June      10-June     TX 1
            History of Texas
     2      Public Opinion                 6-June      10-June     TX 1
 Podcast    Second Reading Quiz 1          6-June      10-June   Podcast
            Voting, Campaigns and
     3                                     6-June      17-June     TX 2
            Elections
     4      Political Parties              6-June      17-June     TX 3
 Podcast    Second Reading Quiz 2         12-June      17-June   Podcast
     5      Interest Groups                6-June      21-June     TX 4
     6      Texas Constitution             6-June      21-June     TX 5
     7      Executive Branch               6-June      24-June     TX 6
     8      The Governor                   6-June      24-June     TX 7
 Podcast    Second Reading Quiz 3         19-June      24-June   Podcast
            Legislative Branch:
     9                                    19-June      28-June     TX 8
            Actors and Organization
            Legislative Branch:
   10                                     19-June      28-June     TX 9
            Process and Politics
 Podcast    Second Reading Quiz 4         26-June       1-July   Podcast
   11       The Justice System            19-June       5-July    TX 10
            Intergovernmental
   12                                     19-June       8-July  TX 11, 12
            Relations
 Podcast    Second Reading Quiz 5          3-July       8-July   Podcast
   13       The Policy Landscape          19-June      11-July    TX 13
               FINAL EXAM: Saturday, July 13 2 PM - 5 PM
* All assignments within a module must be submitted by 11:59 pm CDT
on the due date. No exceptions.
