                                                     AHC 325/HIS 321M/CTI 375    Riggsby   Fall 18 !1
   HIS 321M (39080-39095)/AHC 325 (33435-33450)/CTI 375 (29530-29545)
                               History of Rome: the Republic
Professor Andrew Riggsby
Time: MW 10-11
Place: WAG 201
Office: WAG 103 (471-7442)
Email: ariggsby@mail.utexas.edu
OH: M 12-2, W 11-12
Website: piazza.com/utexas/fall2018/ahc325his321mcti375/home
Sections (you are automatically enrolled in one of these)
R 10-11, CAL 221; R 12-1, CAL 200; F 10-11, CAL 22; F 12-1; CAL 200
Attendance, Preparation, and Assignments:
     Attendance at lectures and at the section you are enrolled in is mandatory.
     Readings fall into two categories. Every week there will be chapters from the main textbook
(C. Mackay, Ancient Rome, to be bought at the book store or online) or from similar modern
works (these will be provided on Piazza). These are listed at the beginning of each week and in
this font. They are to be read before the first class of the week. My lectures will assume you
have read the text already, and you will take an online quiz on the contents of the readings
before that first class. There will also be specialized readings for some individual days, mostly
drawn from ancient sources and, in some cases, images rather than texts (these will be provided
through Piazza or the University’s subscription to the Loeb Classical Library). Some, but not
all, of these are listed below in small font. These should also be read/viewed before the class in
question. Quizzes will cover only the weekly readings. Exams will cover both sets of readings
as well as the lectures.
     There will be an ON-LINE QUIZ on Canvas most weeks to test factual knowledge of the
readings (10% of final grade in total; your single lowest grade dropped). The quiz will normally
be available early the afternoon before it is due. IMPORTANT: Note that you must take the
quiz BEFORE the first class of the week, that is by 10:00 on the day listed on the syllabus.
Note also that there are very struct rules for the form of answers to the quizzes. There will
also be three hour-long, IN-CLASS EXAMS. The first two of these will be taken in the sections, so
your date/time will depend on which you are enrolled in (25% each). These exams are not
formally cumulative, but some awareness of previous material may come into play. There is no
final exam during exam period. You are responsible for material in the textbook, assigned
readings, and class discussion. Relying on only one of these will result in poor marks. Finally,
participation in DISCUSSION SECTIONS will make up 15% of the grade.
     Make-up exams will be given only in cases of documented illness, death of an immediate
family member (documented by an obituary listing you as a survivor), or other documented
emergency, or pre-arranged absences for religious reasons, and only if I am notified 14 days in
advance. Documented emergencies do not include, for example: the illness or death of your
roommate’s pet; being in jail for under-age drinking; a late night at Hooters; missing your ride
back to Austin after a weekend away; missing the bus to campus; or sleeping through your
alarm. You must also notify me in person or by phone as soon as possible and at least 3 hours


                                                     AHC 325/HIS 321M/CTI 375     Riggsby   Fall 18 !2
BEFORE the time of the exam that you will miss the exam. If you fail to do so, you will receive a
zero on the exam, regardless of the reason. You should also expect that the make-up exam will
be of a different form and significantly more difficult.
    If simple averaging of grades does not produce a reasonable distribution of grades
according to the standard scale, scores may be increased by application of a uniform affine
transformation. Plus/minus grading IS in effect. Grades are not affected by any of the following:
your grades in other classes; your status as a classics major (or not); what grade you want for
graduate school admission, scholarship, academic standing or other reason.
Summary of Important Dates:
Midterm I: 27/8 Sept.
Midterm II: 25/6 Oct.
Midterm III: 10 Dec.
University-wide Policies:
DISABILITIES. UT Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact SSD at 471-6259, or go
to http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. It is your responsibility to inform me of any
authorized accommodations by the second week of class.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY. Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a 0 grade
for that examination or assignment. Scholastic dishonesty includes any kind of cheating or
collaboration on tests, or submitting work that is not your own. For more information, contact
Student Judicial Services at 471-2841, or visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
scholdis.php
BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS. The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that provides The
University of Texas at Austin’s faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their
concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is a partnership among the Office of
the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). An
individual can either call the line at 512-232-5050 or report their concerns using the online
submission form. Trained staff members will assist the individual in exploring available
options and strategies. Fuller info at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. If you need to miss a class or other required class activity for the
observance of a religious holiday, you must notify me at least 14 days in advance so we can
make alternative arrangements for your absence. Note: the University's Religious Days Policy
is online: http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/
GLOBAL CULTURES FLAG. This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You
should therefore expect all of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices,
beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
This course also fulfills the Cultural Expression, Human Experience, & Thought Course area
requirement.


                                                   AHC 325/HIS 321M/CTI 375 Riggsby Fall 18 !3
Assignments (The date listed is the Monday of that week, even if there is no class that
day; the daily schedule of topics gives an approximate break-down of material within
the week; exam dates are firm. Note that some additional daily texts will be added
online.)
•Aug. 27: In the Beginning… [NB: NO QUIZ this week]
[M classes have not yet started]
W Introduction/Founding
section The Forum Cippus
•Sep. 3: The Republican Government; Riggsby, Roman Law, chh. 11, 19, text [26]; Beard
and Crawford, Rome in the…, ch. 4; Patterson, Political Life, ch. 2. [NB: NO QUIZ this
week]
[M No class]
W Magistrates
section Running for office; Commentariolum Petitionis
•Sep. 10:The Earliest Republic; M2
M The political context
W Patricians and Plebeians
section The Twelve Tables; Twelve Tables
•Sep. 17: Conquest of Italy; M3
M Pre-Roman Italy
W Conquest of Italy
section Bacchanalia; Liv. 39.8-18, SC de Bacchanalibus
•Sept. 24: Punic Wars; M4
M 1st Punic War
W 2nd and 3rd Punic Wars
section EXAM
•Oct. 1: Wars around the Mediterranean; M5, 6
M Greece and the East
W Spain and Gaul
section War monuments; Riggsby 2006.217-21; IMAGES
•Oct. 8: Domestic Political Strife; M7, 8
M Return of the Tribunes
W Social War
section Political propaganda; Cornelia’s letter, Val. Max. 4.7.1
•Oct. 15: The Restored Oligarchy?; M9
M Sulla and Pompey
W The First Triumvirate
section The Catilinarian conspiracy; Cic., Second Speech against Catiline


                                                      AHC 325/HIS 321M/CTI 375  Riggsby Fall 18 !4
•Oct. 22: End of the Republic; M10
M Descent into civil war
W Dictatorship of Caesar
section EXAM
•Oct. 29: Death; Davies, Death and the…, ch. 2; Parkin, Demography 91-111; Morris, Death-
Ritual, ch. 2.
M Demographics
W Rituals
section Speaking inscriptions; handout
•Nov. 5: Feeding Rome; Garnsey and Saller, The Roman Empire
[M no class]
W City grain supply
section Cooking and eating; Cena Trimalchionis (selection); Apicus (selections)
•Nov. 12: Slavery; Bradley, Slavery and Society at Rome, chh. 2, 4, Slaves and Masters, ch. 4
M Slavery from the outside
W Slavery from the inside
section Edict of the aediles on slave sales
•Nov. 19: How Democratic was Republican Rome?; M12; Yakobson in Blackwell
Companion to the Roman Republic
M That’s hard to say
[W and section no class]
•Nov. 26: Fine arts
M Painting and mosaics
W Sculpture; status of artists
section Perspective; images
•Dec. 3: Patronage; Deniaux in Blackwell Companion to the Roman Republic; Saller,
Wallace-Hadrill in Wallace-Hadrill, Patronage in Ancient Society
M Idealizations; Cic. Fam 15.1-10; Plin. 10.1-7, 10-12
W Realities
section Ordinary letters of recommendation; handout
•Dec. 10 Third exam IN LECTURE. No additional readings
