            Syllabus: Technology Advertising and Marketing
                     ADV 332 (05950), PR 332 (06480)
Day & Time Thursday, 4:00 – 7:00 p.m.
Location        BMC 2.106
Professor       Mark Bunting markb@skytv.net (Office hours: upon request)
Teaching Assistants
    •    Greg Song (Yong Whi Song)
         ywsong@utexas.edu | (612) 325 - 6253
    •    Laura Sliker
         lauragsliker@utexas.edu | (585) 245 - 3731
PLEASE CONTACT ASSISTANTS FOR ANY QUESTIONS CONCERNING ATTENDANCE,
GRADES, ET.
Enrollment Course is designed as an elective for students in the schools of
Business, Engineering and Communications.
Facebook        UT AdTech https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech
The Course One of the biggest challenges we face in the technology & consumer
electronic industry is that the bright minds that develop circuit boards and highly
complex technologies generally are less qualified at marketing and communication
skills. Likewise, those gifted with great communication acumen, rarely possess the
technical understanding of the products they must market. Every discipline within
the high tech industry is ultimately dependent on engineers augmenting their
developments to make them more marketable, and marketing experts need to grasp
the challenges of taking new (and sometimes rarely understood) new technologies
to the consumer and B-to-B market. By exploring actual case histories, interviews
with leading technology advertising and marketing executives and a review of some
of the more topical trends in technology communications – we will bring real-life
experience/exposure for those who hope to enter this important arena.
In addition, we will explore the latest trends in digital advertising from mobile to
social and its impact across marketing segments and industries. Entrepreneurialism
in new media will also be covered, as will the exploration of career opportunities
involving all of the aforementioned. We will also spend 3 weeks with online modules
regarding Entrepreneurship as we work thru case studies.


Summary
Extensive Look at Advertising and Marketing Within the Technology Industry.
Review Newer Technologies in Communication (Social/Mobile).
Entrepreneurialism across “Technology” and “Media.”
Career Opportunities in Social/Mobile/Tech Client Side & PR/ADV/MKT.
Taking a cue from Inside the Actors Studio, this weekly 3-hour class will include
guest speakers from some of the industry’s biggest names. We will explore a myriad
of topics involving the marketing and advertising of technology products and
services. Professor Mark Bunting is the former television host of many popular
computer programs from CNBC, The Discovery Channel and The Learning Channel,
https://www.linkedin.com/in/markbunting/ As a serial entrepreneur in both
technology and media, Mark will expose students to a broad spectrum of topics
within the technology advertising/marketing arena. A few of the topics will include:
    *Marketing Technology to Consumers*Agency and Client Relationship*Social
     Networking and The Changing Media Landscape*Entrepreneurialism*Print
         Advertising (Trade and Consumer)*PR’s Role in the Communication
         Mix*Marketing’s Influence in the Product Development Cycle Out of
                      Home/Alternative Media*Mobile and Social
Guest Speakers have included a number of key executives from leading technology
and media enterprises. They will share their experiences through- out the semester.
Students will also have an opportunity to meet each guest and “network” with these
highly influential leaders.
Due to the fact that the speakers for this class are not yet confirmed, a tentative
schedule of speakers will be posted on Canvas by the 2nd week of class.
Materials (must be purchased by week 2 of class)
Entrepreneurship Modules by G51 at $90.
    • You will select 4 of 8 different cases to work.
    • All students must take the G51 entrepreneurship modules even if you
        have used this material in another class.
    • http://g51edu.com/courses/technology-marketing-and-advertising/


                                     Grading Policy
Attendance - 50%
Students are allowed ONE excused absence for the semester without penalty. If for
some reason you are unable to attend class, the student is expected to inform the TA
assigned to the class via email prior to class. Being absent for class may result in a
reduction of your grade for the course. If a student misses a class for any reason, it
is the student’s responsibility to be informed of the materials covered during the
class. 2 class misses will likely keep a student from achieving an A, 3 or more
missed classes will automatically exclude ANY student from achieving
anything higher than a B.
Exams - 40%
There will be two closed-book exams during the semester according to the
following tentative schedule:
    • Exam 1: Oct 17th
    • Exam 2: Dec 5th
Each exam accounts for 20% of your class grade. The exams will be completed
on a laptop through Canvas and will consist of true/false and/or multiple-choice
questions and/or short answer questions based on course material covered prior to
the exam date.
Entrepreneurship Modules - 10%
We will dedicate 2 class days to learning the basic tenants of entrepreneurialism
with a hybrid online-live workshop. Satisfactory completion of the work generates a
grade equal to your final attendance grade. If you have an A in attendance at
semesters end – you will receive an additional A for 10% of your overall average. If
you have a B in attendance, you will receive an additional B for 10% of your overall
average, et
Grading Schema:
A = 90-100%, B = 80-89%, C = 70-79%, D = 60-69 %, F = below 60%. Fractions of
points will be rounded: .50 or higher upwards, .49 or lower downwards.
Plus/minus will not be assigned to the letter grades.


Course Procedures:
    1. Canvas (http://courses.utexas.edu): Canvas and classroom
       announcements will serve as communication vehicles for this course. Please
       check Canvas or the Facebook page below for PowerPoint slides for a class
       session, as well as for other session-related materials. In order to ensure that
       you receive all information sent out through Canvas, please update your
       email address on UTDirect (www.utdirect.utexas.edu). Tests will also be
       administered via Canvas, so please bring laptops to class on test days.
    2. Facebook: Please like the UT ADTECH Facebook Page:
       www.facebook.com/UtAdTech. This source will list additional information
       such as blog posts, articles and other content which may be relevant to in-
       class discussion. Video content from class lectures as well as PowerPoint
       slides will also be posted on this site.
    3. In Class Conduct: Use of laptop computers, cell phones, mobile tablets and
       other electronic devices during class session is prohibited. NOISE DURING
       LECTURES AND SPEAKERS IS HIGHLY DISRUPTIVE. Quiet is required!
    4. Academic Dishonesty: All students are expected to act within and
       uphold the UT Honor Code fully. You may access the General Information
       Catalog to review specific University policies on scholastic dishonesty or
       refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
       http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
