                              HDF 304 – Family Relationships (51026)
             Summer 2020 | M-F 11:30-1pm | Online Synchronous & Asynchronous
 Instructor:                   Dr. Michelann Quimby | she/her/hers
 Office:                       Skype: missmichelann
                               (512) 789-3063
 Phone:
                               (mobile - short text messages or calls M-F 9-5 only)
 E-mail:                       mquimby@utexas.edu
 Skype:                        missmichelann
 Office hours:                 Thursdays 11:30- via Skype & by appointment
 Dr. Quimby on
                               @Dr_Quimby
 Twitter:
 Website:                       https://drmichelannquimby.com/
 Student Community             https://dr-quimby-spring-2020-community.mn.co/feed (Links
 Page:                         to an external site.)
 TA:                           Jerica X Bornstein
 Contact:                      jericax@utexas.edu
                               Tuesdays 11:30am-1:00pm: zoom
                               https://utexas.zoom.us/j/7699387533 (Links to an external
 Office Hours:
                               site.)
                               Meeting ID: 769 938 7533
                                         Course Description*
The process of family interaction over the life cycle. Application of research findings to the
understanding of relationships.
Topics include relationship stages and theories, intersectional identities including race, sexuality,
gender and gender identity, and socioeconomic status, sociohistorical contexts of relationships in
the US, and systems-informed international perspectives.
*Subject to changes at Instructor discretion
Learning Goals
    • To introduce the field of Human Development and Family Sciences as a discipline and
        career path
    • To examine and apply the main theories used to study relationships in the HDFS field
    • To understand the historical, socioeconomic, and cultural contexts of relationships
    • To examine stages of relationship formation and dissolution
    • To develop the ability to discuss and analyze current-day policy and events and how they
        relate to modern relationships and family formation


     •   To recognize how intersecting identities affect how families and individuals function in
         society, and how they change based on context.
     • To apply the theories and perspectives studied in the course to your own lived experiences
         with the goal of taking an ecological systems perspective on your lived experiences
Learning Outcomes:
     • Apply and communicate an HDFS perspective on pervasive social issues that affect
         relationships through multiple mediums.
     • Ability to apply and communicate the impact of theory to personal, public, current, and
         historical events that affect relationships.
     • Ability to take an intersectional, multidisciplinary perspective on human relationships.
Learning Methods:
I use a variety of techniques in my classroom which will be detailed in the course requirements
section. Types of activities include:
     • Weekly discussion of current events and how they relate to class material
     • Weekly online discussions of assigned material
     • Discussions of videos and lecture via Zoom and discussion boards
     • Lectures on material (but I don’t lecture to everything so do the reading)
     • Guest podcasts
     • Small group projects
     • Small group presentations
     • Essays on student-selected art, media, or pop culture pieces and how they relate to course
         material
     • Case studies, in-class and written
Required Materials
Howe, T. R. (2017). Marriages and Families in the 21st Century: A Bioecological Approach (2 edition).
SAGE Publications, Inc.
All readings other than the textbook are on Canvas under the corresponding week. Most weeks also
include videos. Please read/watch all required material before participating in that week’s online
discussion, as we will be evaluating your knowledge of the content.
Required Devices
Laptops or tablets are highly recommended.
Course Outline (detailed version on Canvas under Modules)
Section 1: Introduction, History, and Theories of Relationships: Weeks 1-2
Section 2: Sexuality, Dating, & Commitment: Weeks 3-4
Section 3: Dissolution, Repartnering, & Aging: Week 5
Section 4: Synthesis & Application: Weeks 12-15


Assignments
Assignments are clustered in groups and weighted. See Canvas Assignments for point and
percentage values.
                                            Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you
from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop
strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to
reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am
happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
It is the student’s responsibility to be aware of their grades. Grades will be available through Canvas
and students have access to these grades throughout the semester. Students are always welcome to
discuss grades or other feedback with the instructor or TA throughout the semester and are
encouraged to do so as early as possible after assignments have been returned.
 Grade          Cutoff
 A              93%
 A-             90%
 B+             87%
 B              83%
 B-             80%
 C+             77%
 C              73%
 C-             70%
 D              65%
 F              <65%
Absences & Student Needs
You are expected to arrive on time for Monday Zoom classes. If you are late or miss class, you are
expected to make your own arrangements to obtain class notes, changes to assignments, etc. To
emphasize the importance of participation, a significant percent of your grade is contingent upon
that. If an illness or a family emergency causes you to miss class or assignments, please e-mail Dr.
Quimby and the TA before the class is missed if possible.
You must notify instructors of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a work assignment, or a project to
observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.


The ONLY legitimate reasons for missing your scheduled commitment times are illness, religious
holidays, or family emergencies. Non-legitimate excuses include but are not limited to: car trouble,
you are tired, you have to study, your alarm did not go off, you bought a last-minute airline ticket to
visit your family, etc. Verification of absences can be referred to the Office of Dean of Students and
may require documentation such as a doctor’s note, police reports, fire reports, or obituaries.
Should you be absent for a non-legitimate reason that you feel should be excused, you must bring
your case and documentation to the Office of the Dean of Students – they will tell me their decision
as to whether I can excuse the absence. Any non-legitimate absences will be considered an
unexcused absence.
In addition please contact the Dean of Students 512-471-5017 (Mon.-Fri., 8-
4:30), http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/ (Links to an external site.) (Links to an
external site.), for issues related to personal or family emergencies, and medical excuses including
depression or other mental issues. Please seek help immediately from the Dean of Students for issues
of this nature. They will help you find resources and work with faculty to assist you during a
challenging time. If you are going through a personal crisis and need accommodations, please talk
with me and consider getting a short-term disability accommodation from the Disability Office.
Whenever possible, ask permission, not forgiveness.
Makeup Work or Extra Credit
Makeup work and/or extra credit are offered only at the instructor's discretion. If you know you
will be missing class for academic reasons (grad school interviews, GRE/LSAT/MCAT, sport or
other team events in which you are participating) let me and the TA know in advance via Canvas
email and in person. If I choose to allow you to do makeup work (usually for missed participation
points), it will be only as time allows, so I suggest you make plans well in advance - not the last
week of class.
Classroom Behavior
Students are expected to be prepared to discuss assigned readings and participate in all class
activities or assignments. You are expected to be courteous and respectful of your fellow students,
guest speakers, instructor, and teaching assistant. Disruptive behavior that distracts the students or
instructors is not tolerated.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
    • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    • You have a right to respect.
    • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
         your learning environment.
    • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall
         be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.


With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
         with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
         others.
     • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
         bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
         someone is excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other
         to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Communication
All emails to the TA or instructor should include “HDF 304” in the subject line to help us organize
course-related emails. We will typically respond to emails within 24hrs., but at high volume email
times, such as before assignments are due, please allow 48 hours. It is the student's responsibility
to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. You must check e-mail on a
frequent and regular basis to stay current with University-related communications, as
communications may be time-critical. Undeliverable messages returned because of either a full
inbox or use of a "spam" filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the
University. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address is
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html (Links to an external site.) (Links
to an external site.).
In this course, e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be
responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class assignments, readings, and announcements.
Diversity and Inclusion Statement
I am committed to furthering diversity and inclusion in my classroom. My approach is particularly
informed by three theories: intersectionality (Links to an external site.), critical pedagogy (Links to
an external site.), and trauma-informed pedagogy (Links to an external site.) (TIP). I follow
pedagogical practices in writing and presenting that seek to minimize the effects of colonization on
marginalized people in their work. I strive to create an equitable environment in which we do not
discriminate based on culture, gender, race, gender identity, sexual identity, ability, appearance, or
religion. We seek to understand each other better to unpack our biases and expand our schemas.
Using intersectionality and critical pedagogy as a guide, I try to create space for all voices in my
classroom, but I work to center marginalized voices whenever possible. This means allowing
students with intersecting identities of oppression space to discuss their perspectives and
experiences as frequently as possible and encouraging research and discussion on and by
populations that are under-researched. The role of structural inequality in the development and
application of science underlies my pedagogy in all courses.
Trauma-Informed Pedagogy (TIP) provides guidelines for minimizing harm to students who may
experience secondary trauma from the study or discussion of traumatic issues, such as racial
violence and discrimination, family abuse, and childhood sexual abuse. I allow students to use


coping mechanisms such as non-disruptive distraction, exit, and individual accommodations in the
classroom and provide alternative assignments for students who may be affected by first-hand
experiences of these and other issues.
Finally, when designing and evaluating assignments, I value the ability to think and communicate
clearly over replicating the white, privileged norms of grammar and syntax in academic writing. My
training in minimal marking practices helps students prioritize communication over perfection and
allows students to develop their thinking while improving their writing.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender
variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal
name unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/ (Links to an
external site.)). I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from
what appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc).
Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to
my records.
                                   University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the
building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible
to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information,
visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/ (Links to an external site.).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs
and alcohol, getting enough sleep, and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your
goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to
ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek
support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html (Links to an external site.)


The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc (Links to an external site.) or call 512-
471-3614 (JES A332).
     • Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/ (Links to an external site.)
     • Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/ (Links to an external site.)
     • ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/ (Links to an external site.)
     • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/ (Links to an
         external site.)
     • Public Speaking Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc/support/speaking-center/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of
care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal (Links to an external site.).
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ (Links to an external site.)
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all the exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
         building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
         the first week of class
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
         enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services officials
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
         be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency (Links to an external site.)
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual


harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence, and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
         have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies (Links to an
         external site.).
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making
an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about
reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu (Links to an external site.) or contact the
Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ (Links to an external site.)
                                          University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism (theft of intellectual property) is taken very seriously
at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a
previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise, you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject
to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an
external site.)
Don’t cheat and don’t lie.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
