E s379R, 79864, 7-Literature and Culture of the 1960s-WB
Instructor: Brian Doherty, Senior Lecturer
Summer 2020, second session
Online office Hours offered weekly.
Writing Flag, Independent Inquiry Flag
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English or rhetoric and writing.
Description:
The largest section of the grade will be attached to the individual student’s chosen “independent
inquiry” topic. Among the topics will be (1) Extended research into Thomas Pynchon and The
Crying of Lot 49; (2) French writer Jean Genet in America and Paris; (3) Kurt Vonnegut in the
60’s; (4) Writers and the magazine: either Ramparts or The Evergreen Review; (5) The 60s and
song-poetry: Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Joni Mitchell, Leonard Cohen; (6) The 60s and American
post-modernism, or avant-garde theater, or underground comics; (7) the emergence of the
Woman’s Movement; (8) etc.
Students will choose a focus for their study very early in the semester, and build toward a work
of literary or rhetorical analysis by the end of the semester. They should be able to demonstrate
what holdings there are in Austin for their chosen writer or topic, and a variety of work published
by and about the chosen author. Short readings will guide out daily discussion; by the second
half of the course, students who have chosen a writer or topic that is central to our class for the
day should be able to lead part of the conversation.
Texts:
Jean Genet, The Blacks: A Clown Show
Thomas Pynchon, The Crying of Lot 49.
All other reading on the Internet or provided by pdf.
Grading and Evaluation:
Contribution to History timeline                                                                        5%
Participation in Canvas Discussion. (minimum 6 of 11 topics commented upon)                             10%
Scheduled quizzes on Readings (3 quizzes scheduled)                                                     10%
60s Music brief presentation (10 minutes maximum)                                                       10%
Participation in independent inquiry group workshops                                                    10%
Independent Inquiry progress report (due July 30)                                                       10%
Independent Inquiry final project (dossier). Due August 15)                                             45%
Plus and minus grades will be used in the class. A = 93-100; A- = 90-92.9; B + = 88-89.9; B = 83=87.9; B- = 80-
82.9; C+ = 78-79.9; C = 73-77.9; C- = 70-72.9; D = 65-69.9. Below 65 = F.
Please be aware of University policies and services for students with disabilities:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Please be aware of the University Standard for Academic Integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Schedule of Reading/ Assignments:
July 13: Introduction to the course. Research methodology. Goals, expectations.


Why the decade of the 60s was pivotal. There will be a short, recorded lecture available, and we
will have a zoom class at 2 p.m. for introductions, questions, etc.
         14: Build timeline on shared site with some elements of social/historical movements,
including early and middle civil rights, the rise of the Black Power Movement, origins of the
Vietnam War, sites like Greenwich Village and the Haight Ashbury, rise of women’s rights
movement in the U.S., and etc. Short research assignments will be submitted electronically, and
a history will be compiled for the class on the Canvas site.
         15: Case study—The assassination of Civil Rights leader Medgar Evers. Eudora Welty.
“Where is That Voice Coming From.” Bob Dylan. “Only a Pawn in their Game.” We’ll have a
zoom class for a discussion of these texts from 2-3:15, attendance highly recommended.
         16: Case study—Some letters from prison by George Jackson, and Jean Genet
introduction. A lecture will present the importance of Jackson in American culture and the
unique brand of confrontation and irreverence that Genet shows in his writing.
         17: Turn the Radio on. That Mo-town song. Sly and the Family Stone (at Woodstock?)
Marvin Gaye, What’s Going On?. Students present a song, or album, or event. Zoom class for
this at 1 pm. It is intended to be enjoyable, informative, uplifting—if you choose not to attend,
well, it is kind of your loss. But ours too, because then we miss the qualities that only you bring
to the table.
         20: Question Authority in Literature. Three by Barthelme: “Me and Miss Mandible,”
“The Balloon,” “Report.” Notes posted on Canvas, and a reading quiz also on Canvas to be
submitted between 2:11 and 5:23, p.m.
         21: Thomas Pynchon. The Crying of Lot 49. Chapters 1 and 2. Recorded lecture to give
you some access to the work and help you to see why it is quintessentially 60s.
         22: Thomas Pynchon. The Crying of Lot 49. Chapters 3 and 4. Reading quiz to make
sure you are keeping up. Submit between 12:14 and 3:42. (Barthelme says: Art is not difficult
because it wishes to be difficult, but because it wishes to be art.” Applies to Pynchon and his
work). Written notes available on “modules in Canvas.
         23: Thomas Pynchon. The Crying of Lot 49. Zoom class to discuss the novel, its impact,
and its difficulty artfulness. Class begins at 10. Second zoom class begins at 2. Take your pick.
         24: Too slim to swim? Psychedelic Music in the 60s. Austin’s own 13th Floor Elevators.
The Grateful Dead (and the San Francisco Scene). The Moody Blues. Beatles and Rolling
Stones avant trip albums. Parody: Frank Zappa and The Mothers of Invention, We’re Only in it
for the Money. Zoom class for this event begins at 4:20, which in no way is to encourage you to,
uh, well, you know.
         27: No assigned meetings. Breakout zoom meetings by topics. There will be about 5
slots, depending on the kind of topic you’ve chosen to investigate independently (which doesn’t
mean in solitude—these groups will help).
         28: How Bob Dylan changed the world. 3 or four iconic songs, including “A Hard Rain’s
a’Gonna Fall,” “Masters of War,” and “Hey! Mr. Tambourine Man.” Assigned reading: Arthur
Rimbaud, “The Drunken Boat” (“Le Bateau Ivre”). Forum—pre-recorded lecture available. A
short Zoom meeting at 3 for those who wish to further investigate these enigmatic songs (mostly
enigmatic).
         29: From Bob Dylan’s Chronicles, the chapter called “New Morning.” Mandatory
discussion on the Canvas discussion board of Dylan’s dilemma, and the role of the artist in the
modern world, and the trouble with fame.
         30: No assigned readings. Each student will submit a progress report on the independent
inquiry project. Many of these projects require a lot of reading, viewing, reflecting. Use these


no reading days and the Fridays when you are not reporting on a musical artist to do your
reading, research, etc. (Don’t view them as days off).
        31: Turn the Radio On. Advances in songwriting. I’m reserving a 2 hour zoom room for
this, because there is so much that is great, interesting, valuable, etc. Joni Mitchell, Joan Baez,
Leonard Cohen, John Lennon, Paul McCartney, Neil Young, Stephen Stills, etc. don’t forget
about Bob Dylan in his prime.
August 3: Back to avant-garde combined with Race matters. First part of Jean Genet, The
Blacks. Brief recorded lecture to help you through.
        4: The Blacks to completion. Zoom meeting at 1 pm. If there are people who have
tackled this difficult text for I I, you will fill us in on some background, reactions to the
performances in the New York community, some subsequent stagings of this difficult work, etc.
(How’s it play in Paris, would be a question I would have).
        5: A Jean Genet wrap-up. Some facts about Chicago ’68, about Genet’s inflammatory
writing in the American alternative press in the 60s, Genet on revolution, and his reflections on
how Black Power lines up with Palestinian freedom movements (in his last book, Prisoner of
Love). Format—pre-recorded lecture.
        6: Discussion of 1968: The Year That Shaped a Generation.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Opjih9pqv2g
Option to discuss on Zoom at 2 pm or on Canvas discussion board, or both. There is another
film called Chicago: 1968 that focusses more explicitly on the Democratic national convention
of that summer. Highly recommended.
        7: “She started Dancing to that fine, fine, music—her life was changed, by rock-n-roll.”
Students choice. Velvet Underground and Iggy Pop? The Doors? Festival at Woodstock? The
Kinks?
        10: A foray into The Black Arts Movement. Selected artists and poems. Zoom
presentation.
        11: Joan Didion: “Slouching Towards Bethlehem.” (recorded lecture)
        12: Three days of peace, love, and magic on zoom. All three days on Zoom, at 1 pm
(subject to time change). Students talk through their independent inquiry project and how they
are feeling about it at this time.
        13: Second day of peace, love, and magic.
        14: Last day of p, l, and m.
        15. Finished, polished, version of the independent inquiry project due (for grading
purposes). It is OK if you did not get to all that you promised—you can leave some as
“unfinished,” as a prospectus.
