Musical Acoustics – Gelb – Fall 2019
                                                       Musical Acoustics
                                   AET 320D / MUS 376J / TD 354T / ME 379Q
 “If you want to find the secrets of the universe, think in terms of energy, frequency and vibration” - Tesla
                                     Fall 2019; DFA 4.126; Tu/Th 5-6:30 PM
Dr. (James) Gelb; jamesmartingelb@gmail.com; 512-565-8413; Office Hrs: After Class/TBD
The goal of the course is to help students develop the intuition and vocabulary for understanding
the basic principles relevant to musical instruments and sound (e.g., mechanics, vibrations,
acoustics, harmonics, acoustic-electronic conversions, speakers, hearing, perception, room
acoustics, and so forth) in order to be able to read basic articles on the subject of musical
acoustics. Material is kept relevant to musical principles (e.g., performance techniques,
scales/harmony, …) throughout the course. The level is accessible to students outside of the
sciences with no background in physics/engineering and to those with limited or no exposure to
music and mathematics beyond basic algebra. Optional advanced reading can be assigned to
those interested. Liberal arts and science/engineering students will both benefit from the course.
 TOPICS:
 I) Introduction and Motion                          Position, Speed/Velocity, Acceleration, Force, Mass, Gravity
 II) Pressure and Oscillations                       Work, Energy, Pressure, Springs, Transverse/Longitudinal Waves
 III) Sound                                          Wavelength, Frequency, Doppler, Phase, Amplitude, Intensity, Decibels, Resonance, Impedance
 IV) Strings and Harmonics                           Vibrating String, Transients, Standing Waves, Harmonics, Plucked Instruments
 V) Properties of Musical Sound and Frequency        Combinations of Waves, Beats, Modes of Vibration, Fourier (Frequency) Analysis
 VI) Timbre and Bowed Instruments                    Timbre, Driven Systems, Harmonic Structure, Bowed Instruments, Inharmonicity, Mode Locking
 VII) Human Ear and Voice                            Human Ear, Critical Bands, Intensity, Pitch, Loudness, Voice/Singing
 VIII) Scientific Foundations of Music Theory        Piano, Intervals, Scales, Scales/Modes in the World, Tempered Tuning, Consonance (part 1)
 IX) Architectural Acoustics                         Reverberation, Absorption, Attenuation, Reflection, Refraction, Diffraction, Interference, Sabine's Law
 X) Wind, Woodwind, & Brass Instruments              Open/Closed Tubes, Organ Pipes, Reeds, Brass Instruments, Transcription, Impedance Plots
 XI) Electronic Music and Signal Processing          Filters, Circuits, Speakers, Sound Synthesis, Properties of Electronic/Acoustical Signals
 XII) Percussion                                     Analysis of Percussion Instruments, Piano, Modes of Vibration, Unpitched Instruments
 XIII) Psychoacoustics                               Pure and Complex Tones Revisited, Loudness, Pitch Perception, Consonance (part 2), Neural Models
This syllabus below represents my current plans and objectives. Changes are not unusual and should be expected.
Test/presentation dates (in red), however, will be preserved to accommodate your schedule planning.
 Wk         Dates                 TUE (PART 1)                TUE (PART 2)                      THU (PART 1)                       THU (PART2)
                               Part 1 is 1st 40 min.      Part 2 is 2nd 40 min.               Part 1 is 1st 40 min.             Part 2 is 2nd 40 min.
   1       Aug29                   NO CLASS                     NO CLASS                          Introduction             Introduction/Units/Mechanics
   2       Sep3/5                   Mechanics                   Mechanics                    Pressure/Oscillations                       Heat
   3      Sep10/12                Waves/Sound                     Sound                       Strings/Harmonics                  Strings/Harmonics
   4      Sep17/19                SOUND LAB                    SOUND LAB                      Frequency Analysis                Frequency Analysis
   5      Sep24/26          Timbre / Bowed Strings      Timbre / Bowed Strings                   Miscellaneous                        REVIEW
   6       Oct1/3                    TEST 1                       TEST 1                     Intensity / Loudness               Intensity / Loudness
   7       Oct8/10             Intensity / Loudness        Intensity / Loudness                     Hearing                           Hearing
   8      Oct15/17                    Scales                       Scales                            Tuning                            Tuning
   9      Oct22/24                    Winds                       Winds                              Winds                              Winds
  10      Oct29/31                     Brass                     REVIEW                              TEST 2                            TEST 2
  11       Nov5/7            Architectural Acoustics    Architectural Acoustics             Architectural Acoustics                 WINDS LAB
  12      Nov12/14               Electronic Music            Electronic Music                  Speakers / Filters                 Speakers / Filters
  13      Nov19/21                  Percussion                  Percussion                            Piano                        Psychoacoustics
  14    Nov26/Thanks              Presentations                Presentations                       NO CLASS                          NO CLASS
  15       Dec3/5                 Presentations                Presentations                     Presentations               Presentations / REVIEW
  16       Dec12                   NO CLASS                     NO CLASS                        FINALS WEEK                       FINALS WEEK
  17       Dec17                 FINALS WEEK                 FINALS WEEK                           NO CLASS                          NO CLASS
                                                                1
                                                                                                           Revised 5/1/19


Musical Acoustics – Gelb – Fall 2019
Format and Procedures:
The class and exams are based heavily upon lectures using the white board and computer projected information.
Many demonstrations using laboratory equipment will be used in class to enhance learning/intuition/retention. “Lab”
days (in blue above) are informal – they represent days that are heavily dependent upon demonstrations.
Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on (+/- letter grades given for overall grade):
                   (a) Midterms (2x25=50%)
                   (b) Homework (6x3=20%, two free points, hw7/8 are not graded)
                   (c) Presentation (mandatory, 5%) – topics/details will be provided shortly
                   (d) Final (mandatory, 25%)
Requirements:
         1. Class attendance and participation policy: Attendance is strongly recommended
              because the exams are primarily based on the lectures. Attendance will be taken and
              can influence borderline grades. Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me
              of your pending absence prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
              class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
              give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
         2. Course Readings/Materials:
              (a) Required Textbook: "The Science of Sound," 3rd Ed., Rossing, Moore, Wheeler
              (b) Supplementary texts if interested (I can show you my versions if interested):
              “Musician’s Acoustics” by Parker and Smith –
                   nice, succinct, intuitive descriptions, very simple math
              “Musimathics” Volumes I and II by Gareth Loy –
                   accessible, all aspects of musical acoustics, for musicians, moderate basic math
              “The Physics and Psychophysics of Music” by Juan G. Roederer
                   accessible treatment, moderate mathematics, mostly psychoacoustics
              “The Physics of Musical Instruments” by Fletcher and Rossing
                   highly technical, upper division / graduate level
              “Musical Acoustics” by Hall
                   descriptive, standard textbook for musical acoustics for musicians
              (c) A simple scientific calculator is recommended. You can find one for under $10.
              (d) URL for course website: https://canvas.utexas.edu
         3. Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
           (a) Homework (with due dates) will be posted approximately every 1-2 weeks.
           (b) Make up exams must be scheduled prior to exam date.
           (c) Students are responsible for knowing add/drop/… dates: http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars
           (d) Date, time, and location of Final Exam: http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/exams
          4. Use of Canvas in class
                 In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected
                 access at http://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
                 online, to post grades, and to submit assignments. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS
                 Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
                                                            2
                                                                                                  Revised 5/1/19


Musical Acoustics – Gelb – Fall 2019
Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work.
You are encouraged to study together and to discuss information and concepts covered in lecture and the
sections with other students. You can give "consulting" help to or receive "consulting" help from such
students. However, this permissible cooperation should never involve one student having possession of a
copy of all or part of work done by someone else, in the form of an e-mail, an e-mail attachment file, a
diskette, or a hard copy.
Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave
material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of
this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the
examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any
collaborative behavior during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure
of the course and University disciplinary action.
Other University Notices and Policies
 Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
      All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
         student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students
         are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
         communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
         mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions
         for updating your e-mail address are available at: http://www.utexas.edu/its
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details
of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition or
diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.)
        Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
         instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
         etc.).
        Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
         required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
         transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
        Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
         reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
         http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
                                                            3
                                                                                               Revised 5/1/19


Musical Acoustics – Gelb – Fall 2019
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
 discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
 among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
 Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
   undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
   dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than
   that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
 Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
 activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
           Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
              exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
           If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
           In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                            4
                                                                                             Revised 5/1/19
