                            THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                           STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course number: SW n383T                        Instructor: Mary Beer, LCSW-S
                                                            Clinical Assistant Professor
                                                            (She/Her/Hers)
Unique number: 87595                           Email: mary.beer@austin.utexas.edu
Semester: Summer 2020                          Cell phone: 512-529-0313
Meeting time: Mon/Wed 5:30-8:00PM              Office hours: Mondays 4-5, or by appt.
& Place: Via Zoom                              Office number: 3.124 G
                                    Social Work Practice II
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course builds upon Social Work Practice I by deepening students’ knowledge of the
generalist social work perspective in the application of theory and practice methods for
effective and ethical service delivery to diverse individuals, families, groups, organizations
and communities in conjunction with field education.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, students should be able to:
     1. Critically analyze professional values, ethical dilemmas and ethical decision making
        and their impact on service delivery, policy and practice;
     2. Identify, critique, apply and evaluate social work theories and methods from a
        strengths based generalist perspective for effective service delivery to diverse
        individuals, families, groups, organizations and communities;
     3. Apply beginning practice skills in the development, leadership and evaluation of
        small groups in agency, organization and community settings;
     4. Identify aspects of human diversity within and between groups and the implications
        for this diversity in assessment, planning, intervention and evaluation;
     5. Demonstrate knowledge of leadership and advocacy skills, conflict management and
        Inter-professional collaboration at all levels of social work practice to promote
        social and economic justice;
     6. Apply a beginning level of skill in utilizing empirical knowledge to evaluate
        theoretical frameworks, intervention plans and practice effectiveness;
     7. Communicate effectively and professionally, both orally and in writing, assessment,
        intervention and evaluation plans for diverse client systems that enhance client
        strengths, capacities, assets and resources.
     EPAS Competencies
                                                  1


The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council
on Social Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation
status, the UT SHSSW engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate
compliance with CSWE’s Education Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the
implementation of knowledge, skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective
processes to assess the following competencies:
Competency 1: Demonstrate Ethical and Professional Behavior
Outcome 1.1: Make ethical decisions by applying the standards of the NASW Code of
Ethics, relevant laws and regulations, models for ethical decision-making, ethical
conduct of research, and additional codes of ethics as appropriate to context
Outcome 1.2: Use reflection and self-regulation to manage personal values and maintain
professionalism in practice situations
Outcome 1.3: Demonstrate professional demeanor in behavior; appearance; and oral,
written, and electronic communication
Outcome 1.4: Use technology ethically and appropriately to facilitate practice outcomes
Outcome 1.5: Use supervision and consultation to guide professional judgment and
behavior
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families & Groups
Outcome 6.2: Use empathy, reflection, and interpersonal skills to effectively engage
diverse clients and constituencies
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families & Groups
Outcome 7.1: Collect and organize data, and apply critical thinking to interpret
information from clients and constituencies
Outcome 7.3: Develop mutually agreed-on intervention goals and objectives based on
the critical assessment of strengths, needs, and challenges within clients and
constituencies
Outcome 7.4: Select appropriate intervention strategies based on the assessment,
research knowledge, and values and preferences of clients and constituencies
Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families & Groups
Outcome 8.1: Critically choose and implement interventions to achieve practice goals
and enhance capacities of clients and constituencies
Outcome 8.3: Use inter-professional collaboration as appropriate to achieve beneficial
practice outcomes
Outcome 8.4: Negotiate, mediate, and advocate with and on behalf of diverse clients and
constituencies
Outcome 8.5: Facilitate effective transitions and endings that advance mutually agreed-
on goals.
Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families & Groups
Outcome 9.1: Select and use appropriate methods for evaluation of outcomes
Outcome 9.3: Critically analyze, monitor, and evaluate intervention and program
processes and outcomes
Outcome 9.4: Apply evaluation findings to improve practice effectiveness at the micro,
mezzo, and macro levels
                                           2


III. TEACHING METHODS
This class will be taught using a variety of teaching methods to foster a stimulating, creative
and collaborative learning community. These methods intentionally draw on diverse
pedagogical approaches to be inclusive of a variety of learning styles; activities include
readings, writings, small group discussions, role-play, lectures, videos, in-class group
activities, learning activities in the community and self-reflection. Experiential learning that
builds upon students’ field instruction will be emphasized. For a meaningful experience in
this class, students must actively participate, take risks, stretch their creativity, apply their
critical thinking skills and attend class regularly. This course will highlight diverse
perspectives of thought, and encourage students to engage in new ways of thinking that
may be represented by speakers, the professor, and classmates from diverse backgrounds.
All students are encouraged to ask questions, raise issues, provide the instructor feedback
and meet with the instructor individually as needed to enhance their learning.
Students with disabilities are expected to inform the instructor so appropriate academic
accommodations may be planned. Any student with a documented disability (physical or
cognitive) who requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for
Students with Disabilities in the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-
4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
IV. REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Walsh, J. (2014). Theories for Direct Social Work Practice. Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning.
(3rd Edition)
All required readings listed on the class schedule that are not found in the required texts
will be available on Canvas. If readings are added to the reading list after the beginning of
the class semester, you will be notified by the professor, generally by email.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Students will be required to complete the assignments listed below. Detailed assignment
learning objectives and instructions, including expected demonstration of content mastery
and skill development will be provided in a separate handout. All assignments will be
discussed in detail in class and students are encouraged to meet with the instructor should
they have any questions about the assignments. Grading sheets with point allocation will be
provided with the assignment guidelines. All assignments will be graded on depth and
quality of required content, creativity and critical thinking skills, overall professionalism
and quality of writing. Specific point totals for each assignment are indicated below.
Participation and Preparedness (40 points)                             Bring to each class
                                                3


It is important to attend class on time, remain for the entire class, and be actively and
meaningfully present for effective learning and demonstration of professional behavior.
Because you are graduate-level social work students, it is expected that you will be able to
participate on a deeper level in class discussions, taking healthy risks to work outside of
your comfort zone. In order to receive the highest level of participation points, healthy risk-
taking for increasing self-awareness, cultural humility, and professional growth must be
demonstrated. Participation points will be determined by attendance, level of interest,
respect for others’ learning needs and contributions to classroom discussions, canvas
discussions, and all activities. Being prepared for class by reading assigned material is part
of this professional expectation as well. There will be the possibility of in-class activities
throughout the semester that will gauge your preparedness for class.
Students are expected to communicate with the professor about absences or late
arrivals/early departures. Please text if you are running late to class. More than two
absences and/or a pattern of late arrivals or early departures may result in disciplinary
action. If a student is concerned about their participation grade, they should arrange to
meet with the professor to discuss their grade before the end of the semester. All
electronic devices-including laptops-must be put away and silenced during class unless
their use is explicitly requested by the professor for a class activity.
Points will be deducted as follows:
         First absence                   No deduction with timely email
                                         (1 point without email)
         Second absence                   Five points deducted
         Third absence                   Six additional points deducted
Self-assessment (40 points)                              Due 6/15/20
Students will complete a written self-assessment, exploring areas that contribute to making
each a unique emerging professional. This assignment is designed to increase
understanding of assessment, provide the professor with a deeper understanding of the
student’s background, and facilitate learning about professional use of self as applied in
social work practice. A separate assignment sheet will be provided.
Video Role Play and Critique (60 points)
Paper due at time of video review (6/24/20, 6/29/20)
The purpose of this assignment is to provide students with an opportunity to further
develop the social work practice skills learned in Practice I and to demonstrate the skill of
staying present in the moment with minimal “problem solving”. Students will prepare a
video role-play with a partner from class and participate in small group viewing and
feedback sessions to deepen their clinical learning and further develop their comfort and
skill in the use of supervision and consultation. A written critique of the video is also a part
of this assignment.
                                                4


Social Work Theory Presentation (80 points)                       Due on your assigned date
The purpose of this assignment is to further develop student’s research, critical thinking,
and presentation skills while increasing their knowledge and skill in the application of a
social work practice theory with diverse populations. Students will also have the
opportunity to develop their effective task group membership skills. Students will
collaborate in a small group project that culminates in a “professional staff development
training” on a skill-based application of a practice theory for the class.
Final Case Assessment (80 points)                                 Due 7/22/20
The purpose of this assignment is to help students consolidate their knowledge and skills,
and to comply with the school’s CSWE accreditation process. Students will read a fictional
case and answer a set of questions about the case. The case and questions will test
students’ competency in the areas of ethics & professionalism, and engagement,
assessment, intervention and evaluation of individuals, groups & families.
VI. GRADES
The following graduate grading scale will be used to determine the final letter grade for the
course. The student who earns an A for this course is one who, over the course of the
semester, consistently submits work that exceeds expectations. Assignments will not be
given letter grades individually; instead, a number of points will be awarded for each
assignment, leading to the cumulative grade for the semester.
UT Grading Scale
94.0 and Above A
90.0 to 93.999 A-
87.0 to 89.999 B+
84.0 to 86.999 B
80.0 to 83.999 B-
77.0 to 79.999 C+
74.0 to 76.999 C
70.0 to 73.999 C-
67.0 to 69.999 D+
64.0 to 66.999 D
60.0 to 63.999 D-
Below 60.0 F
Class Participation and Preparedness       40 pts
Self-assessment                            40 pts
Video Role Play and Paper                  60 pts
Social Work Theory Presentation            80 pts
Final Case Assessment                       80 pts
                                                5


TOTAL=                                      300 pts
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Attendance and participation
Attendance and participation for the full three hours of class and the additional hour of
field seminar is expected for all students. After two absences the student’s final grade
will be lowered by one grade (A to an A-, A- to a B+, etc.). Further absences may result
in the student being dropped from the course. Repeated late arrivals to class may be
considered as an absence. Classroom exercises, discussions, role-plays, guest speakers and
other class experiential exercises are essential for the students’ professional learning and
continued development of self-awareness. This form of learning cannot be “made up” once
missed. Students will be expected to contact their peers to secure any missed notes or
handouts. The student may schedule an office visit with the professor if they wish to
discuss missed classroom material in more detail. Students are to notify the instructor
prior to class at the given office number or via email if they cannot attend class due to an
illness or emergency.
Papers
Students are expected to produce high quality work in terms of appearance, writing style
and content. Points will be deducted for errors, misspellings, incorrect grammar, poor
organization, repetition of information, and inferior word processing. When using
information from other sources, references and bibliography should conform to the current
APA style of citation. Students are encouraged to consult with the SSW writing consultant.
Plagiarism is a serious violation of university rules and will be dealt with according to
university policy. All papers must be submitted by the beginning of the class due date
to avoid point deductions.
Time management
All assignments are due at the beginning of class on the date and time indicated. Late
assignments will be penalized 5% of the total points per day that they are late and will only
be accepted in the first week following an assignment’s due date. However, students will be
allowed to turn one assignment in late by one day during the semester without incurring
the 5% penalty. Students must contact the professor ahead of time to request the penalty-
free late submission. Contact the instructor before the assignment is due if other
arrangements need to be made due to an emergency. All assignments are due at the
beginning of class on the date and time indicated on Canvas.
Use of computers/cell phones in the classroom
Practice II is a practice course, and class participation is essential to successful learning.
Cell phones should be turned off when class begins and remain off throughout the duration
                                                 6


of the class. Texting is not allowed during class time unless special circumstances arise,
about which the professor has been made aware. These are issues of professionalism and
will incur disciplinary action if necessary.
Use of canvas in class
In this class the professor uses Canvas Web based course management system with
password protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu to distribute course materials, to
communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to give
students online quizzes and surveys. Students can find support in using Canvas at the ITS
Help Desk. For more information go to http://www.utexas.edu/its/helpdesk/
Feedback
Students will be asked to provide feedback on their learning and the professor’s teaching
strategies in informal as well as formal ways. It is very important for the professor to know
the students’ reactions to what is taking place in class, ensuring that together the professor
and students can create a dynamic and effective learning community. Students are
encouraged to provide ongoing feedback to the instructor during class and office visits.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
(471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student
should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor
of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects
students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various
backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender,
sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual
orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of
positive engagement and mutual respect. This atmosphere includes working intentionally
to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom.
                                                  7


Social Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be
challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom
experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging
issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and
sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the
professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive
regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are
responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is
needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users
cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social
work students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted
can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded,
subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional
reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other
forms of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their
communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work
students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be considered
inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this, social work
students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid
posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites
and are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks.
Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media,
including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise
client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any
material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as
certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social
work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program
while in the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
                                               8


POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of
the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any
unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may
result in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of
course materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation
of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could
result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading
class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current
or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the
educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions
taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located
in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as
an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for
reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail
address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at
minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for
updating their e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy
day. If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to
observe a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete
the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that
is free from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty,
                                                 9


field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated
reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking,
dating violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such
incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the
University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources related
to Title IX, may also be found at https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the
Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments
that involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments
may present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the
profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and
practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor
regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else,
students may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns.
This service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students,
the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    ·     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
          the building.
    ·     If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the
          first week of class.
    ·     In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    ·     Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
           Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
           office.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
The following is a general guide to the Summer 2020 semester. In covering each topic, the
class will examine issues specific to diverse populations. The instructor reserves the right
to modify the calendar as needed to correct errors, to better meet learning objectives and
to accommodate guest speakers and in-class discussions and tasks. Changes will be made
only when necessary and, if made, students will be notified in class and/or by email. Please
                                                10


check canvas and email regularly for any updates.
CANVAS=Additional readings on Canvas
Walsh=Walsh text
 Date                Topic                   Assignment Due           Readings
  6/8   Course and Syllabus Review
  #1    Community development
 6/10   Values and ethics                                     Canvas
  #2    Diversity and Inclusion                               ~Dr. Ken Hardy article
        Cultural humility                                     ~Reamer article
        Filter activity                                       ~Crowe article
                                                              https://www.nabsw.or
                                                              g/
                                                              http://www.naprhsw.c
                                                              om/about-us
 6/15   TBRI/Attachment                 Self-assessment due   Canvas
  #3                                                          ~Dr. Nadine Burke-
                                                              Harris video
                                                              ~Dr. Karyn Purvis video
                                                              ~Bath article
                                                              ~Strange experiment
                                                              video
 6/17   Social Work and Leaders in      Discussion board post Website
  #4    Advocacy                        assignment            https://www.socialwor
        (Will Francis/Stacey                                  kers.org/Advocacy/Soci
        Jordan/Katelyn Caldwell)                              al-Justice
                                                              Canvas
                                                              ~Trainin Blank article
 6/22   Group work/Task groups                                Canvas
  #5    Solution-focused                                      ~Cooley chapter 2
        theory/Ecotherapy                                     ~Mindtools article
                                                              ~Ecotherapy
                                                              assessment and
                                                              Benefits of nature
                                                              Walsh
                                            11


                                                         Chapter 10
6/24 Video reviews                Video review and paper
 #6                               due
6/29 Video reviews                Video review and paper
 #7                               due
 7/1 No class                     Work on group theory
 #8                               presentations
 7/6 Theory into practice         (Readings split among  Walsh
 #9  Behavioral, Transtheoretical groups)                Chapters 2, 7, 11
     Model/MI
 7/8 Theory presentation          Crisis theory          Walsh
#10                                                      Chapter 13
7/13 Theory presentation          Narrative theory       Walsh
#11                                                      Chapter 12
                                                         Canvas
7/15 Theory presentation          Feminist theory        ~Turner Chapter 11
#12
7/20 Theory presentation          Cognitive Theory       Walsh: Chapter 8
#13
                                      12


 7/22    Final field process               Final case analysis due
 #14     Self-compassion
         Professional self-care
 7/27    Endings, Transitions, and
 #15     Celebrations
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
The reading list for this course was designed to explore issues of diversity. All readings are
available through the library and/or canvas.
60 Minutes (2018). The “life-changing” story Oprah reports this week.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dF20FaQzYUI&t=2s
Anechiarico, B. (n.d.). Vicarious trauma: What are the protective measures? Retrieved from:
http://www.cpcamerica.com/Presentations/Vicarious%20Trauma%20Article.pdf.
Blundo, R. (2001). Learning strengths-based practice: Challenging our personal and
professional frames. Families in Society: The Journal of Contemporary Human Services,
82(3), 296-304.
Burke Harris, Nadine (2015). How childhood trauma affects health across a lifetime.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=95ovIJ3dsNk
Calderwood, K.A. (2011). Adapting the transtheoretical model of change to the
bereavement process. Social Work, 56(2), 107-118.
Compton, B., Galaway, B. & Cournoyer, B. (2005). Social work processes (7th ed.). Pacific
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Corcoran, K. (2015). Social workers' desk reference. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
De Jong, P. & Berg, I. (2002). Interviewing for solutions (3rd ed.) (pp.20-51). Belmont, CA:
Thomson Brooks/Cole.
Dewane, C. J. (2006). Use of self: A primer revisited. Clinical Social Work Journal, 34 (4),
543-558.
                                               13


DiClemente, C. & Velasquez, M. (2002). Motivational interviewing and the stages of change.
In Miller, W. & Rollnick, S. (Eds.), Motivational Interviewing: Preparing people for change
(pp. 201-217). New York: Guilford Press. 16
Dillon, C. (2003). Learning from mistakes in clinical practice. Pacific Grove, CA:
Brooks/Cole.
Facione, P. (2013). Critical thinking: what it is and why it counts. Retrieved from:
InsightAssessment.com.
Faulkner, M., Fernandez-Castro, M., Padilla, Y., & Shapiro, E. (2008). Our nation’s
immigrants in peril: An urgent call to social workers, Social Work, 53(1), 5-8.
Fine, S.F. & Glasser, P.H. (1996). The first helping interview: Engaging the client and
building trust. (pp.58-78, 118-134). London: Sage Publications.
Furman, R., Negi, N., Iwamoto, D., Rowan, D., Shukraft, A. & Gragg, J. (2009). Social work
practice with Latinos: Key issues for social workers. Social Work, 54(2) 167-174.
Gerdes, K. & Segal, E. (2011). Importance of empathy for social work practice: Integrating
new science. Social Work, 56(2), 141-148.
Giordano, J. (2000). Effective communication and counseling with older adults. Aging and
Human Development, 51(4), 315-324.
Glicken, M.D. (2004). Using the strengths perspective in social work practice: A positive
approach for the helping professions (pp.48-61). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Golden, R. & Sonneborn, S. (1998). Ethics in clinical practice with older adults: Recognizing
biases and respecting boundaries. American Society on Aging, 22(3).
Hare, I. (2004). Defining social work for the 21st century. International Social Work, 47(3),
407-424.
Hepworth, D.H., Rooney, R.H., Rooney, G.D., Strom-Gottfried, K. (2013). Direct social work
practice: Theory and skills (9th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Hick, S. F. (2009). Mindfulness and social work: Paying attention to ourselves, our clients,
and society. In S. Hick (Ed.), Mindfulness and Social Work (pp. 1-26). Chicago, IL: Lyceum
Books.
Hodge, D. (2005). Epistemological frameworks, homosexuality, and religion: How people of
faith understand the intersection between homosexuality and religion. Social Work, 50(3),
207-218.
                                                14


Klein, W.C. & Bloom, M. (1995). Practice wisdom. Journal of the National Association of
Social Workers, 40(6), 799-807.
Kotlowitz, Alex & James, Steve (2012). The Interrupters. [Motion Picture]. USA.
McLaughlin, A. (2009). Clinical social workers: advocates for social justice. Advances in
Social Work. 10(1), 51-68.
Miley, K., O’Melia, M. & Dubois, B. (2013). Generalist social work practice: An empowering
approach (7th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson Education. 17
Miller, W. & Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change
(pp. 3-10, 98-110). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Murdach, A. (2010). What good is soft evidence? Social Work, 55(4), 309-316.
NASW (2009). Professional self-care & social work policy statement in Social Work Speaks:
National Association of Social Workers policy statements 2009-2112 (8th ed.). Washington,
DC: NASW Press.
Netting, F.E. & O’Connor, M.K. (2003). Organization practice: A social worker’s guide to
understanding human services (pp. 5-28). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
O’Hare, T. (2005). Evidence-based practices for social workers: Definition, processes and
principles (pp. 3-13). Chicago: Lyceum Books.
Powers, J. & Whitlock, J. (2008). Places to be and to belong: Youth perceptions of life in
community. The Prevention Researcher, 15(2), 12-15.
Raines, J.C. (2004). Evidence-based practice in social work: A process perspective. Children
and Schools, 26(2), 71-83.
Rapp, C. & Goscha, R. (2006). The strengths model: Case management with people with
psychiatric disabilities. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Reamer, F.G. (2003). Boundary issues in social work: Managing dual relationships. Social
Work, 48(1), 121-133. Reamer, F.G. (2005). Documentation in social work: Evolving ethical
and risk-management standards. Social Work, 50(4), 325-334. Rothman, J. (2008). Cultural
competence in process and practice. Boston, MA: Pearson Education.
Saleeby, D. (2004). The power of place: Another look at the environment. Families in
Society. 85(1), 7-16.
Schnitzer, P.K. (1996). “They don’t come in!”: Stories told, lessons taught about poor
families in therapy. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 66(4), 572-582.
                                               15


Shulman, L. (1999). The skills of helping individuals, families, and groups (4th ed.) (pp.200-
232). Itasca, IL: Peacock Publishers.
Steen, J. (2006). The roots of human rights: Advocacy and a call to action. Social Work,
51(2), 101- 105.
Stricker, G. (2003). The Many Faces of Self-Disclosure. JCLP/In Session, 59(5), 623-630. 18
Swenson, C.R. (1998). Clinical social work’s contribution to a social justice perspective.
Social Work, 43(6), 527-537.
Tervalon, M. & Murray-Garcia, J. (1998). Cultural humility versus cultural competence: A
critical distinction in defining physician training outcomes in multicultural education.
Journal of Health for the Poor and Underserved. 9(2), 117-125.
Trout, S. (2007). Adolescence from a strengths perspective: A guide for parents and other
caring adults. In Henderson, N., Benard, B & Sharp-Light, N. (Eds.), Resiliency in action:
Practical ideas for overcoming risks and building strengths in youth, families, and
communities. San Diego, CA: Resiliency in Action, Inc.
Waites, C. (2009). Building on strengths: Intergenerational practice with African American
families. Social Work, 54(3), 278-287.
Walsh, F. (2003). Family resilience: Strengths forged through adversity. In Walsh, F. (Ed.)
Normal family processes (3rd ed.) (pp. 399-423). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
                                                16
