                      ALD 329, Section and Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                                         Unique Number: 73365
                                              Summer I, 2020
Course Information
Class meets: M ​ TWTHF, 2:30-4:00 pm, Online
Instructor: Laura Turner                  Office Location: Online
Pronouns: she, her, hers                  Office Hours: 4:00-5:30 pm (or by appointment)
Email: l​ aura.turner@utexas.edu
T.A.: Mohit Mehta                         Office Location: Online
Pronouns: he, him, his                    Office Hours: 4:00-5:30 pm (or by appointment)
Email: m ​ ohit.mehta@utexas.edu
Land Acknowledgment
We begin this syllabus by recognizing that we stand on the shared lands and waters of the ​Comanche
and Tonkawa. We express our respect for the three federally-recognized nations: Alabama-Coushatta,
the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, and the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo, within the state as well as
other Indigenous peoples and nations such as the Karankawa, Caddo, Lipan Apache, Comanche,
Wichita, Coahuiltecan, Neches, Comecrudo, and Mission Indians that have historic ties to these
homelands. We also acknowledge the multiple ways the State of Texas and the residents of this Land
have benefitted from the forced and systematic removal of Native peoples from Texas. ​Land
acknowledgements are a small step toward correcting the stories and practices that erase
Indigenous histories and the ongoing presence of Indigenous peoples today. As teacher
educators and researchers, many of us are complicit in this erasure, and it is imperative
that we recognize, support, and advocate for the sovereignty of Native nations in our work.
University Catalog Course Description
This course will provide an overview of theoretical and practical perspectives on the nature of language
in education, its use and usage. Students will explore principles of discourse, phonology, morphology,
syntax and semantics as they relate to second language acquisition. We will also cover language
varieties, social conventions and linguistic structures. The focus of the course is to prepare pre-service
teachers to best meet the ​semiotic,​​linguistic, academic, etc. needs of emergent bilingual
students in the K-12 classroom from a holistic multilingual perspective.
Topics include English structures and analysis, identification of emergent bilingual students’ academic
and linguistic learning needs, and pedagogical strategies to promote language acquisition. Our beliefs
about language and its acquisition shape the kinds of opportunities we provide our emergent bilingual
students and are therefore highly consequential to their educational trajectories. This course is
structured to support the student in designing, implementing and reflecting on the language
development of emergent bilingual students in a variety of contexts from a holistic perspective.
Subjects explored in the course include initial language and literacy acquisition theory; second
language acquisition theory; relations among first and additional languages in literacy and language
acquisition; home, school, and learners’ perspectives; and current issues in literacy and multilingual
classrooms.
                                                                                                           1


Course Goals
By the end of the semester, the successful student will be able to:
     1. Discuss the complexities of the English language.
     2. Explain English language structures and patterns.
     3. Critically analyze the linguistic features of an emergent bilingual’s oral language sample from a
         holistic multilingual, multimodal perspective.
     4. Understand language as a sociopolitical and historical construct.
     5. Appreciate varieties of the English language and its ongoing transformation.
     6. Identify the linguistic challenges facing emergent bilingual students in the academic context.
     7. Design activities appropriate to emergent bilingual students’ linguistic needs in the academic
         context.
     8. Identify and reflect upon attitudes towards, and modes of inquiry regarding language.
     9. Articulate theories of language (e.g. variation, phonology, social conventions, use/usage).
     10. Identify instructional strategies to address emergent bilingual students’ academic & linguistic
         development.
Required Reading
Freeman, D. E. and Freeman, Y. S. (2014). Essential linguistics: What teachers need to know to teach
ESL, reading, spelling, and grammar (Second Edition). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Supplemental course readings will be available on Canvas
Educator Standards this Course Addresses
ISTE Standards
TEA Educator Standards
Course prerequisites: A    ​ pplied Learning and Development 327
Writing Flag
ALD 329 carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you will write regularly throughout the semester,
complete a substantial writing project, receive feedback from your instructor and your peers to help
you improve your writing, and provide feedback to your peers. You will also have the opportunity to
revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. A
substantial portion of your grade will come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the
Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. We also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center
if you would like.
                                                                                                           2


Cross Cutting Themes and Professionalism
Students in this course are held to professionalism standards in line with the Cross Cutting Themes of
the College of Education (see p. 9-10 of this syllabus). As a representative of UT and a future educator,
please practice the standards of professionalism you would in a school or other educational setting,
whether this course is or is not field-based. We are building dispositions of the profession, which
include those professional attitudes, values, and beliefs expected of an education professional. When
we learn in schools and other educational spaces, we enter with humility, open to what we can learn in
the setting and from the students, teachers and other community members. We also practice
reciprocity, considering how we can contribute to the places where we are fortunate to learn.
University classrooms are places to engage in these practices of open learning and reciprocity. Students
should be open to new perspectives and work collegially with others, including instructors.
Attendance Policy
PDS Policy: The PDS policy for attendance is as follows: Attendance is mandatory and arriving on
time and staying the full length of the class is required.
              • There are no unexcused absences.
              • You are allowed one excused absence for the semester (see below).
              • Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor.
              • Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of ¾ letter grade in your final grade.
              • More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing grade for
              the class.
              • A pattern of tardiness or early departures will affect your grade.
              • Excessive tardies or early departures (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused absence.
Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of religious holidays that fall on our
scheduled class day; please give me advance notice of these absences (see below for more detailed info).
Excused Absence​:​ T
                   ​ he only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable.
Check with us for details or arrangements.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely​. Ask your classmates to get a run-down and notes on
any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise
questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific
questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not
specific enough.
Policy on Children in Class/Working from Home
I fully support parents and guardians attending school. As the university does not have a formal policy
on children in the classroom, the policy described here is a reflection of my own beliefs and
commitments (and with all due credit to Dr. Melissa Cheyney at Oregon State University who
circulated her own policy through social media).
                                                                                                         3


All exclusively breastfeeding babies are welcome in class as often as is necessary to support the
breastfeeding relationship. You and your nursing baby are welcome in class anytime.
For older children and babies, I understand that minor illnesses and unforeseen disruptions in
childcare often put parents in the position of having to choose between missing class to stay home
with a child or finding childcare, which can be a burden in many ways. While this is not meant to be a
long-term childcare solution, occasionally bringing a child to class in order to cover gaps in care is
perfectly acceptable.
For students learning at home with children or others you care for at home, your children are welcome
on the screen and I understand you may need to take breaks from class when you are attending to
those in your care. Finally, I am open to talking about needed accommodations with deadlines as the
semester progresses.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they
have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/​). I will gladly honor your
request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, ​etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so
that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
                                   University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students
with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/​.
Basic Needs Security
Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and believes this may affect their
performance in the course is urged to contact the Dean of Students for support. Furthermore, please
notify the instructors if you are comfortable in doing so. This will enable them to provide any
resources that they may possess. (Thanks to Dr. Sara Goldrick-Rab [@saragoldrickrab] for this
language.)
                                                                                                            4


                                    Counseling and Mental Health
Counselors in Academic Residence Program (CARE)
CARE is the university's Counseling and Mental Health Center program that was created in
collaboration with the Office of the Provost. CARE’s primary mission is to provide access to mental
health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. The College of
Education CARE counselor, Danie White, has regular office hours 1-2p.m. T/F in SZB 212E,
512.232.6862 or ​dlwhite@austin.utexas.edu​.
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask
for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit h
             ​ ttp://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc​ or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Other Resources
     Undergraduate Writing Center:​ ​http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     Libraries​:​ h
                  ​ ttp://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     ITS​: ​http://www.utexas.edu/its/
     Student Emergency Services​:​ ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power
to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
campus, go to:​ ​wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal​.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                                                                                                         5


The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,​ h      ​ ttp://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
             ●       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
                     occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
                     entering the building.
             ●       Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
                     during the first week of class.
             ●       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
                     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
                     Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
                     Prevention Services office.
             ●       Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
                     procedures can be found at: w  ​ ww.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
university can:
               1. I​ ntervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
               2. P    ​ rovide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
               harm
                       or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
               3. I​ nvestigate and discipline violations of the university’s​ r​ elevant policies​.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator.​ I am a Responsible Employee and​m            ​ ust report any Title IX related incidents​that
are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, visit​ t​ itleix.utexas.edu​ or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                 University Policies
Academic Integrity
Students should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted through a
plagiarism-detection tool, such as Canvas Turnitin. Tools like this are designed to help
                                                                                                            6


students avoid plagiarism and improper citation. The software encourages original writing and
proper citation documentation practices by ​cross-referencing submitted materials with an
archived ​database of journals, essays, newspaper articles, books, and other published work. In
addition, other methods may be used to determine the originality of the paper. Tips for
maintaining academic integrity AND the University’s academic integrity policy are available
at: All students are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University
Honor Code available at: h  ​ ttp://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php​.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see:​ h
      ​ ttp://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Cross-Cutting Themes and Creed
The teacher preparation program at The University of Texas at Austin is committed to creating a
society that is more just, caring, inclusive, and democratic through transformation of educational
practices. Too often, universities and schools have engaged in racist and other oppressive practices that
replicate and perpetuate the status quo in our society, rather than working against inequities. We
believe there is a more powerful path. Following The University of Texas motto, “What starts here
changes the world,” we teach to change the world.
Schools, districts and universities are located within oppressive social, economic and political systems.
Teachers must recognize the oppressive conditions that many families and communities experience
related to their identities—racial, ethnic, linguistic, social class, religious, gender, sexual orientation,
immigrant status, abilities, and other positions in society. At the same time, teachers must recognize
the cultural and linguistic wealth that exists in these communities, along with their histories of
resilience and resistance in the pursuit of justice. U
                                                     ​ nderstanding these critical perspectives on society,
culture and schooling is critical for teachers’ development and enactment of curricular and
pedagogical knowledge across school subjects, such as reading, language arts, social studies, science and
mathematics.
We practice vision, courage, and determination because these stances and practices require a lifelong
commitment and ongoing, critical inquiries in our personal and professional lives. As teachers, we
serve our students well by cultivating in them these same commitments and capacities.
As educators we are committed to educational change that allows us to enact our vision for teacher
preparation. Identities, Values, and Practices serve as our guide, as we are always in process. While
listed separately the themes are deeply connected, so to work on one is to work on many.
                 Theme Statement                                           Creed Statement
                                                                                                             7


Who are    We are continuously examining how our               I am self-aware. I​ recognize who
we?        identities​1 sometimes
                        ​
                                   afford us privileges and    I am and who I am becoming in
Identities other times, result in oppression. We recognize     terms of my multiple identities.
           that our personal identities are deeply connected
           to our professional identities, and contribute to
           how we work with our students, communities
           and colleagues.
           We research and inquire to better understand our    I am a learner. ​I will grow my
           students, curriculum and teaching across school     teaching into more powerful
           subjects​2​, and our own dispositions and practices practices and share them with
           as teachers. We continue to grow our                others.
           professional identities to support our work of
           building inclusive and anti-oppressive
           classrooms, schools, and local and global
           communities.
What do    We value educational justice, inclusiveness and     I value courage and
we value?  continuous learning, and we are committed to        determination. I​ will view all
Values     being teachers who take on the challenges and       challenges that confront me as
           risks associated with teaching in service of these  opportunities to grow and
           values.                                             change.
           We value the multiple cultures, languages,          I value learners’ differences as
           knowledges, and experiences of our students and     strengths. I​ will respect and
           the communities we work alongside, and we see       engage with differences and will
           these as essential to a healthy and productive      craft my teaching to build upon
           society.                                            and sustain the abilities, cultures
                                                               and languages my students bring
                                                               to school.
           We value shared responsibility over individual      I value shared responsibility. ​I
           accountability within educational systems. As       will hold myself responsible for all
           teachers, we are committed to working               my teaching and will share in this
           collaboratively with our students, teacher          responsibility with others to build
           colleagues, families, and communities in the        a community that contributes to
           pursuit of our collective growth and well-being.    the growth and well-being of
                                                               students.
                                                                                                    8


   What do         We continuously reflect on how our diverse               I practice reflection on action.
   we              perspectives and identities​1​ matter when working       I will build humanizing practices
   practice?       with others, including students, families and            and trusting relationships through
   Practice        colleagues. This continual reflection allows us to       my ongoing critical reflection.
                   build trusting relationships and engage in
                   humanizing practices.
                   We recognize students’ identities​1 ​and strengths       I practice imaginative change. ​I
                   and honor the resources they bring. We question          will imagine the possibilities of a
                   the materials, curriculum, and instructional             student-centered curriculum that
                   methods that are in place. We continually adapt          is transformative for students and
                   and redesign our teaching practices in response to       our collective communities.
                   changing opportunities and demands in our
                   transnational society. We dream of possibilities
                   for students’ educational futures.
We will be the teachers who, working with families, communities and our colleagues, teach to change
the world.
1​
   racial, ethnic, linguistic, religious, gender, sexual orientation, social class, immigrant status, abilities,
and other positions in society.
2​
   reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics anchored in critical perspectives on
society, culture and schooling
                                                 Grading Policies
Flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. We intend to work with
you with support if you miss an assignment, but final grades are firm.
                       Grade             Cutoff             Grade              Cutoff
                       A                 94%                C+                 77%
                       A-                90%                C                  74%
                       B+                87%                C-                 70%
                       B                 84%                D                  65%
                       B-                80%                F                  <65%
                                                                                                                 9


*Please note that continuation in the PDS requires a minimum grade of “C” in each of the PDS
courses.
Required Devices and Learning Platforms
Use of e-mail and ​Canvas​are essential elements of this class. Successful completion of this course
requires that you record a language sample from your emergent bilingual student for transcription and
holistic analysis. Projects and assignments must be submitted electronically, posted to the class
Canvas​website. E-mail through C     ​ anvas​will be used to communicate with the instructor and other
class members. A ​Canvas​site has been established for this course; the site contains a copy of this
syllabus, project guidelines, readings which are not in your textbooks, and general course information.
Announcements, updates, and new documents will be posted throughout the course; students are
expected to check ​Canvas​regularly. Students are encouraged to post their own presentations to the
group presentation folder on C   ​ anvas​so others in the class may have access to them. All students must
post their weekly c​ ritical commentaries to ​Canvas​by midnight (12:00 a.m.) on Sunday and
critical reflections to ​Canvas​by midnight (12:00 a.m.) on Friday evenings​.
                                                 Assignments
Organization and planning are essential characteristics of professionalism that will help you meet
assignment due dates and will influence the quality of your work. Late submissions will receive partial
credit. A student with an emergency situation preventing a timely submission should contact the
course instructors immediately.
     1. Critical Commentaries & Critical Reflections​(10% of grade)
Approximately 1 paragraph per reading
CCs and CRs are designed to help you organize, synthesize, and connect course readings—to easily
locate and identify reference materials for exams and the final project- as well as for reference in future
coursework. Critical commentaries (due on Sunday evenings) should be written in paragraph form
and include the following information:
             1. Title​ – Full citation of the reading (in APA format)
             2. Brief Summary​ – 2-3 sentence summary of key points and note any details, key
                  concepts, etc. which particularly struck you.
             3. Response – ​Your o​ pinion of​ and ​reaction to​ the reading and course material. Did the text
                  trigger a connection or reaction upon reading? Comment on, dialogue and interact
                  with the text. Did you agree / disagree? Why? Did you gain any new insights from the
                  reading? Was it helpful? Why / why not? How does it relate to other readings for this
                  class or others? Does it relate to your work tutoring your bilingual English learner
                  student?
             4. Key Question/Critical Concept​—At least one idea per week that either (a) requires
                  further clarification, or (b) you synthesized in a novel way and will share with your
                  colleagues.
             5. CCs must be posted to C       ​ anvas​by 12:00 midnight on Sundays and CRs must
                  be posted to C  ​ anvas b​ y 12:00 midnight on Fridays.​​For every 12 hours that pass
                  beyond the time they are due, 5 points will be deducted.
                                                                                                            10


                   **While informal, please carefully edit for spelling, grammar, syntax and clarity.**
Critical Reflections, due on Friday evenings, are organized to serve as a reflection on the week’s
learning experiences and can be written in paragraph format.
     2. Tutoring​(10% of grade)
Online tutoring requirement: 5 hours
Several school and tutoring organizers will speak to our class at the start of the Summer session. Please
either sign up with them, or let the instructor​ ​know w​ here you will be volunteering prior to the 3​rd
class meeting on Monday, June 8​. Begin tutoring by W    ​ eek 2​and complete a​ ll required hours​by
Week 4​. A​ ll​ 5​ HOURS are REQUIRED to receive CREDIT.
         a) A signature from your tutoring coordinator will be required on the ​Tutoring Sign-in
             sheet​at the end of the semester. Include your tutoring coordinator’s preferred contact
             (email/phone) on the form. S​ ubmit this form under the tutoring assignment on
             Canvas.
         b) You will also complete the T  ​ utoring Log​for each tutoring session in order to reflect
             upon the experience and document how the time was spent. These entries will detail the
             work you conducted with your student that day, strategies you may have used, and any
             lingering questions you might have. ​Submit this form under the tutoring assignment
             on Canvas (with the sign-in sheet).
         c) At the end of the semester, you will complete a T   ​ utoring Reflection Form​, also to be
             submitted on Canvas.
     3. Presentation of Findings/Tutoring Reflection​(10% of grade)
At the end of the course, all students will conduct a 10-minute presentation that will serve as a
reflection of the tutoring experience. The presentation should lift up the innovative semiotic and
linguistic practices of their emergent bilingual student and participants in the course should use the
space to reflect upon their perspective as a future educator or community member in relation to
bi/multilingual learners.
     4. Extended Essay Response & Writer’s Workshop​(30%)
Extended Essay Response: ​During Week 3, all students will conduct an extended essay response (15%)
in relation to a menu of topics presented in the course (language policy, immigration, language
acquisition, programs for emergent bilingual students, the standard language myth). Students will
have space to draft the extended essay response in class in collaboration with the instructors and
outside of class.
Writer’s Workshop & Peer Review Session: D    ​ uring Week 6, students will participate in a peer-review
and writer’s workshop session (15%) to receive descriptive feedback surrounding their final paper. All
students will receive specific, descriptive feedback from a peer in class, in addition to the course
instructor, to guide their final papers.
     5. Semiotic & Linguistic Analysis from a Holistic Multilingual Perspective​(40%)
                                                                                                          11


Students will demonstrate their understanding of the (1) distinct structure and features of oral English,
and (2) the innovative semiotic and linguistic repertoire of an emergent bilingual student by utilizing
information obtained throughout the tutoring experience, coupled with a language sample from a
tutoring session with their student. Language samples will include approximately 10 minutes of
discussion around a topic and will serve as a supplemental tool to refer back to when crafting your
final paper. The purpose of the analysis is to place your student at the center of the paper, lifting up
the complexity, nuances, and contradictions involved in second language acquisition. The analysis
should focus on the innovative practices utilized by your student (semiotic and linguistic) as a
multilingual. All analyses should be descriptive vs. prescriptive and approach the concept of language
and meaning making from a holistic multilingual perspective. Y           ​ ou are not prescribing or “correcting,”
you are approaching language from a descriptive, holistic lens. C       ​ laims made in the linguistic analyses
must be supported by ​references​ drawn from course readings as well as external texts.
Final projects will consist of 4 discrete sections:
        1. Introduction
A brief overview of your work with your student. Describe your student's background and experience
and include any interesting features of your time spent together.
                                                                                       (Maximum: 3/4 page)
      2​.​ ​ Linguistic Analysis
An analysis of your student’s linguistic development as represented in the language sample:
                  i.   Phonological development
                 ii.   Morphological development
                iii.   Syntactic development
                iv.    Semantic development
                 v.    Pragmatic competence (e.g., discourse routines, social conventions)
                vi.    Holistic Perspective: Semiotic resources and multiple modes of meaning-making;
                       visual, spacial, gestural, sociocultural perspective.
                                                                           (Maximum: 6 pages; min. 10 references)
   ​ ​3.​ ​   Recommended Classroom Practices
                  i.   Describe 2-3 recommended instructional strategies for working with your bilingual EL
                       student.
                 ii.   Strategies should target improving content area development and comprehension
                       based on your work together.
                                                                           (1-2 pages; min. 2 references)
  ​ ​ ​4.​     SOLOM Results and Discussion
        ●     Analyze the how and why of your participant’s SOLOM results.
        ●     How (well) does the SOLOM measure a learner’s use of: syntax, semantics, morphology,
              phonology, language use/usage? Which features of the student’s oral language prompted the
              rater to place him/her at each level in each domain? Does the overall rating reflect the student's
                                                                                                                   12


        abilities in the larger academic context? How well do ratings in the individual language ability
        areas reflect the overall assessment? Limitations and contradictions.
    ●   What questions did the SOLOM answer for you as a teacher? Were any areas left unaddressed?
                                                                     (1-2 pages; min. 2 references)
Reference list for all three sections combined
        Canvas upload (Final Submission): Linguistic Analysis
        Narrative (Sections 1-4 above)
        Copy of completed SOLOM, less student name
        Annotated Transcript of the language sample (scan or hard copy)
Style Guide​:
References in APA format (​www.apastyle.org​);
Appropriate use of headers and sub-headers to organize the written text
Double-spaced, 12 pt. font
One-inch margins
Last name/page number(s) in footer
                             All materials must be uploaded electronically
                      to C
                         ​ anvas​(narrative and appendices; SOLOM; transcript)
                                 by M
                                    ​ onday, July 13, 2020 by 11:59 p.m.
 Assignments                           Points Possible                     Percent of Total Grade
 Critical Commentaries (5) and         10 points each                      10%
 Critical Reflections (5)
 Tutoring                              30 points (including post           10%
                                       reflections, sign-in sheet, &
                                       tutoring log)
 Presentation of Findings              30 points                           10%
 Extended Essay Response               25 points                           15%
 Writer’s Workshop                     25 points                           15%
 Final Linguistic Analysis             30 points                           40%
                                                                                                       13


                                              Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website
at h
   ​ ttps://utexas.instructure.com​.​ C
                                      ​ heck this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
schedule.
Changes​ t​o the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
receive the changes with as much advance notice as possible).
                                            Schedule Snapshot
 Week       Date     Class Topic                    Readings Due                   Assignments Due
 1          6/4      Introduction & Overview Reading assignments on                Complete Student
                     Syllabus & Course              Canvas                         Information Sheet
                     Expectations
            6/5      Language as a Tool,            Reading assignments on         Critical Reflection #1:
                     Multilingual Perspectives      Canvas                         Due Friday, June 5, at
                                                                                   midnight
 2          6/8      How Linguists Study            Reading assignments on         Critical Commentary #1:
                     Language                       Canvas                         Due Sunday, June 7 at
                                                                                   midnight
                                                                                   Sign-up for tutoring;
                                                                                   Begin tutoring
            6/9      First Language                 Reading assignments on
                     Acquisition                    Canvas
            6/10     Language Policy                Reading assignments on
                                                    Canvas
            6/11     Language Policy                Films on Canvas
                     Film Session
            6/12     Affirming Equal Rights         Reading assignments on         Identify Student for
                                                    Canvas                         Sample
                                                                                                           14


                                                       Critical Reflection #2:
                                                       Due Friday, June 12, at
                                                       midnight
3 6/15 What the Research Does   Reading assignments on Critical Commentary #2:
       and Does Not Say...      Canvas                 Due Sunday, June 14 at
                                                       midnight
       Student Oral Language
       Observation Matrix
       (SOLOM)
  6/16 Loss of Family Languages Reading assignments on
                                Canvas
  6/17 Immigration & Networks Reading assignments on
       of Relationships         Canvas
  6/18 The Standard Language    Reading assignments on
       Myth & Language          Canvas
       Variation
  6/19 Extended Essay           Reading assignments on Extended Essay Response:
       Response; Independent    Canvas                 Due Friday, June 19 at
       Writing & Conferencing                          midnight
4 6/22 Second and Written       Reading assignments on Critical Commentary #3:
       Language Acquisition     Canvas                 Due Sunday, June 21 at
                                                       midnight
  6/23 Translanguaging          Reading assignments on Language Samples Due
                                Canvas
                                                       Tutoring Post #1 on
                                                       Padlet
  6/24 Raciolinguistics         Reading assignments on
                                Canvas
  6/25 Semantics                Reading assignments on Language Transcriptions
                                Canvas                 Due
                                                                               15


  6/26 Pragmatics                Reading assignments on Critical Reflection #3:
                                 Canvas                 Due Friday, June 26 at
                                                        midnight
5 6/29 Phonology                 Reading assignments on Critical Commentary #4:
                                 Canvas                 Due Sunday, June 28 at
                                                        midnight
  6/30 Implications from         Reading assignments on
       Phonology: T ​ he “Why”   Canvas
  7/1  Morphology                Reading assignments on
                                 Canvas
  7/2  Implications from         Reading assignments on Tutoring Post #2 on
       Morphology: T  ​ he “Why” Canvas                 Padlet
  7/3  Syntax                    Reading assignments on Critical Reflection #4:
                                 Canvas                 Due Friday, July 3 at
                                                        midnight
6 7/6  Implications from         Reading assignments on Critical Commentary #5:
       Syntax: T
               ​ he “Why”        Canvas                 Due Sunday, July 5 at
                                                        midnight
  7/7  Peer Review & Writer’s    Reading assignments on Assignments Due for
       Workshop                  Canvas                 Peer Review:
                                                        Phonological
                                                        Development write-up &
                                                        Pragmatic Competence
                                                        write-up (drafts)
  7/8  Individual Conferences    Individual Conferences Individual Conferences
       (Presentation of Findings
       & Final Papers)
  7/9  Whole Class:              Reading assignments on Critical Reflection #5:
       Presentation of Findings  Canvas                 In-class reflection
                                                                                16


                     & Course Reflection
                                        Detailed Daily Schedule
 Week 1                               Course Introduction & Overview                     Thursday, June
 4
Read Before Class:​ Readings on Canvas
    ●   Fillmore, L. W., & Snow, C. E. (2000). What teachers need to know about language
    ●   Zeller, et al. (2010). From stranger to friend: The effect of service learning on pre-service
        teachers’ attitudes toward diverse populations
Assignments Due:​C      ​ omplete Student Information Sheet
This will be completed in class on Thursday, June 4
 Week 1                            Language as a Tool: Multilingual Perspectives             Friday, June
 5
Critical Reflection #1: ​Due Friday, June 5, at midnight
Read Before Class:​ Readings on Canvas
    ●   García, O. (2009). Emergent bilinguals and TESOL-What’s in a Name?
    ●   Martínez, R. (2018). Beyond the English learner label: Recognizing the richness of
        bi/multilingual students’ linguistic repertoires
Assignments Due: ​Sign-up for tutoring by Monday, June 8
 Week 2                                 How Linguists Study Language                      Monday, June
 8
Critical Commentary #1: ​Due Sunday, June 7 at midnight
Read Before Class:​ Course text
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014a). How Linguists Study Language: Ch. 1 (pp. 1-20)
Assignments Due:​Begin tutoring
 Week 2                                    First Language Acquisition                     Tuesday, June
 9
Read Before Class:​ Course text
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014b). First Language Acquisition: Ch. 2 (pp. 21-51).
                                                                                                         17


Watch Before Class:​ Link on Canvas
    ●   Deb Roy TED Talk: ​The Birth of a Word
 Week 2                                         Language Policy                  Wednesday, June
 10
Read Before Class:​ Readings on Canvas
    ●   Macías, R. (2014). Benefits of bilingualism: In the eye of the beholder?
Explore Before Class: ​Link also on Canvas
    ●   Our Nation’s English Language Learners​ (the breakdown of languages by state is interesting to
        explore in the ​languages​ section)
 Week 2                                Language Policy (Film Session)            Thursday, June 11
Asynchronous Meeting / Film Session
Watch: L​ inks also on Canvas
    ●   The Lemon Grove Incident: Roberto Alvarez v. The Board of Trustees of the Lemon Grove
        School District (1931)
    ●   Stolen Education​ (through UT Libraries, Kanopy)
 Week 2                   Affirming the Equal Rights of Multilingual Students        Friday, June
 12
Critical Reflection #2: ​Due Friday, June 12, at midnight
Read Before Class:​ Readings on Canvas
    ●   Hakuta, K. (2011). Education language minority students and affirming their equal rights:
        Research and practical perspectives
Assignments Due:​Identify Student for Language Sample
 Week 3                       What the Research Does—and Does not—Say              Monday, June
 15
Critical Commentary #2: ​Due Sunday, June 14 at midnight
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Goldenberg, C. (2008). Teaching English language learners: What the research does—and does
        not—say
Review Before Class: ​Readings and links on Canvas
    ●   García-Medina (2010). Table 3.1, Types of Educational Programs for Emergent Bilingual
        Students
 Week 3                                Loss of Family Languages                    Tuesday, June
                                                                                                    18


 16
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Fillmore, L. W. (2000). Loss of family languages: Should educators be concerned?
    ●   Excerpt from T​ ongue​ T ​ ied​: Indian Boy Love Song (#2) (p. 55) ​Sherman Alexie
    ●   Excerpt from T ​ ongue​ T ​ ied​: My Hawa'i' (p. 179-183) ​Nany Veary
    ●   Excerpt from T  ​ ongue​ T ​ ied​: Masks and Acculturation (p. 32-33) ​Margaret Montoya
 Week 3                       Immigration & Networks of Relationships                  Wednesday, June
 17
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Suárez-Orozco et al. (2008). Networks of relationships
 Week 3                    The Standard Language Myth & Language Variation              Thursday, June
 18
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Lipp-Green, R. (2012). The standard language myth
    ●   Delpit, L. (2002). “No kinda sense,” In T    ​ he Skin We Speak
Watch Before Class:​ Link also on Canvas
    ●   Why English Class is Silencing Students of Color​, Jamila Lyiscott TEDx
 Week 3                                Independent Writing & Conferencing                  Friday, June
 19
Extended Essay Response: ​Due Friday, June 19 at midnight
 Week 4                              Second and Written Language Acquisition             Monday, June
 22
Critical Commentary #3: ​Due Sunday, June 21 at midnight
Read Before Class: ​Course text
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014c). Second and Written Language Acquisition: Ch. 3 (pp. 52-83)
 Week 4                                         Translanguaging                          Tuesday, June
 23
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Velasco, P. and García, O. Translanguaging and the Writing of Bilingual Learners
                                                                                                        19


Assignments Due:​Language Sample Completed
                     Tutoring Post #1 on Padlet
 Week 4                                     Raciolinguistics                     Wednesday, June
 24
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Rosa, J. and Flores, N. (2017). Do you hear what I hear?
 Week 4                                       Semantics                           Thursday, June
 25
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Ariza, E. N., Morales-Jones, C. A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010a). Semantics
Assignments Due:​Language Sample Transcript
 Week 4                                       Pragmatics                             Friday, June
 26
Critical Reflection #3: ​Due Friday, June 26 at midnight
Read Before Class: ​Readings on Canvas
    ●   Ariza, E. N., Morales-Jones, C. A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010b). Pragmatics
 Week 5                                       Phonology                            Monday, June
 29
Critical Commentary #4: ​Due Sunday, June 28 at midnight
Read Before Class: ​Course text and on Canvas
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014d). English Phonology: Ch. 4 (pp. 89-118)
    ●   Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The myth of non-accent
 Week 5                                Implications from Phonology                 Tuesday, June
 30
Read Before Class: ​Course text
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014e). Implications from Phonology for Teaching a Second Language
        and for Teaching Reading: Ch. 5 (pp. 119-145)
 Week 5                                        Morphology                         Wednesday, July
                                                                                                  20


 1
Read Before Class: ​Course text
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014f). English Morphology: Ch. 7 (pp. 180-208).
 Week 5                                Implications from Morphology              Thursday, July
 2
Read Before Class: ​Course text
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014g). Implications from Morphology for Teaching a Second
        Language and for Teaching Reading: Ch. 8 (pp. 209-229).
Assignments Due: ​Tutoring Post #2 on Padlet
 Week 5                                           Syntax                            Friday, July
 3
Critical Reflection #4: ​Due Friday, July 3 at midnight
Read Before Class: ​Course text
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014h). English Syntax: Ch. 9 (pp. 230-264).
 Week 6                                   Implications from Syntax                Monday, July
 6
Critical Commentary #5: ​Due Sunday, July 5 at midnight
Read Before Class: ​Course text and on canvas
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014i). Implications from Syntax for Teaching a Second Language and
        Teaching Reading: Ch. 10 (pp. 265-287).
    ●   Martínez, R. (2010). Spanglish as a literacy tool
 Week 6                           Peer Review & Writer’s Workshop                  Tuesday, July
 7
Write Before Class:
Assignments Due for Peer Review (Bring to Class): ​Phonological Development write-up &
Pragmatic Competence write-up (drafts)
Assignments Due at the End of Class: ​Phonological Development write-up with feedback,
Pragmatic Competence write-up with feedback, and one additional section of your choice
Sign-up for individual conferences
                                                                                                 21


 Week 6                    Individual Conferences: Presentations & Final Papers Wednesday, July
 8
Individual conferences (presentation of findings & final paper)
 Week 6                       Presentation of Findings & Course Reflection       Thursday, July
 9
Presentation of Findings (Individual Presentations)
Critical Reflection #5: ​In-class reflection
                                                                                                22
