   Syllabus - Spring 2020                Unique #: 09470                  January 2020
                             ALD 322
                               Individual Differences
   Instructor Info
   Jim Patton, Ed.D.
   Office: SZB 408A
   Phone: 512.740.4082
   Email: jpatton91@me.com
   Office Hours
   Tuesday:      11:30a - 12:30p
   Thursday: 2:00 - 4:00p
                 8:00 - 9:00p       Course Description
   *online hours to be announced
   *other hours - by appointment    This introductory course provides an overview of
                                    individual differences among an array of people
                                    across the lifespan.
   Class Session                    The course focuses on basic concepts, issues, and
                                    ways to accommodate individuals whose features
   Thursday:5:00 to 8:00p           and/or conditions make them "different" and worthy
                                    of consideration, understanding, and action.
                   (7:45p)
   Location: UTC 3.104
                                     Support Personnel:
                                        Jordan Dille [Teaching Assistant]
                                           Office: SZB 242H
                                        Dahao Wang [Teaching Assistant]
qi


Syllabus - Fall 2019      Unique #:xxxxx                      August 2019
                     Required Readings
                     Students are asked to complete readings for each
                     class session. We will primarily use a textbook that
                     is in the process of being revised; as a result, it is
                     not ready in a complete edition. So, we will access
                     many of the existing chapters. Note: all readings will
                     be provided as PDFs and available in the modules.
                     Primary Source:
                     Blackbourn, J. M., Patton, J. R., & Trainor, A. T.
                     (2004). Exceptional individuals in focus (7th ed.).
                     Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
                     Course Flag
                     This course currently carries one flag:
                     “ Cultural Diversity”
                     This course carries the flag for “Cultural
                     Diversity in the United States.” Cultural
                     Diversity courses are designed to increase
                     your familiarity with a variety and richness of
                     the American cultural experience. You should
                     therefore expect a substantial portion of your
                     grade to come from assignments covering
                     the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
                     one US cultural group that has experienced
                     persistent marginalization.


                         Weeks 2-3:
                          Historical Perspective
                          Programs & Services
                          Diversity & Differences
                          Cultural Considerations
      My Teaching         Responsible Inclusion
       Philosophy
                          Model for Differentiating
  Learning occurs best
                             Instruction
     when folks are
enjoying what they are
 doing. I love teaching
and will have fun being
 the instructor for this
  course. I am hopeful
  that you will find the Weeks 4-15:
      sessions to be      Areas of Disability:
    informative and           Physical
engaging. Each session
                              Developmental
 will include a mixture
     of instructional         Cognitive/Learning
 techniques, including        Sensory
  some lecture, lots of   At-Risk Groups:
    discussion, guest      [from a school perspective]
   presenters, video &        Homeless
   audio clips, and in-
                              Refugees
     class activities. I
  believe that you will       Abuse & Neglect
 find that each session       Parents/Incarcerated
    will go by pretty         Parents/Serious Illness
   quickly, as will the
        semester.


Course Goals
Upon completion of this course, each of you will be
able to:
  • Familiarize students with the basic concepts and issues
 related to diversity in school, workplace, and community.
  • Introduce the concept of inclusion and understand its
 implications for school and community.
  • Introduce the concept of response-to-intervention and
 understand its implication for teachers and their students.
  • Present the key features/characteristics of a wide range
 of exceptional individuals
  • Examine the issues, needs, and strategies for working
 with students who are “at-risk” for academic difficulties.
  • Present a range of practices for differentiating
 instruction that may be appropriate for students with special
 needs across various levels of school.
  • Discuss the legal mandates and controversial issues
 associated with addressing the needs of individuals who
 differ from those in mainstream of society.
  • Highlight important familial and cultural issues affecting
 individuals with special needs.


Course Requirements —
Administrative:
Attendance. Class attendance per se will not be
considered in grading. However, regular
attendance is highly recommended for the
following reasons:
• Reading material will be discussed in class.
• In-class discussions will cover material
from sources other than readings.
• Guest speakers will cover selected
topics presented from a personal/
professional perspective.
• Credit for the completion of various in-class
activities (ICAs) can only be achieved if one is
present in class.
Assignments. Assignments are to be submitted
electronically. Work submitted should reflect a
quality in terms of scope, depth, writing
mechanics, and appearance that would be
expected of undergraduates at one of the most
prestigious universities in US and world.
Grade of incomplete. The grade of "Incomplete"
will be granted only if a student has completed
75% of the course. This grade designation will
result from a request from a student based on
extraordinary personal or academic reasons, or
by me, when deemed necessary. A due date for
completing the course will be negotiated by the
student and the instructor. If the course is not
completed by the agreed upon due date, the
grade corresponding to the number of points
already earned will be submitted. There is no
grading penalty for completing the course by the
negotiated date.
Late assignments. Late assignments of major
course requirements will be accepted; however,
one point will be deducted for each school day
after the due date of the assignment.


Accommodations          Activity make-ups. In-class activities CANNOT
                        be made up, unless extraordinary
                        circumstances explain your inability to be in
 I have tried to design class.
   this class using the
                        Academic honesty. I expect that all activities
 principle of universal
                        performed in this class conform to a standard of
   design for learning  personal integrity and honesty. I am under
     (UDL) whereby      obligation from UT not to tolerate scholastic
                        dishonesty and to report any such incidents to
     elements of the    the Office of the Dean of Students. The UT
  course are designed   Student Honor Codes reads: “As a student of
                        The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by
   to accommodate a     the core values of the University and uphold
      wide range of     academic integrity.” I want you to attach the
                        following statement to all major course
     student needs.
                        requirements that has been individually assigned
     However, I am      in this class: “I have neither given nor received
  prepared and quite    assistance from any other person on this [state
                        the activity].” After you write this statement, I
        willing to      want you to initial it.
   accommodate any
                        Religious Considerations. Policy for absences
  special and uniques   due to religious holy days is set in the Texas
  needs that a student  Education Code. The code states that a student
                        who misses an examination, work assignment,
    might have. I will  or other project due to the observance of a
   comply completely    religious holy day must be given an opportunity
                        to complete the work missed within a reasonable
     with any official
                        time after the absence, provided he or she has
  directives provided   properly notified each instructor. It is the policy of
   by the Services for  The University of Texas at Austin that the student
                        must notify each instructor at least 14 days prior
      Students with     to the classes scheduled on dates he or she will
    Disabilities Office be absent. For religious holidays that fall within
                        the first two weeks of the semester, the notice
                        should be given on the first day of the semester.
                        The student may not be penalized for these
                        absences, but the instructor may appropriately
                        respond if the student fails to complete
                        satisfactorily the missed assignment or
                        examination within a reasonable time after the
                        excused absence.


                       Course Requirements —
                       Academic:
Due Dates              Course requirements will be discussed at the
                       beginning of the semester. In-depth
These are the due
                       descriptions of certain requirements will be
dates for the major
                       addressed in class.
course requirements.
                       General Evaluation Criteria: All products
KAs:
                       generated and activities performed in this class
  #1:     Feb 20
                       will be evaluated on the following dimensions:
  #2:     Apr 02
                          Directions were followed.
   #3:    May 07
                          Product is well-organized.
                          Content reflects comprehensiveness and effort.
Response Brief: Oct 22
                          Content shows appropriate application of course
                             content.
AIT Lab: Apr 23
                       Readings: Assigned readings should be
SLP:      May 07       completed prior to class. Various activities based
                       on the readings will occur in class.
IP:       May 07
                       In-Class Activities (ICAs) During the course of
                       this term, typically there will be two in-class
                       activities (ICAs) every session. These activities
                       will relate to the assigned readings and topics
                       covered in class. You will receive points for
                       completing the activities. However, as indicated
                       earlier, to receive the point(s) for the ICAs, you
                       must be in class at the time of the activity. Each
                       activity is typically worth 1 point.
                         Due: during each class period
                       Outside-of-Class Activities (OCAs): I am
                       going to ask you to do approximately fifteen (15)
                       outside-class activities. These activities are
                       designed to engage you in a topic that we will be
                       covering in an upcoming session. Your response
                       will be due the night before class to allow us to
                       review the responses prior to the session. The
                       OCA information will be provided in the module
                       for a particular session. Each activity will be
                       worth 1 point.
                         Due: at 11:59p the night before class
                       Single Most Important Thing (SMIT): At the
                       end of each class session or within one hour
                       after class, you should submit a one sentence/
                       phrase that captures, in your opinion, the single


                          most important point that was discussed during
                          the session. You will receive one point for
                          completing the SMIT for each class session.
                          However, as indicated earlier, to receive the
                          point for your SMIT, you must have been in
                          attendance for the session.
                             Due: at the end of each class period
                          Knowledge Assessments (KA): Knowledge
                          Assessments (KA). I will be administering three
                          knowledge assessments during the semester. The
                          KAs are based on assigned readings and content
                          covered in class -- typically an even balance of
Assignment                both sources. Each KA will include material
                          covered since the previous KA. If you have a
Weighing:                 legitimate conflict with any of the scheduled dates,
There are 200 points      see a TA as soon as possible. The KAs come in
possible for the          three formats: multiple-choice; short answer; and
course. The grade         oral. The default format is multiple-choice –
you obtain for this       however, if you feel that you require a different
course depends on         type of assessment format, see a TA prior to the
the TOTAL number          first KA. NOTE#1: All KA make-ups are the short-
of points you earn        answer format. NOTE#2: The KAs must be taken
throughout the term.      to receive a passing grade for the course. NB: You
The point values          are encouraged to examine your KA performance.
for each course           If you feel that you can provide a sound, logical
requirement are           argument for why any of your choices should be
provided below.           accepted, you can submit a written response. You
                          have until the date of the next KA to file a
KA:    75 points          response.
       (each KA = 25 pts)
                          Individual Project (IP): Each student must
SLP:   25 points          complete an individual project that involves
                          completing mini-assignments that relate to the
AIT:   10 points          goals of this course. Guidelines will be provided
                          to explain this requirement in more detail.
ACE Activity:   10 points
Individual Project: 25    Product: A document file (Word, Pages, PDF)
points                    submitted by the due date. Extension rule
                          applies.
OCAs: 15 points
ICAs:   25 points
SMITs: 15 points


                   Service Learning Project (SLP): Complete at
                   least 10 hours of fieldwork in the setting in
Grade              which you are have contact with students or
Determination:     other individuals with special needs. In most
                   settings, you will provide tutoring and/or
                   mentoring to one or more individuals with special
 A = 93% and above needs; however, it is possible that you may
 A- = 90-92%       perform other activities depending on your
                   setting.
 B+ = 87-89%
 B = 83-86%        (a) Five documents that relate to this
 B- = 80-82%       requirement will be posted on Canvas in a
                   module called “SLP.” Read over the guidelines
 C+ = 77-79%       carefully, as they explain this course requirement
 C = 73-76%        in more detail and will enable you to successfully
 C- = 70-72%       complete this course requirement.
 D = 60-69%        (b) Identify a site and indicate this to us via
                   Canvas (SLP module) by Feb 06.
 F  = below 60%
                   (c) Read the "Service Learning Agreement" (one
                   of the five documents on the website) and
                   submit it via Canvas (SLP module) Feb 13. Your
                   field experience supervisor MUST sign this form.
                   Scan this form and post to the SLP.
                   (d) Generate “personal reflections” of your SLP
                   experience. These reflections should reflect your
                   reactions to the experience (i.e., your feelings,
                   thoughts, comments). This aspect of the SLP will
                   be discussed/explained in class!! You will need
                   to make at least four (4) entries over the course
                   of the term: one entry after your first visit, two
                   entries during your service learning experience,
                   and a fourth entry after your final visit. Each
                   entry will be made via Canvas (SLP module).
                   (e) Maintain a log (this form is posted in the SLP
                   module) by including the dates, a brief
                   description of tasks performed on a given date,
                   and the number of hours performed on that date.
                   Upon completion of your 15 hours of fieldwork,
                   obtain your supervisor's signature and
                   comments (optional) on the log. Scan this log
                   and upload via Canvas (SLP module). If you


need additional time, you can request this as the
term nears completion.
(f) Evaluation criteria: requirements met; effort
put into the blog entries.
Product: Seven uploads via Canvas (SLP
module): (1) indication of where you are doing
your SLP (2) agreement form (3-6) four (4)
entries with your reflections (7) log (signed by
supervisor at end of SLP). Extension rule
applies.
Assistive & Instructional Technology (AIT)
Lab Visitation. Site visits to the AIT Lab in SZB
518e are required to better acquaint students in
ALD 322 with the use of assistive technology
(AT) across a number of settings in which
individuals with special needs work, learn, and
live. Specific information about this assignment
is provided in the “AIT Lab Orientation
Assignment Information” guidelines that are
located in the AIT Lab module on Canvas.
You will need to sign-up for a visit to the lab
online early in the term – procedures for signing
up are provided in the guidelines and will be
discussed in class. Specific dates for when the
actual orientations begin and when you will have
the last opportunity to visit the AIT lab are
provided in the guidelines. I strongly advise that
you sign up as soon as you can – this class is
not the only one doing these visits.
You should collect information that is requested
on the “Site Visit Form” – use this form to take
notes when you are doing the visit – this form is
also found in the module. After you complete
your visit and have word-processed your notes,
you should upload the Site Visit Form via
Canvas (AIT Lab module). This course
requirement will be evaluated on the following
criteria:
(a) completing the site visit, as verified by the
sign-in sheet given to me by the AT lab staff at


the end of the term;
(b) completing the AIT lab evaluation; and
(c) submitting a completed report that reflects
thoroughness and effort.
Product: Document that summarizes your
observations (format in packet) submitted via
Canvas (AIT Lab module). Extension rule
applies.
ACE Activity. This activity is designed to engage
some of the issues associated with adverse
childhood experiences. Specific details will be
provided in the module for this activity on Canvas.
Product: Document that includes the information
provided in the guidelines. Extension rule
applies.


                   Additional Aspects of the Course
   Course Feature                                    Info
Discussion           I am going to use the discussion feature of Canvas in a
                     variety of ways this term. Most of the activities will be
                     voluntary.
                     NOTE: if you just missed the cut-off for a grade, I will bump
                     up your grade, if, and only if, you have made at least two (2)
                     postings to any of the discussion activities.
Session schedule       5:00 (sharp)         begin class
                       5:00 – 5:10          news/course business
                       5:10 – 6:25          Part 1: topic(s) for the day
                       6:25 – 6:35          break
                       6:35 – 7:40.         Part 2: topics
                       7:40 – 7:45          closure activities (SMIT)
Class session format   lecture, discussion, activities, media, guest speakers
Course Etiquette/    •   respect for other class members & for my guests
Guidelines           •   asking questions during class is encouraged
                     •   environmental needs/problems – let me know
                     •   bring your book and/or the readings to class
                     •   if you are going to miss class or have to leave class early,
                         please let me know in advance
Phone use in class   For the most part, you will NOT need to use your cell phone
                     in class. As a result, please place your iPhones, Galaxies,
                     HTCs, or other devices in the “silent” mode. NOTE: I am
                     aware that some of you may want to use your phone to
                     complete certain activities.
Computer use in      You will NEED to bring your laptop to class. However, I ask
class                that you NOT use your computer for non-class-related
                     activities.
                     NB: I may designate “digital-free times” when EVERYONE
                     must close his/her computer, etc.
In-class behavior    I will KNOW who you are and will be cognizant of your in-
                     class behavior. So, if I feel that there is a problem with in-
                     class behavior --behavior that interferes with the learning of
                     others (e.g., excessive chatting or excessive non-class-


                      related digital use -- constantly looking at your computer but
                      no note-taking), you are likely to HEAR from me privately.
                      However, I encourage students to speak directly to one
                      another about any problem that might arise.
Plagiarism            UT Senate: “if you use words or ideas that are not your own
                      you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
                      plagiarism.”
Syllabus              A syllabus constitutes a type of “contract” between the
                      student and the course instructor. Participation in this course
                      indicates your acceptance of its content, requirements, and
                      policies. Please review this syllabus in detail as soon as
                      possible (and click the “Accept” button!).
Supports for Students UT provides a number of support services for students. An
                      initial overview of services an be found at the Dean of
                      Students website (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu). Please
                      see me if you have any questions or concerns.
Withdrawal from       If you believe that the purpose, goals, policies, requirements,
course                or some other aspect of this course do not meet your
                      interests, needs, or expectations, you should drop the class
                      by the drop/add deadline. NB: other sections of ALD 322 are
                      available this term at UT, and, given that variations in policies
                      and requirements do exist across sections, you may want to
                      explore these other options. If you do decide to drop this
                      course, I wish you the best.


20jan20
                                  TENTATIVE SCHEDULE OF TOPICS
   This schedule may change to meet class needs. You will be notified if this occurs.
     DATE        TOPIC                                    Readings                NOTES/DUE DATES
1    Jan 23      Welcome                                  Smith (Epiphany)        organizational reps
                 Introductions
                 Course overview & Business
                 SLP representatives
2    Jan 30      Diversity and Differences                STS: ch1
                 Historical & Legal Foundations           Neilson: 1-19
3    Feb 06      Programs & Services                      Focus: 2                SLP site selection due
                 Inclusive Settings                       STS-ch2                 g: Christopher D
                 Intro to IEPs                            Patton-1 (di-intro)
                 Differentiated Instruction-intro
                 Traumatic Brain Injury
4    Feb 13      Physical & Health Conditions             Focus: 8                SLP agreement form due
                 Accessibility                            Neilson: 175-180        g: Jeff B
                                                          Martin
5    Feb 20      Blind & Low Vision                       Focus: 9                g: Lori P
                 KA #1
6    Feb 27      Intellectual Disability                  SPTD: ch6               g: Boyce/Amy G
                 Family issues                            Focus: 15               g: Priors
                                                          Prior (Dad perspective)
7    Mar 05      Speech & Language                        Focus: 11               g: Mirza L-N
                 ID-pt 2                                  Neilson: 90-99
                 Transition                               Patton & Dunn (intro
                                                            to transition)
8    Mar 12      Learning Disability-pt 1                 STS: ch6                ACE Activity due
                 Response to Intervention (RTI)           Reiff et al.
                                                            (LD experiences)
     Mar 19      BREAK
9    Mar 26      LD-pt 2                                  Neilson: 99-107
                 Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Focus: 6
                                                          Mooney & Cole
                                                           (personal take)
10   Apr 02      Deafness & Hard-of-Hearing               Focus: 10               g: James M
                 KA #2
11   Mar 26      Situational-1: Homelessness              SPTD: ch12              g: Isa A
                                  Parent – incarcerated   Anderson (incarcerated) (g: Joy K)
                                                          Focus: 12
                 Giftedness
12   Apr 09      Autism Spectrum Disorder                 SPTD: ch8
                                                          Neilson: 42-50
13   Apr 23      Emotional & Behavior Disorders           Focus: 5                AIT visit report due
                 Mental Health Issues                     Samuels (ebd)           g: Jessica M
                                                          Kauffman & Badar
14   Apr 30      Situational-2: Trauma                    Herman (PTSD)           g: Meredith C & Sondra
                                 Child Abuse & Neglect    TBA
                                 Serious Illness – parent McCue (chronic illness)
15   May 07      Putting It All Together                  Hart (Honors Day)       IP due
                 Concluding Comments/Thoughts                                     SLP due
                 KA #3
