                                          ANT 324L/REE 345
                                       Politics and Performance
                           from Populist Demagogues to Russian Trolls
                               Fall 2019, T/Th 9:30-10:45am, BIO 301
                        Maria Sidorkina (maria.sidorkina@austin.utexas.edu)
            Office Hours (Burdine Hall 474): Thu 1:30-3:30, otherwise by appointment
Summary:
During presidential elections, we often talk as much about how politicians speak as about what
they say. This heightened attention to language provides a superb opportunity to dig deeper into
our own culture of political communication from “Abe” to “W”: from Obama’s “precision-grip
gesture” to Palin’s “Whitmanesque” forms of address; from Hilary’s register-shifting to Trump’s
gestural caricatures. The last election cycle has also given observers cause to examine rhetorical
technologies that seem not our own—such as “Kremlin propaganda techniques,” the
weaponization of “fake news” and populist demagoguery. Over the course of the semester,
students will think through the power struggles of democratic process by closely attending to
language, rhetoric and performance. Combining fieldwork, theoretical speculation and engaged
research we will contribute to community knowledge about public speech and civic life, and, in
the end, help shape our local public culture.
Requirements:
The bulk of the work over the course of the semester will include reading, conducting
independent research, and working towards a final paper. Further specifications for each
assignment and the due dates will be posted to the course website. Students are required to:
     1.  Prepare the readings, and lead/fully participate in class discussion. Submit weekly
         paragraph-long responses to the readings, due on the first day of class each week (20%).
     2.  Keep an ethnographic journal (20%). This ongoing journal of your online and offline
         research can be made by using Evernote, a note-taking platform. The notes will be due
         on the last day of class each week. Resulting snapshots, transcripts and field notes can be
         used for your own research, and will be shared with the class.
     3.  Midterm essay (30%). Careful summary, synthesis, extension, and critique of 2-3
         readings in first half of class, 10 pages long. Due Tuesday, October 15th.
     4.  Submit a final essay of 10 pages (30%) which uses the class readings and your research
         notes to analyze an example of a political performance or debate. You are encouraged to
         collaborate with your classmates on data gathering and analysis. Due Tuesday,
         December 17th.
I strongly encourage you to use the services offered by the University Writing Center. The UWC
offers 45-minute, one-on-one consultations with UT students on any piece of writing. You may
visit up to three times per assignment. The consultants are well trained, and the cost of the
service is covered in your tuition. If you wish to make an appointment, you may do so through
the UWC website: uwc.utexas.edu


Ethnographic Research References:
Depending on students’ individual experiences with anthropological research methods, we will
incorporate discussion of these readings into the course or at office hours, as needed. They will
be available for your reference on the online course server.
    • Laura Ahearn (2011) “Chapter 2: The Research Process in Linguistic Anthropology”
        from Living Language: An Introduction to Linguistic Anthropology. (31-49)
    •   Charles Briggs (1986) “Introduction” from Learning How to Ask (1-30)
    •   Clifford Geertz (1973) “Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture”
        from The Interpretation of Cultures (3-30)
    •   Betsy Rymes and Andrea R. Leone (2016) “Citizen Sociolinguistics: A New Media
        Methodology for Understanding Language and Social Life” from Blum, Making Sense of
        Language (596-607)
Readings: All readings will be available as PDFs on the class server. I will guide you to
particular sections and concepts in these readings as the course progresses. I reserve the right to
add and/or subtract readings as we go.
Schedule:
Week I. (August 29) Introduction to the course.
Week II. (September 3, 5) How to talk about political talk, anthropologically.
    • Donzelli and Lawrence, “The ‘Tiny Hand’ of Donald Trump and the Metapragmatics of
        Typographic Parody.”
    • Hemment, “Red Scares and Orange Mobilizations: A Critical Anthropological
        Perspective on the Russian Hacking Scandal”
WEEK III. (September 10, 12) The way things were: from ideologies to institutions/history.
    • Habermas, “Institutions of the Public Sphere,” from The Structural Transformation of the
        Public Sphere: An Inquiry Into a Category of Bourgeois Society
    • Warner, “The Res Publica of Letters” from The Letters of the Republic: Publication and
        the Public Sphere in Eighteenth-century America
    • Oleg Kharkhordin, “The Past and Future of Russian Public Language” in Public Debate
        in Russia: Matters of (Dis)order
WEEK IV. (September 17, 19) Learning to sound political in the U.S; sincerity; performance.
    • Fliegelman, from Declaring Independence: Jefferson, Natural Language and the Culture
        of Performance.
    • Goffman, “Footing,” from Forms of Talk.
WEEK V. (September 24, 26) Civility and political correctness; strategic incivility.
    • Bejan, from Mere Civility: Disagreement and the Limits of Toleration


  •  Bauman, “Christ Respects No Man's Person: The Plain Language and the Rhetoric of
     Impoliteness.” In Let Your Words Be Few: Symbolism of Speaking and Silence Among
     Seventeenth-Century Quakers
WEEK VI. (October 1, 3) Trolling, for and against democracy.
  • Perelmutter, Renee, “Klassika Zhanra: The Flamewar as a Genre in the Russian
     Blogosphere,” Journal of Pragmatics
  • Gabriella Coleman, “Our Weirdness is Free: The logic of Anonymous—online army,
     agent of chaos, and seeker of justice” in Triple Canopy
     (https://www.canopycanopycanopy.com/legacy/final/our_weirdness_is_free)
WEEK VII. (October 8, 10) Propaganda and the post-truth, post-modern, post-liberal Other.
  • Pomerantsev, “Reality Show Russia” from Nothing Is True and Everything Is Possible:
     The Surreal Heart of the New Russia
  • John MacKay, “Built on a Lie: Propaganda, Pedagogy, and the Origins of the Kuleshov
     Effect” from The Oxford Handbook of Propaganda Studies
WEEK VIII. (October 15, 17) Soviet political culture, past and (our) future?
  • Yurchak, “Late Socialism: An Eternal State,” “Hegemony of Form: Stalin’s Uncanny
     Paradugm Shift,” and “Ideology Inside Out: Ethics and Poetics”
  • Boyer and Yurchak,“American Stiob: Or, What Late-Socialist Aesthetics of Parody
     Reveal about Contemporary Political Culture in the West”
WEEK IX. (October 22, 24) Political institutions and media markets
  • Roudakova, from Losing Pravda: Ethics and The Press in Post-Truth Russia
WEEK X. (October 29, 31) Pluralizing cultures of political communication.
  • Jackson, “Building Publics, Shaping Public Opinion: Interanimating Registers in
     Malagasy Kabary Oratory and Political Cartooning.”
  • Bernard Bate, “Shifting Subjects: Elocutionary Revolution and Democracy in Eighteenth-
     Century America and Twentieth-Century India.”
WEEK XI. (November 5, 7) From talking heads to acting bodies.
  • Alim and Smitherman, “Nah, We Straight: Black Language and America’s First Black
     President” from Articulate While Black: Barack Obama, Language, and Race in the U.S.
  • Hill, “Language, Race and White Public Space”
WEEK XII. (November 12, 14) What do high school and presidential elections have in common?
  • Bucholtz, “Say word? Race and style in White Teenage Slang” from White Kids:
     Language, Race, and Styles of Youth Identity
  • Lempert and Silverstein, “The Message in Hand,” from Creatures of Politics: Media,
     Message, and the American Presidency
WEEK XIII. (November 19, 21)
  • Kira Hall, Donna Meryl Goldstein and Matthew Bruce Ingram, “The Hands of Donald
     Trump: Entertainment, Gesture, Spectacle.”


  •  Lempert, “Barack Obama, being sharp: Indexical order in the pragmatics of precision-
     grip gesture”
                            **Nov 27-30 Thanksgiving **
WEEK XIV. (December 3, 5) Conclusions. No readings.
