 ARI 560R / ARI 696 - ADVANCED DESIGN: INTERIORS                                                                                          FALL 2018
 INSTRUCTOR: LYSA JANSSEN
                                         OFFICE HOURS / LOCATION:              By appointment
                                         Class time / location: 		             MWF 1:00pm - 5pm, TBD
                                         Designing with the Senses - Perfumery and The Contemporary Retail Apothecary
                        Images L-R, T-B:
       Santa Maria Novella, Florence,
           Alchemic Workshop, 1590;
        Grasse Institute of Perfumery;
Aesop store in Milan by dimorestudio;
                      Francis Kurkdjian
                Olfactory Installation;
             StoreyStudio John Lobb,
                     Spring Walk SS18;
   Jakob + Macfarlane Frédéric Malle
                 perfume store, Paris.
                                         Fall 2018 Syllabus
                                         This advanced Interior Design studio will investigate the history of perfumery, its relationship to
                                         the apothecary, and the rise of sensation and experience in retail, interior design, and architecture.
                                         Students will apply this research to developing a sensorial pop-up and movable display counter, which
                                         will lead to broader studio investigations of retail design, sensory guest/customer experiences, and a
                                         final design of a modern apothecary retail store in New York City.
                                         Studio Course Outline:
                                         1A) Research - Apothecary & Perfume
                                                   An introduction to perfumery, scent and its relationship to memory, and the history of the
                                                   apothecary. Learn about the history of fragrance, its use in soap and perfume in antiquity, its
                                                   connection to trade, the rise of its use in beautification, and its connection to the monastic
                                                   and medicinal dispensaries. Techniques of manufacturing and distillation will be reviewed,
                                                   including modes of extraction of natural elements and the understanding of natural vs
                                                   synthetic scents.
                                         1B) Research - Sensory Experiences and Retail
                                                   Research the impact of online shopping and its impact on the physical retail store. Focus on
                                                   user research and case studies of how brands are shifting retail design strategies to retain
                                                   customer and brand attention between the digital and the physical. Gather precedent
                                                   examples across retail industries, as well as outlier examples of sensorial experiences in art,
                                                   music, hospitality, theatre, fashion/runway.


ARI 560R / ARI 696 - ADVANCED DESIGN: INTERIORS                                                                         FALL 2018
INSTRUCTOR: LYSA JANSSEN
                      2) Sensorial Retail Pop-Up
                                Students will design a pop-up sensorial experience and counter for product display which
                                integrates a scent and material exploration component for a site in downtown Austin, specific
                                site information forthcoming (site may be movable). The pop-up experience will focus on
                                developing a singular, sensational moment, incorporating research on perfumery, sensorial
                                design, and new retail trends.
                      3) Retail Store Design
                                Using the sensorial pop-up experience as a basis for re-conceptualizing experiences of retail
                                and the typology of the modern day apothecary, students will design a finish-out retail
                                store in New York City, specific site information forthcoming. Program will include retail and
                                product display (seasonal vs permanent), guest interaction moments, new concepts for points
                                of sale, sensorial experiences, an extension of the pop-up counter, as well as experience based
                                programming based on the student’s research such as a cafe, bakery, or flower shop. Each
                                design will include the development of site research, storefront and street presence, signage,
                                wayfinding, lighting, interior surfaces, ceiling systems, flooring, sound (ambience as well as
                                acoustics), examination of scent, ventilation, and air quality, and innovations in the use of
                                color, pattern, material, textiles, and FF&E.
                      All course material will be submitted in a pre-agreed upon design format prior to the first presentation,
                      and presentations thereafter, and all material compiled into a research course book at the end of the
                      studio semester.
                      Catalog Description and Prerequisites
                      ARI 560R. Advanced Interior Design. 5 Hours. (Undergraduate section)
                      Restricted to students in the School of Architecture. Synthesis of components covered in other interior
                      design courses, such as human aspects, place-making, the interior envelope, transitional spaces, and
                      conceptual processes. Fifteen hours of lecture and studio a week for one semester. May be repeated for
                      credit when the topics vary. Prerequisite: Architectural Interior Design 530T with a grade of at least C
                      and satisfactory completion of a third-year portfolio review.
                      ARI 696. Advanced Interior Design Studio. 6 Hours. (Graduate section)
                      Studies advanced problems in interior design and examines design strategies and different phases of
                      design. Topics may focus on interior design as it relates to retail, education, sustainability, and health
                      care. Fifteen studio hours a week for one semester. May be repeated for credit when the topics vary.
                      Prerequisite: Graduate standing, Architectural Interior Design 693K and 693L, and consent of the
                      graduate adviser.
                      STUDIO CULTURE
                      The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning
                      encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio offers
                      an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals, which
                      are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-
                      large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members, and provides
                      the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and spatial and material
                      sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project-based learning
                      becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the school’s core
                      values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all
                      in service of architecture’s fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural
                      environments.
                      https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture


ARI 560R / ARI 696 - ADVANCED DESIGN: INTERIORS                                                                            FALL 2018
INSTRUCTOR: LYSA JANSSEN
                      GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
                      A/A- Excellent
                      Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual
                      rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond
                      what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
                      B+/B/B- Above Average
                      Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues
                      ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is
                      complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
                      C+/C Average
                      Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication
                      and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
                      C-/D+/D/D- Poor
                      Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
                      appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
                      F Fail
                      Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this
                      grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
                      X Excused Incomplete
                      Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
                      on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation
                      with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be
                      completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to
                      the School of Architecture policy.
                      ATTENDANCE
                      Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused
                      absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade
                      will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious
                      observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family
                      emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and
                      initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
                      If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1)
                      unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is
                      known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a
                      classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
                      RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
                      A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations,
                      for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence
                      is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take
                      an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
                      time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in
                      advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.


ARI 560R / ARI 696 - ADVANCED DESIGN: INTERIORS                                                                         FALL 2018
INSTRUCTOR: LYSA JANSSEN
                      ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
                      Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties,
                      including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
                      dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic
                      integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for
                      official University policies and procedures on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
                      conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
                      http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
                      CARE PROGRAM
                      Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within
                      the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for
                      students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
                      Laura Dannenmaier (LCSW) is the CARE Program Director and is the assigned CARE counselor for the
                      School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may
                      directly reach out to her.
                      Laura Dannenmaier | BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115
                      https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
                      STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
                      Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents
                      the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students
                      (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be
                      presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
                      needed should be discussed at that time.
                      http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
                      SECURITY, SAFETY, AND THE STUDIO
                      The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful
                      attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should
                      be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your
                      colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and do not
                      leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio-mates accountable for the security of your
                      shared space.
