             Introduction to Advertising/PR Research (309R)
                                             Spring 2019
Instructor
Matthew S. Eastin, PhD
Professor
Office: BCM #4.324
Office Hours: Tuesday offline (my office) from 10am to 11:30am or by Appointment
Email: matt.eastin@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant
Fangxin Xu
Office Hours: Monday and Thursday 9-11am (BMC 4th floor Cubical 4.332) or by apt. I will also have a
chat open on this time to answer questions virtually, Thursday online 4pm to 5pm.
Email: fxu@utexas.edu
Manuela Caviedes
Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday 12:00-2:00 p.m. (BMC 4th floor Cubical 4.332) or by apt. Also, I’ll
be available online Tuesday from 9:00 to 10:00 a.m.
Email: mcaviedes@utexas.edu
Zayna Thompson
Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursday 10:00-12:00 p.m. (Cubical TBD) or by apt.
Email: zayna@utexas.edu
Required Resources
Davis, J. J.(2012). Advertising Research: Theory and Practice, 2nd Ed. Saddle River, NJ: Prentice
         Hall.
Buy at the Coop or online, bound copy, eBook or value edition – wherever you can get it and in whatever
form you desire, just be sure to get the 2nd edition.
Technological Requirements
All students will be required to use excel and SPSS throughout the semester. You may access
SPSS in the following ways:
●   Campus Labs: MEZ 2.104 (5 copies)
●   You may purchase a 6-month or 1-year student license of IBM SPSS (Base Grad Pack) for
    $42.99 or $65.99, respectively. Visit the following: http://www.onthehub.com/spss/
● IBM SPSS free trial: https://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/technology/spss/spss-trials.html


Course Goals
From a media and advertising perspective, this course will cover essential statistical analyses
needed for basic advertising research. Quantitatively, within the context of advertising examples,
this class will cover sampling, descriptive statistics, variable development and measurement,
probability, group comparisons, and relational and predictive testing. Again, each of the topics
will be advertising-based in example and context.
Lectures
All lectures will be posted to CANVAS. Students can view lectures at any time prior to taking the exam.
Lectures may in in video, audio or presentation format (although most are video). Assignments will be
covered in lecture and labs. Students can follow up with the instructor or TA during their online (or off-
line) office hours. Due to the nature of this online class, all material needed for exam 1 will be posted by
January 22nd, 2019. Following exam 1, all material needed for exam 2 will be posted. Following exam 2,
all remaining materials will be posted.
Grading
Grading breakdown is as follows:
Individual Assignment (x4 – 10% per)               =        40%
Exam Flashcards (x2 – 5% per)                      =        10%
Exam 1                                             =        10%
Exam 2                                             =        20%
Exam 3 (cumulative)                                =        20%
Total                                                       100%
Grade Breakdown
93-100 = A        87-89 = B+          77-79 = C+            65-69 = D+
                                                                                 59 and below = F
90-92 = A -       83-86 = B           73-76 = C             60-64 = D
                  80-82 = B -         70-72 = C –
Individual Assignments
There will be four individual assignments. Three of these assignments will require you to
analyze, display (visually) and write-up data. Simply using SPSS output will not be sufficient
for assignment completion. More information will be presented in class on the date indicated
on the course schedule below.


Exams
There will be three exams throughout the semester. In most instances, the TA will try to have
some kind of exam review. Exam #3 will be cumulative so make sure you go back and review
early class content. Make-up exams will be given only in instances of excused absences.
Furthermore, you must notify me beforehand about an excused absence for an exam. On the
scheduled exam days, the exam will be available online from 5pm to 10pm. You can take the
exam at any point during this time period. However, once you start you will need to finish the
exam. All exams will be timed and will end at their designated time allotment.
Make-up Policy Exams must be taken during the scheduled exam time. A make-up exam can
only be taken if the student presents proof of a valid medical excuse or extenuating circumstance.
Medical excuses and extenuating circumstances will be verified and judged as warranting a
special case by the course instructor. ALL class assignments must be turned in by the date
and time listed on the syllabus. No late work will be accepted.
Communicating with the Instructor
Feel free to contact me via e-mail or in-person. I check e-mail regularly and will do my best to
respond as soon as I can; however, do not expect a response immediately, during the weekend, or
at midnight before the test—simply stated, plan ahead and give me time to respond. For quickest
response, please put "ADV 309R" in the subject heading.
        Piazza
        For most questions related to course material or class administration, please post your
        question to Piazza. This is the most efficient way for us to share knowledge among the
        entire learning community. Never doubt the value of your questions – if you are
        wondering about something, at least a few of your classmates are wondering the same
        thing!
        This semester, we will be using Piazza as a class-wide discussion forum. If you have
        questions or topics that you'd like to discuss with your classmates and teaching team, this
        is the place to do it. The system is highly catered to getting you help fast and efficiently
        from classmates, TAs, and instructors. Rather than emailing questions to the teaching
        staff, we encourage you to post your questions on Piazza.
Academic Dishonesty
Any form of academic dishonesty, including plagiarism, manufacturing quotes or sources, using
another’s reporting, research or quotes without giving proper attribution, will result in an
automatic grade of “F” for your assignment, possibly the course and possibly worse. If you’re
ever unsure whether you’re crossing the line, ask – that’s what good practitioners and good
journalists do. Here’s the basic university policy on academic dishonesty:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html (Links to an external site.)
Special needs
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability who requires


academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512)
471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please see me at the
beginning of the semester if you have special needs or require alternative testing.
Tentative Nature of this Syllabus
This syllabus represents a contract in the works. Events that transpire during the semester may,
in rare circumstances, require me to modify the syllabus. I will announce the modification in
class and on the course Canvas. Meaning, the syllabus will update weekly with new reading and
any changes in topics. Ultimately, it is your responsibility to keep up with any such
modifications and be aware of current policies, deadlines, etc.


Course Schedule
Timeline              Topic(s)        Reading(s)    Assignment     Description
                                                    Due Dates
                                                                   I will not
                                                                   lecture directly
                      Pre-Course      Chapter 1 and                to these
Week of January 22nd  Activities      2                            chapters so
                      Introduction                                 please read
                                                                   them as an
                                                                   introduction to
                                                                   the class.
                      Sampling/
Week of January 28th  Introduction to Chapter 4
                      SPSS
Week of February 4th  Measurement     Chapter 10
                                      Chapter 11
Week of February 11th Descriptive     Chapter 15
                      Statistics
                                                    Assignment #1
Due February 20th                                   - 5pm
                                                    Canvass
                                                    Submission
                                                    Exam 1
Due February 22nd                                   Flashcards Due This is a
                                                    – Canvas 5pm completion
                                                                   Grade
Due February 25th     Exam 1
                                                                   Gary Wilcox,
Week of February 25th Data                                         Chein Yang,
                      Visualization                                Ted Talk
                      P-Value and
                      Chi-Square
Week of March 4th     T-test          Chapter 14
                                      and 16
                      Analysis of
                      Variance
                      (ANOVA)
Week of March 11th    Correlation     Chapter 16


                                                    Assignment 2 –
Due March 15th                                      5pm
                                                    Canvass
                                                    Submission
Week of March 18th      Spring Break
                        Regression,
Week of March 25th      Factorial Design Chapter 16
                                                    Assignment 3 –
Due April 3st                                       5pm Canvass
                                                    Submission
                                                    Flashcards for This is a
Due April 5th                                       Exam 2 Due – completion
                                                    Canvas at 5pm. grade.
Due April 8th           Exam 2
                        Segmentation     Chapter 17
Week of April 8th                        and 9
                        Biometric
                        Research
                        Ad Metrics
Week of April 15th                       TBA
                        Ad Metrics
                        Ad Metrics –                               Interview with
Weeks of April 22nd and Interview                                  Natalie Brown-
April 29th                                                         Develin
                        Digital Metrics
                                                    Assignment 4 –
Due May 8th                                         5pm Canvass
                                                    Submission
TBA                     Final Exam
                        Review
May 15th                Exam 3
