                                    Media Psychology
                                          Spring 2018
                           Tuesday and Thursday 12:30 – 2:00pm
                                            DRAFT
Instructor
Matthew S. Eastin, PhD
Associate Professor
Office Hours: Wednesday Tuesday and Thursday 9am to 11:00am
BMC: 4.324
Email: matt.eastin@utexas.edu
Required Resources
1. All reading will be located on Canvas or handed out in class.
Course Goals
This class is designed so that each student will develop a thorough understanding of
media engagement. We will discuss different theoretical frameworks practically and
theoretically to understand the psychology behind media consumption. In many cases,
this will allow you to examine each theoretical area within the context of your research
interests.
Grade Breakdown
93-100 = A 87-89 = B+               77-79 = C+         65-69 = D+        59 and below = F
90-92 = A - 83-86 = B               73-76 = C          60-64 = D
                80-82 = B -         70-72 = C –
Course Structure
At the start of each class, I will generally present a few core ideas and then open the class
up for discussion. Many classes will be led by students (see below for details)! Following
our general discussion, teams of students will develop a DISCUSSION surrounding the
topic of the day. Research for your “DISCUSSION topic” will be in additional to the
assigned readings (discussed below) and should contextualize the class to fit your
interests. All other assignments and deliverables will be discussed during class.
Make-up Policy
Academic Dishonesty
Any form of academic dishonesty, including plagiarism, manufacturing quotes or
sources, using another’s reporting, research or quotes without giving proper attribution,
will result in an automatic grade of “F” for your assignment, possibly the course and
possibly worse. If you’re ever unsure whether you’re crossing the line, ask – that’s what
good practitioners and good journalists do. Here’s the basic university policy on
academic dishonesty: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html


Special needs
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented
disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
letter from SSD. Please see me at the beginning of the semester if you have special needs
or require alternative testing.
Tentative Nature of this Syllabus
This syllabus represents a contract in the works. Events that transpire during the quarter
may, in rare circumstances, require me to modify the syllabus. I will announce the
modification in class and on the course Bb. Meaning the syllabus will update weekly with
new reading and any changes in topics. Ultimately, it is your responsibility to keep up
with any such modifications and be aware of current policies, deadlines, etc.
Schedule (Subject to change due to discussion)
Date          Topic                 Readings
              Class Introduction
              Presenting Techniques
              Origins of Media
                                    1. Mass Communication Theory. pp 1-118
              Group Formation and
              Big Idea Introduction
              Concept Explication   1. Concept Explication: An overview. pp 1 - 42
                                    2. TBA
              Presentation Exercise
                                    1. Attitude and Attitude Change.
              Attitudes
                                    2. A General Connectionist Model of Attitude Structure and
                                    Change:
                                    The ACS (Attitudes as Constraint Satisfaction) Model


Graduate Students:       3. The Meta-Cognitive Model of Attitudes: Implications for
                         attitude measurement, change, and strength.
                         4. TBA
Paper Development
Meeting #1
No Class – Each
student will participate
in a 15 min meeting
with Dr. Eastin.
Audience Motivation:
An overview for those 1. Social Cognitive Theory of Mass Communication.
who have not been        2. Uses and Gratifications Theory in the 21st Century.
paying attention
                         3. TBA
Graduate Students:
                         1. TBA
Audience Engagement 2. TBA
                         3. TBA
Graduate Students:
 Problem Solving Day
 Spring Break
                         1. TBA
Psychology of Media      2. TBA
– mobile and virtual
connects                 3. TBA
Graduate Students:


Paper Development
Meeting #2
No Class – Each
student will participate
in a 15 min meeting
with Dr. Eastin.
                         1. The Media Equation
                         2. Interpersonal Distance
Media Equation
                         3. Good versus Bad
                         3. TBA
Graduate Students:
 Short Group Meeting     1. TBA
– Topic TBA              2. TBA
                         3. TBA
Graduate Students:
                         1. TBA
Arousal and Emotion
                         2. TBA
                         3. TBA
Graduate Students:
Paper Development
 Final Papers are Due


