GRG 401C: The Natural Environment
Summer 2020
Krause
GRG 401C
The Natural Environment
Summer 2020
Labs: Weds 1-4:30
Instructor: Sam M. Krause, PhD
sam.m.krause@gmail.com (Canvas Messages Preferred)
Department of Geography and the Environment
Office Hours: W 12:00-1:00pm or by appointment
Teaching Assistants
Will Pratt
Office Hours: TBD
wpratt@utexas.edu
Course Overview: How do hurricanes form? Why do rivers meander across a floodplain? What kind of
materials is this type of rock made of? Which kinds of landscapes are more suitable to build on? How can
we predict droughts and what do dry years mean for cropland? If you’ve ever asked any of these
questions, this is the course for you. Welcome to the world of Physical Geography! Through this
semester, you will be introduced to the study of our Earth. We will begin the semester by exploring each
of the Earth’s major systems, such as the atmosphere and the composition of the Earth’s interior. We will
then analyze and understand the many processes that form and reshape the Earth’s surface. We will also
explore climate, ecology, and water science to understand and properly work through present-day
environmental challenges.
Online Learning: This class is primarily asynchronous. I will upload the weeks’ worth of work on
Monday morning of each week. This includes labs, lectures, quizzes, and any other assessments. It will
seem like a lot, but take your time working through it over the course of the week: it will be manageable.
The work for each week will be due by each Friday at 5pm, but you are welcome to turn it in as you
complete it throughout the week.
On Wednesdays, which is the only scheduled synchronous time for instruction for this class, your TA and
I will provide synchronous zoom time from 1:00 p.m.-4:30 p.m. We will provide the link and information
for this scheduled time prior to 1:00pm each week. During this time, we will provide additional lectures
that will assist with your lab component, and we can answer questions you may have about the reading or
work.
By the end of this course, you will:
     •   Explain the role of interior and exterior processes in shaping our planet.
     •   Identify and categorize important rocks and minerals that make up the globe.
                                                                                                 1|Page


GRG 401C: The Natural Environment
Summer 2020
Krause
    •   Identify and explain different zones and mechanisms within the hydrosphere and atmosphere.
    •   Explain how the biosphere behaves over different regions on the planet, and how this sphere is
        affected by humanity.
    •   Understand and critically assess the concept of the Anthropocene
Required Textbooks and Additional Materials
You have two options for the required textbook, a Hard Copy OR and Digital Copy
Option 1: Hard Copy
R.W. Christopherson et al., 2017. Geosystems Core plus Mastering Geography with e-text Access Card
Package
ISBN: 9780134835693
This includes:
    • Geosystems Core (a hard copy textbook)
    • Value Pack Access Card for Geosystems Core and access to online tools called Mastering
        Geography and Learning Catalytics
Option 2: Digital Copy
Additional materials needed for class:
1. A laptop, tablet, or smartphone with internet access. Please inform Dr. Krause if you do not have a
laptop, tablet, or smartphone or limited internet access.
2. Canvas. Material and information will be provided to you on Canvas. It is your responsibility to
check Canvas regularly for updates. Be sure that you receive emails sent through Canvas by Dr. Krause
and the TAs.
Recommended Websites and Materials:
Climate Central: http://www.climatecentral.org/
National Center for Atmospheric Research: http://www.ncar.ucar.edu/
National Geophysical Data Center: http://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/
National Water Information System Web Interface: https://waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis
USGS Current Water Data: https://waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis/rt
                                                                                                2|Page


GRG 401C: The Natural Environment
Summer 2020
Krause
USGS Earthquake data: https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/map/
USGS Volcano data: https://www.usgs.gov/products/data-and-tools/real-time-data/volcanoes
USDA Web Soil Survey: https://websoilsurvey.sc.egov.usda.gov/App/WebSoilSurvey.aspx
Global Forest Watch: https://www.globalforestwatch.org/
Global Weirding with Katherine Hayhoe:
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCi6RkdaEqgRVKi3AzidF4ow
Lab Requirements
When you enrolled in this course, you also enrolled in a weekly laboratory section taught by Dr Krause
and your fabulous TA. Details on lab assignments will be provided in the lab by your fabulous TA. Please
refer to the section below regarding Lab Policies.
Lab Policies:
Attendance and Participation
          •    If you miss a lab, there will be no makeup opportunities unless you can provide a valid
               written excuse.
          • The lab will enhance your learning experience through hands-on activities; these activities
               are to be completed in class during the lab section or in advance.
Submission instructions
          • Unless otherwise noted, labs are due 24 hours after the start of your lab section. You will
               submit the lab through Canvas as a Word document (.docx) or as an Adobe file (.pdf). If you
               work on a Mac, please do not submit as a Pages document because Canvas is unable to read
               Pages files.
          • For each day that a lab is submitted late, 10% will be deducted from the lab grade. Late
               submissions should be emailed to your TA as Word or Adobe attachment. You will not be
               able to submit it through Canvas because the assignment will be closed.
Lab materials
          • The lab handout and presentation will be made available on Canvas at the start of your lab
               under Files > Lab Materials. The materials will not be available in advance.
          • Bring your laptop or a tablet every week.
Other Important Information
Grading
4 Quizzes: 50 points each
5 Labs: 40-50 points each
5 class check in assignments/discussions/games, 20 points each
1 Final Test: 100 points
The lowest of your lab grades will be automatically dropped.
Academic Integrity: Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated. Students are expected to uphold the
University of Texas’ Academic Honor Code: As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
                                                                                                 3|Page


GRG 401C: The Natural Environment
Summer 2020
Krause
abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.
     •   Intellectual integrity is expected in all work. Collaboration and the use of a wide range of
         references is encouraged, but any plagiarism, use of un-cited materials, or un-credited assistance
         will result in a recommendation of course failure. If you have any questions about what is
         acceptable and what is not, please ask. Also see:
         http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
     •   You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Integrity Policy which can be found at the
         following address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
     •   Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
         penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
         Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
         policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the
         Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct
         Violations of the UT honor code, including cheating or plagiarism, will result in: 1) a zero for the
         assignment/exam; 2) an assigned ‘F’ for the final grade; and/or 3) notification to the UT
         Academic Judiciary Committee for further disciplinary measures.
         Exam rules:
             • All tests are open book, open notes, and administered on Canvas at the end of the week.
                  Tests are randomized from a large test bank, so you will have different questions than
                  your classmates. Sharing answers between classmates is not permitted, nor will it be
                  much help to you, so don’t do it!
Make Up Exam Policy: Please be in contact with Dr. Krause regarding missed exams.
Communication: We all get hundreds of emails a day! I try my best to answer all emails within a 48
hour period! Please help me keep organized by putting the course number in the subject line of your
email. For example, I would write “GRG 401C: Can I go over my exam with you?” in the subject line.
This allows me to see your email quickly. Please do the same when emailing your fabulous TAs, and, in
that case, don’t forget to put what lab section you are in within the body of the email as well! ☺
Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more than half of UT undergraduate students use the
Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to
take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc, JES A332, or call 512-471-3614.
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you will need to execute a Q drop
before the Q drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations: Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
                                                                                                   4|Page


GRG 401C: The Natural Environment
Summer 2020
Krause
    •    Please request a meeting with Dr. Krause as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations.
    •    Please notify Dr. Krause as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
         accessible.
    •    Please notify Dr. Krause if any part of the physical space is difficult for you.
Religious Holy Days: Per UT Austin policy and Texas Education Code, you must notify Dr. Krause of a
pending absence due to observance of a religious holy day as far in advance as possible (minimum 14
days prior to the date of the religious holy day is a good rule of thumb). If you must miss a class, an
examination, or a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, Dr. Krause will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting differently,
you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counselling and Mental Health Centre (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
and the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Evacuation Information: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter
         a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
         Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
         found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
TL;DR: Come to class, come to lab, keep up with your reading, check canvas, check the syllabus.
                                                                                                   5|Page


GRG 401C: The Natural Environment
Summer 2020
Krause
GRG 401c Course Calendar
Week            Topic                       Readings        Assignments and Labs          Notes______
Week 1: Getting Started
                Introduction                Core:
Week 1: June 4- Earth’s Spheres             Chapter 1-2     Warm Up assignment 1
5               Solar Energy, Seasons,
                Atmosphere
                Earth’s Energy Balance
Week 2 and 3: The Atmosphere and Hydrosphere
                                            Core:           Lab 1: Coordinate Systems and
Week 2: June 8- Pressure, Winds, Currents   Chapter 3-7     the Atmosphere
12              Atmospheric Water and
                Weather                                     Quiz 1: June 12
Week 3: June    The Water Cycle
15-19           Water Resources                             Lab 2: Water
                                                            Resources/Hydrographs
                                                            Quiz 2: June 19
Week 4 and 5: The Lithosphere
                                            Core:
Week 4: June    Earth’s Interior Processes: Chapter 8-      Lab 3: Rocks and Minerals,
22-26           Tectonics, Volcanism,       10              Earthquakes and Hazards
                Earthquakes
Week 5:June     Earth’s Exterior Processes:                 Quiz 3: June 26
29-July 3       Weathering and Erosion
                Glaciers                                    Lab 4: Glaciers
                                                            Quiz 4: July 3
Week 6: The Biosphere
Week 6: July 6- Soils and Ecosystems        Core:           Lab 5: Soils and Biodiversity
10              Biomes                      Chapter 11-
                Welcome to the Anthropocene 14
                Climate
July 10-11 Friday-Saturday Final examinations for first-term classes
                                                                                           6|Page
