                                                  HIS N315K: United States History, 1492-1865
                                                                             Unique ID# 81960
                                                                     MTWTh 11:30-1:00 | MEZ B0.302
                                                                   Signe Peterson Fourmy, JD, ABD
                                                                     Email: signepfourmy@utexas.edu
Office: 3.206 GAR | Office Hours: Tuesdays 9:00-10:30 AM and Wednesdays 2:00-3:00 PM (and by appointment)
William Aiken Walker, A Cotton Plantation on the Mississippi, 1883                              Frances F. Palmer, Across the Continent: Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way, 1868
         TEACHING ASSISTANT:
         Ben Yeager | Email: ben.h.yeager@gmail.com | Office Hours: Tuesdays/Thursdays 1-2:30 @Prufrock’s
         COURSE DESCRIPTION:
         This class will cover United States history from European arrival in North America (1492) to the
         culmination of the Civil War (1865). We will examine pivotal topics in American history including
         colonization; the causes and consequences of the American Revolution; the creation and ratification of
         the U.S. Constitution; and the causes and results of the Civil War. In addition to studying these specific
         topics, we will look at broader historical shifts such as the transition from indentured servitude to race-
         based slavery; the emergence of republicanism; the evolution of political thought through the Early
         Republic and antebellum periods; the emergence of sectional loyalties; and economic transformation
         fueled by technological innovations that improved travel, communication, and production.
         We will examine the people, ideas, and legislation that shaped American life, paying special attention to
         the themes of race and gender. Focusing on the long arc of slavery as central to the development of
         American economy and prosperity, we will consider the transition from indentured servitude to race-
         based slavery; the role of slavery in defining liberty and citizenship; the political and social conflicts
         stemming from the expansion of slavery; and the abolition of slavery. In tandem with race, we will focus
         on women’s roles in the home and community; assess women’s contributions to religious and reform
         movements; and consider how women participated in the emerging political economy of early America.
         History is more than the study of dates—it is the examination of peoples’ public and private lives; it is the
         consideration of individuals’ and groups’ actions, perspectives, motivations, successes, failures, and
         purposes; it is understanding how and why people acted, interacted, and reacted the ways that they did.
         Understanding history involves analyzing how actions and reactions shaped life locally, regionally, and
         nationally. History is the study of continuity and change in communities—large and small—across time
         and space. Therefore, we will endeavor to connect issues confronting our 21st century world to their
         historical roots in order to understand how the past has shaped the present/future.
                                                                                                                                                                                1


COURSE OBJECTIVES: The overall objective of this course is to introduce students to a broad understanding
of American history from European colonization to the conclusion of the American Civil War and to
familiarize students with the people, places, and ideas that shaped America’s development. To this end,
lectures, discussions, and assignments will encourage students to think critically, analyze competing
points of view, and develop and articulate an understanding of important events, themes, people, and
changes over time.
A successful student will demonstrate:
    - An understanding of the political, social, economic, and geographic changes over time in what is
         now the United Stated from the late 15th century to 1865.
    - The ability to think critically about and explain the experiences of different groups and how those
         groups contributed to the US’s political, economic, social, religious, and cultural development.
    - The ability to contextualize and analyze primary and secondary source materials that
         support/defend a position on an historical topic.
    - The ability to draw comparisons across eras and regions in order to define enduring issues as well
         as large-scale or long-term developments that transcend regional and temporal boundaries.
REQUIRED READING:
    - Online Text: The American Yawp—www.AmericanYawp.com
    - Williams, Heather A. American Slavery: A Very Short Introduction. New York: Oxford University
         Press, 2014.
    - Primary Source Readings—some are included in The American Yawp Reader and can be found at
         the end of each chapter—these sources are indicated with an (AY) in the syllabus. If the source is
         from a chapter other than the one currently assigned, the chapter number where it can be found
         follows AY. Additional assigned primary sources will be posted on Canvas.
ASSIGNMENTS & EXAMS:                            % of GRADE         DUE DATE
    - Attendance                                    10%            Everyday
    - In-Class Quizzes                              10%            Mondays
    - Midterm Exam                                  25%            Wednesday July 3
    - Primary Source Analyses & Discussion 25%                     Thursdays
    - Final Exam                                    30%            TBD
    - Extra Credit                                                 Check syllabus
Attendance Policy: Attendance in class is critical to your success (and grade). A sign-in sheet will be
circulated every day. You are responsible for making sure that you sign in every day. If you arrive more
than 20 minutes late or leave early, you will be considered absent. You get 3 unexcused absences. After
that each unexcused absence will negatively impact your grade.
In-Class Quizzes: There will be short quizzes designed to make sure you are keeping up with the reading
and understand key concepts. Quizzes will also serve to prepare you for the midterm and final exam.
Quizzes might contain multiple choice questions and terms for identification.
    - Multiple Choice—5-10 questions
    - Identification—you will be given 1-2 terms, either a person/place/event and will have to identify
         and describe its historical significance
Material covered on quizzes will be from the assigned reading from American Yawp or previous lectures.
Your lowest 2 quiz grades will be dropped. Quizzes cannot be made up if you are absent.
                                                                                                          2


Midterm: The midterm will consist of multiple choice questions, identification terms, and a short, written
response.
Primary Source Analyses (PSA): On designated Thursdays we will have primary source discussion group.
Discussion will be led by a team of 2-3 students. A sign-up sheet will be circulated on Monday June 10.
Each student will serve as a discussion leader for one class. All students will serve as discussion
participants.
         Discussion leaders will be responsible for generating conversation and critical thinking/analysis
for the assigned primary sources. Discussion leaders will submit a list of questions for each document
designed to generate discussion (related to the assigned documents). Discussion participants (the rest of
the class) should come to class prepared to actively engage in discussion—come to class with your own
observations/analysis/questions relating to the documents. Students should come to class prepared to
discuss all of the assigned primary sources, although discussion leaders may break down the assigned
documents so that each can lead discussion for a particular document.
         Students will select one of the primary sources (from those assigned) to analyze in a written
response. Responses should be 300-400 words and turned in in hard copy form the day of discussion (at
the end of class). Responses should include: a brief description of the primary source and its historical
context and a more detailed explanation/evaluation of who created the primary source, its intended
audience, subject, purpose, and historical importance. What questions does the source raise? How is it
biased? As you evaluate your primary source, it might be helpful to consider what the selected source
reveals about the larger historical period in which it was created (or represents) and what it suggests or
reveals about the social, political, economic, and/or religious issues of that time. Responses should include
at least 2 questions that the primary source raises or inspires that might be used to stimulate discussion.
         Discussion leaders will be graded on preparedness, organization, and the quality of questions
submitted/asked during discussion. Leading discussion is worth up to 25 points. Each written response
will be worth 10 points and participation in discussion will be worth 5 points. The lowest written response
and participation grade will each be dropped.
Final Exam: The final exam will consist of multiple choice, identification, and an essay question. The
multiple choice and identification terms will come from the material covered after the midterm. The essay
question will cover the longer arc of the entire historical period covered by the class.
Extra Credit: For those interested in (or in need of) extra credit, there will be four extra credit assignments
available to you throughout the course. These assignments are completely optional—you may choose to
complete all, some, or none of them. These assignments will require you to read a short article, tweet
thread, or editorial concerning a contemporary historical issue and compose a response to it. Assignments
will be made available on Canvas. Responses should be 400-500 words in length and submitted via Canvas
on the designated due date. Late assignments will not be accepted. Each assignment will be worth up to
3 points added to an assignment (excluding the final exam). Points may be stacked. For example, if you
get a 80 on the midterm but have completed three extra credit assignments and earned full credit for
each, you could add 9 points to your midterm grade.
GRADES:
     A = 94+                                 B- = 80-83                              D+   = 67-69
     A- = 90-93                              C+ = 77-79                              D    = 64-66
     B+ = 87-89                              C  = 74-76                              D-   = 60-63
     B = 84-86                               C- = 70-73                              F    = 59 or less
                                                                                                              3


ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
Academic dishonesty (i.e. cheating) will not be tolerated. Cheating on in-class quizzes, the midterm, or
final exam will result in an automatic F for the quiz/exam. Plagiarism also constitutes cheating. If any
portion of the written primary source analysis response is copied without proper attribution to the original
source, it will result in a zero for that assignment.
GENERAL INFORMATION:
Late Policy: Quizzes and exams are taken in class. Primary source analysis responses are due at the end
of class discussion in hard copy form. If you are going to be absent from class on the day of discussion you
can turn your analysis response in early or by email (due by 1:00 PM the day of class). Assignments will
not be accepted after class.
If you are unable to take an exam on the designated class day due to an illness/emergency email me as
soon as practicably possible. If you will miss an exam for university-related travel, please make the
necessary arrangements to complete the make-up exam before the regularly scheduled
exam/assignment.
Email and Canvas: Canvas will be used to post the syllabus, post assigned readings, and make general
announcements. Please make sure that your email address on record with the University is up-to-date—
this is the email that will receive Canvas announcements and notifications. Accordingly, be sure to check
your email regularly.
Professional Communications: When communicating with me or your TA, please be professional and
respectful. Do not address us by our first names unless you have been given permission to do so. Email
submitted late at night/very early in the morning might not receive a response until “normal” working
hours (defined for our purposes as Monday-Friday 9AM-5PM).
Electronic Devices: Please silence phones/devices before class.
Classroom Conduct: If you are late or must leave class for some reason, please enter/exit quietly. Please
be courteous to those around you.
Campus Concealed Carry Policy: If you are licensed to carry a concealed weapon and choose to bring one
to class, it must remain concealed at all times. If I see (or any student in the class reports seeing) a gun, or
if I hear (or if any student in the class reports hearing) a student talking about carrying a gun, I will
immediately report the matter to the University Police (as per President Fenves’s instructions to the
faculty). At any time when you are on campus, if you see anyone carrying a gun, or talking and behaving
in a threatening manner (to themselves or others) I urge you to call the campus Behavioral Concerns
Advice Line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050. Callers to BCAL can remain anonymous if they choose.
Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement: Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259. Upon receipt of a letter from the SSD office, I will make every reasonable accommodation to
meet individual student’s needs.
                                                                                                               4


A Note on Course Content: History classes often confront controversial subject matter. I will do my best
to present material that may be uncomfortable or controversial in a manner that is both considerate and
respectful, but that does not mean that we will not discuss topics that are both uncomfortable and
controversial. We are a community of scholars and part of that means that we will, on occasion, confront
or be confronted by ideas that are different than what we might have previously thought or would prefer
to believe. Your beliefs are your own. Please be aware that during class, you are expected to be respectful
of others and their beliefs. This means we will speak with intention, listen with interest, and use relevant
and accurate information to form/support opinions. It is hoped that you will engage with the class and the
course material in a thoughtful and intellectually rigorous manner.
UNIVERSITY FLAGS: CULTURAL DIVERSITY IN THE UNITED STATES
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
marginalization.
COURSE SCHEDULE:
*I reserve the right to change and adjust the syllabus as needed.*
WEEK 1
     1. Thursday June 6—The Study of History and Historical Perspective
WEEK 2
READING: Williams, American Slavery, Ch. 1: The Atlantic Slave Trade, p. 1-16
     2. Monday June 10—Points of Departure: 1492, Exploration, Exchange, and Conquest
        READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 1: The New World, sections III-V and Ch. 2: Colliding Cultures,
        sections I and II
        PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
        - Journal of Christopher Columbus, 1492 (AY)
        - Sign up for Primary Source Discussion Leader
        - Quiz #1
     3. Tuesday June 11—England Enters the Atlantic World: Jamestown and Tobacco Take Root in
        America
        READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 2: Colliding Cultures, sections III-V
        PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
        - Richard Hakluyt makes the case for English colonization, 1584 (AY)
        - Image: “Village of Secotan,” by John White, 1585 (AY)
        - Excerpt from George Percy’s diary (CANVAS)
     4. Wednesday June 12—Massachusetts, the Puritans, and a City Upon a Hill
        READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 2: Colliding Cultures, sections VI and VII
        PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
        - John Winthrop, “A Modell of Christian Charitie,” 1630 (AY)
                                                                                                           5


   5. Thursday June 13—Primary Source Discussion Group: European Encounters
       - Primary source response #1 due
       - John Smith’s A True Relation of Occurences and Accidents in Virginia, 1608 (CANVAS)
       - Bartolome de las Casas describes the exploitation of indigenous people, 1542 (AY)
       - Images: America by Theodor de Bry, (CANVAS)
       - “Race War in Virginia” Edward Waterhouse, 1622 (CANVAS)
WEEK 3
READING: Williams, American Slavery, Ch. 2: Putting Slavery in Place, p. 17-32
   6. Monday June 17—The Growth of the Chesapeake: The Emergence of Race, Gender, and Class
       as Signifiers of Status
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 2: Colliding Cultures, sections IV and V; Ch. 3: British North
       America, sections I and II
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Image: Casta painting (AY, 1)
       - Forging Slavery and Race in the Laws of Early Virginia (CANVAS)
       - Quiz #2
   7. Tuesday June 18—Upheaval and Conflict in Colonial New England: Native Americans, Witches,
       and War
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 3 British North America, sections III-VI
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Records of Salem Witchcraft, Trial Testimony, Sarah Good (CANVAS)
       - Testimony of Tituba (CANVAS)
       - Optional Extra Credit Due: “When the Past Presents Problems”
   8. Wednesday June 19—Constructing Gender and Finding Women’s “Place” in Colonial America
       READING: Brown, Kathleen. “‘Changed into the Fashion of a Man’: The Politics of Sexual
       Difference,” Journal of the History of Sexuality. 6(2): 171-193. (CANVAS)
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       -    TBD
   9. Thursday June 20—Primary Source Discussion Group: Race and Gender in Early America
       - Primary source response #2 due
       - The Narrative of the Captivity and the Restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson, Mary
           Rowlandson, 1682 (CANVAS)
       - Nathaniel Bacon on Bacon’s Rebellion (1676) (CANVAS)
       - Laws of Early Virginia concerning tithables (CANVAS)
WEEK 4:
READING: Williams, American Slavery, Ch. 3: The Work of Slavery, p. 33-50
   10. Monday June 24—The American Colonies in 1750: Forging an “American” Identity
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 4: Colonial Society
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S): TBD
       - Quiz #3
                                                                                                      6


   11. Tuesday June 25—The Imperial Crisis, 1763-1775
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 5: The American Revolution, sections I-IV
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Benjamin Franklin’s Testimony to Parliament, February 1766 (CANVAS)
       - Political Cartoon: The Bostonians Paying the Excise Man, 1774 (CANVAS)
   12. Wednesday June 26—The American Revolution, 1775-1783
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 5: The American Revolution, sections V-VII
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Declaration of Independence, 1776 (CANVAS)
   13. Thursday June 27—Primary Discussion Group: Independence and Freedom: The American
       Revolution
       - Primary source response #3 due
       - Jonathan Boucher’s Argument against Independence, 1775 (CANVAS)
       - Excerpt from Common Sense, 1776 (CANVAS)
       - Frederick Douglass “What, to the American Slave is the Fourth of July?” (CANVAS)
       - Thomas Jefferson’s Racism, “Notes on the State of Virginia,” 1788 (AY, 7)
WEEK 5:
   14. Monday July 1—Independence! Now What? 1783-1787
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 6: A New Nation, sections I-V
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Crevecoeur Describes the American People, 1782 (AY)
       - Quiz #4
   15. Tuesday July 2—Crafting the Constitution: Compromise & Ratification
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 6: A New Nation, sections I-V
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Federalist #10 (CANVAS)
       - Federalist #51 (CANVAS)
       - Political Cartoon: Constitutional Ratification, 1789 (the Federal Edifice) (AY)
   16. Wednesday July 3—MIDTERM (In class)
   17. Thursday July 4—UT HOLIDAY—4th of July
WEEK 6:
READING: Williams, American Slavery, Ch. 4: Struggles for Control, p. 51-71
   18. Monday July 8—The New Nation: Washington Returns
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 6: A New Nation, sections VI-XI
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - George Washington, Farewell Address, 1796
       - Quiz #5
                                                                                          7


   19. Tuesday July 9—The Revolution of 1800: Jeffersonian Democracy
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 7: The Early Republic
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - A Scene on the Frontier (in chapter 7, not primary sources)
       - Optional Extra Credit Due—"On Hamilton! And Learning to Think Historically”
   20. Wednesday July 10—The Second American Revolution, Nationalism, & the Era of Good
       Feelings, 1808-1824
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 7: The Early Republic
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Political Cartoon: “The Hartford Convention” (in AY chapter, not primary sources)
       - Image: America Guided by Wisdom Engraving, 1815 (AY)
       - President Monroe Outlines Monroe Doctrine, 1823 (AY, 12)
   21. Thursday July 11—Primary Source Discussion Group: Political Agitation: Expansion,
       Sectionalism, and Slavery
       - Primary source response #4 due
       - Letter: John Tyler to Appeals Court Jude Spencer Roane (CANVAS)
       - “Meeting of the Pennsylvania Society for Promoting the Abolition of Slavery…” (CANVAS)
       - Letter: Thomas Jefferson to Lydia Sigourney (CANVAS)
       - Letter: Thomas Jefferson to Samuel McCay (CANVAS)
       - Letter: Thomas Jefferson to LaFayette (CANVAS)
       - Letter: Henry Clay to Thomas J. Wharton (CANVAS)
       - The Election of 1824: Henry Clay to Dr. J.D. Godman (CANVAS)
WEEK 7:
READING: Williams, American Slavery, Ch. 5: Surviving Slavery, p. 72-85
   22. Monday July 15— Jacksonian America, 1828-1836
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 9: Democracy in America
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Jackson’s Veto Message against Re-Chartering Bank of the US, 1832 (AY)
       - Image: County Election painting (AY)
       - Quiz #6
   23. Tuesday July 16— America on the Move: The Market Revolution, Industrialization, and
       Westward Expansion, 1815-1850
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 8: The Market Revolution
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - A Traveler Describes Life Along the Erie Canal, 1829 (AY)
       - Harriet H. Robinson: “A Mill Worker’s Strike, 1863 (CANVAS)
   24. Wednesday July 17— Ch-Ch-Ch-Changes: Religion, Revival, and Reform, 1815-1850
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 10: Religion and Reform
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Revivalist Charles G. Finney Emphasizes Human Choice in Salvation, 1836 (AY)
       - William Lloyd Garrison introduces The Liberator, 1831 (AY)
       - Image: The Fruits of Alcohol and Temperance Lithograph, 1849 (AY)
                                                                                                8


   25. Thursday July 18—Primary Source Discussion Group: Equality and Liberty
       - Primary source response #5 due
       - David Walker’s Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World, 1829 (AY)
       - Sarah Grimke Calls for Women’s Rights, 1838 (AY)
       - Toqueville, “How Americans Understand the Equality of the Sexes,” 1840 (AY, 8)
       - George Fitzhugh Argues that Slavery is Better than Liberty and Equality, 1854 (AY, 11)
WEEK 8:
READING: Williams, American Slavery, Ch. 6: Taking Slavery Apart, p. 86-114
   26. Monday July 22—The Cotton Revolution and the South’s “Peculiar Institution”
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 11: The Cotton Revolution
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Image: Slaves Waiting for Sale, 1861, painting (AY)
       - Harriet Jacobs on Rape and Slavery, 1860 (AY)
       - Political Cartoon, “Slavery As It Exists in America, Slavery As It Exists in England” (AY)
       - Solomon Northrup Describes a Slave Market, 1841 (AY)
       - Nat Turner Explains His Rebellion, 1831 (AY)
       - Quiz #7
   27. Tuesday July 23—US Territorial Expansion: Manifest Destiny, Texas, and the Mexican-
       American War, 1836-1850
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 12: Manifest Destiny
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Image: Westward the Course of Empire, 1862 (AY)
       - Image: “American Progress,” by John Gast, 1872 (AY)
       - Cherokee Petition Protesting Removal (AY)
       - John O’Sullivan Declares Manifest Destiny, 1845 (after annexation of Texas) (AY)
       - Diary of a Woman Migrating to Oregon, 1853 (AY)
       - Optional Extra Credit Due: “Last American Slave Ship is Discovered in Alabama”
   28. Wednesday July 24—An Irrepressible Conflict? The 1850s and the Impending Crisis
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 13: The Sectional Crisis
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Harriet Beecher Stowe, Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 1852 (AY)
       - Excerpt: Dred Scott v. Sandford, 1857 (CANVAS)
       - Image: “Tragic Prelude” by Steuart Curry, 1938-1940 (AY)
   29. Thursday July 25—Primary Source Discussion Group: The Election of 1860 & Secession
       - Primary source response #6 due
       - Alexander Stephens (Confed. VP) on Slavery and the Confederate Constitution, 1861 (AY, 14)
       - Excerpt: South Carolina Declaration of Secession (CANVAS)
       - Excerpt: Lincoln’s First Inaugural Address (CANVAS)
       - Excerpt: Mississippi Declaration of Secession (CANVAS)
       - Election of 1860 Party Platforms (CANVAS)
                                                                                                    9


WEEK 9:
READING: Williams, American Slavery, Epilogue, p. 115-118
   30. Monday July 29—The Nation Undone: Secession and the War for Union, 1860-1863
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 14: The Civil War
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - General Butler reacts to Self-Emancipating Slaves, 1861 (AY)
       - Quiz #8
   31. Tuesday July 30—The Civil War: Lincoln and the War for Emancipation, 1863-1865
       READING: The American Yawp, Ch. 14: The Civil War
       PRIMARY SOURCE(S):
       - Emancipation Proclamation (CANVAS)
       - Lincoln’s Second Inaugural Address, 1865 (AY)
       - Civil War nurses Illustration, 1864 (AY)
       - Optional Extra Credit Due: Confederate Monuments
   32. Wednesday July 31/Thursday August 1—Final Exam TBD
                                                                                      10
