                                                   Syllabus
                Accounting 327: Financial Statement Analysis and Valuation
                                                Spring 2020
Class Hours:        MW 2:00-3:30 (Unique #: 02310)                     Location: UTC 4.134
                    MW 3:30-5:00 (Unique #: 02315)                                   UTC 4.134
Instructor:         Bill Spiller                                       Office: CBA 6.304H
    E-mail:         bill.spiller@mccombs.utexas.edu                    Phone: please use email
    Office Hrs:     Tuesday 9:00-11:30am, and 1:00-4pm
TA:                 Savayra Panjwani                                   Office:              TBD
    E-mail:         Savayra Panjwani@utexas.edu                        Office Hrs:          TBD
Course Description:
This course deals with the analysis of financial information, particularly firms’ financial statements, to
determine value. Valuation is necessary for making decisions to invest in businesses, but also many other
decisions as well. The primary focus will be on valuing operating activities, with some attention given to
the valuation of debt and equity. Methods to determine value using fundamental analysis and forecasting
will be examined in detail and applied in situations involving publicly listed companies.
Particular emphasis in this course is given to the discounted cash flow model and two accounting-based
valuation models: the residual operating income model and the abnormal operating income growth model.
The appeal of the accounting-based models is that valuation is based on numbers that are not only
available ex-post but they are also commonly available ex-ante as forecasts. Companies have used
accounting information for ex-post performance evaluation for decades but different (generally cash flow)
data have been used for ex-ante decision making. Now we have methods which permit use of the same
data for ex-ante decision making and for ex-post performance evaluation.
Topics include a comparison of cash-flow-based and accounting-based approaches to valuation, methods
of financial statement analysis, dealing with various accounting methodologies, forecasting firms' future
performance, and the analysis of risk.
Student Learning Outcomes and Objectives:
1) Students will be able to calculate values using different valuation methodologies including discounted
     cash flow, residual operating income, and abnormal operating income growth models.
2) Students will understand the role of financial statements in determining value and how to analyze
     financial statements to get at the relevant information.
3) Students will be able to perform traditional ratio analysis as well as understand its role in forecasting
     and valuation.
This class will provide a strong foundation and practical tools both for careers in the field of finance and/or
accounting. While the material you will learn is grounded in valuation theory, you will find it is also
incredibly practical and relevant.
                                                       1                          Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


Required Textbooks and Other Materials:
Valuation Using Financial Statements, by Sommers and Easton (Cambridge Business Publishers, 2018),
     ISBN 978-1-61853-290-9
There is no course packet to purchase. Additional materials may be made available via Canvas and/or
distributed in class.
Grading Policy:
Although grades are important in the short-run, a true measure of your success comes in how much you
learn that can be applied to your future career. Your goal should be to work hard and do the best you can
to maximize your learning. I am not looking for you to simply memorize and spit back information, though
you will need to know this information to do well in the class. What I expect of you is to make sense of
what you read and what we discuss, and enter into a dialogue with me and your peers about it.
Mastering and making sense of the material we cover is the key to maximizing your grade. I am more
than happy to help you, in and out of class, achieve this; I strive to be a teacher, after all. However, the
discipline, timely study and preparation habits, and simple hard work necessary to do well are matters
largely in your own hands. I will not give you grades; you will earn them.
All work undertaken and submitted in this course will be governed by the Cox Honor Code (violations are
discussed in the Academic Dishonesty section). Grades will be based on the following:
          Two Midterms (each worth 15%)                                                         30%
          Daily Work                                                                             20%
          Final examination                                                                     30%
          Written valuation project report                                                      20%
The percentage earned in the class may be adjusted downward due to deficiencies in professionalism. A
downward adjustment of up to 5% from student’s total above may be made at the professor’s discretion
based upon professionalism in class. Incompletes will be given only in accordance with University policy.
Course and Instructor Policies:
Attendance, Participation, and Professionalism
     Class attendance is expected as it will be beneficial to mastering the material. You should be in your
     seat and ready to begin discussion of the material at hand at the beginning of class. “Ready” means
     having your notes and text open and on the table before you at the beginning of class. Late arrivals
     should expect to be penalized through determination of the participation adjustment. Your cell phone
     will not ring during class and you will neither send nor receive text messages during class. You will
     focus on the class. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to get notes from a classmate.
     You are expected to read the required textbook material and related readings in a timely fashion. Part
     of taking a class is being prepared for class. This means you will have done your readings before we
     treat them in class. Failure to do so will almost assuredly lead to an incomplete grasp of the material,
     inability to contribute to and/or learn from class discussions, and yield a lower grade in the course. As
     the professor will regularly cold call on students, lack of preparation will yield uncomfortable situations
     for you now just as it would in a meeting with a client or supervisor. The good news is this is
     avoidable by being prepared to discuss the topic, or at least have questions concerning it.
     Discussion and cold calling allow practice articulating your positions and defending them verbally
     which is a necessary business skill regardless of discipline. You will have to speak publicly, in
     meetings or groups as a business person. You might as well start the practice now. Please do not
     hesitate to volunteer when you have something of value to add to the discussion and to raise
     questions if you are confused. Textbook readings are shown in the attached schedule and additional
     materials may be made available on Canvas.
     Professionalism is measured based on your preparation for class, engagement in class activities, and
     conducting yourself in a business-like manner. The possible adjustment of the final grade for
                                                         2                         Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


     professionalism will be evaluated relative to other students in the class. Please bear in mind that
     virtually all grading schemes are subjective to some extent, and participation is no exception. You are
     preparing for positions in business and as such are expected to be acting accordingly.
Examinations
     There will be two midterms and a final examination administered with time and date as noted on the
     attached schedule. The midterm exams will cover only material covered up to the exam. While the
     final exam will cover the entire class, its goal is to ensure you have understood the information
     necessary to complete a valuation similar to the group project as an individual. As such, the exam will
     measure your ability to understand and apply the concepts you have learned from the textbook, your
     work on the project, and class discussions. While the ideas may appear in slightly new garb, the
     material is expected to be familiar. Your best method of studying for the exam will be to prepare for
     and participate in class and be well versed in all aspects of the group project. The final grade
     distribution may be curved downward (lowering of cutoffs) recognizing the nature of the course and
     potential issues related to question wording or test length.
Daily Work
Daily work will be work assigned during class and taken up at the end of class. We will leave time at the
end of class to complete the assignment. The assignments will be to determine what some variable is in
the Form 10-K or to make a calculation from information that is contained in the financial statements. We
will have a minimum of 12 but may have more and we will drop the two lowest scores.
Valuation Project
     The information on the valuation project contained in the project guide (distributed in hard copy and
     available on Canvas) is hereby incorporated by reference. This document will provide a description of
     the requirements for the final project report to be submitted as well as suggestions on how your group
     should be progressing during the module. The project is a very hands on learning experience
     completed as a team from which you will gain practical experience in and tools for valuation. We may
     meet as groups as needed with the professor during the semester.
E-Mail and Canvas
     During the semester, e-mail messages will be sent to your mccombs.edu account as shown on
     canvas. Additionally, the class Canvas page will be updated with useful course information. You are
     responsible for the content of e-mail messages and the material posted to Canvas. On Canvas, you
     will find information of significance to the class – syllabus, project description, course up-dates, hand-
     outs, a discussion board, and the like. The discussion board in Canvas will allow you to post
     questions and seek help in understanding concepts. In addition to the professor, other students will
     also be able to help with issues arising providing an opportunity for collaborative learning. The
     announcements page will provide a quick way to communicate things coming up. You should plan to
     visit Canvas regularly.
Academic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail
in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-
of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there.
By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the
application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any
way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of
the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and procedures on
                                                          3                        Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Document Retention
     All project submissions and exams will be held for one academic year following the completion of the
     course. They will then be destroyed. Any grade discrepancies must be cleared within the first two
     weeks of the following long semester, Fall 2020.
Dropping the Course
     You must follow official University withdrawal procedures to drop this course. Failure to attend
     classes and/or take the exam does not constitute a drop and a student who stops attending the class
     without officially dropping will receive a grade of F.
Disability Accommodations:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Excused Absences for University Extracurricular Activities:
Students participating in an officially sanctioned, scheduled University extracurricular activity should be
given the opportunity to make up class assignments or other graded assignments missed as a result of
their participation. It is the responsibility of the student to make arrangements with the instructor prior to
any missed scheduled examination or other missed assignment for making up the work. (University
Undergraduate Catalogue) Normally, you will need to complete anything required prior to the scheduled
absence.
Religious Observance:
Religiously observant students wishing to be absent on holidays that require missing class should notify
their professors in writing two weeks before the holiday and should discuss with them, in advance,
acceptable ways of making up any work missed because of the absence.
Assignments and Academic Calendar:
The following page contains the anticipated dates that we will cover the assigned material in class. The
professor reserves the right to go faster or slower as class progress dictates.
                                                          4                      Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


         Class Schedule
Week     Date             Chapter
1    Wed 1/22           Intro Syllabus
2    Mon 1/27           Ch 1 The Link Between
                        Valuation and F/S Analysis
     Wed 1/29           Ch 2 Role of Accounting
3    Mon 2/3            Ch 3 Reformulation to Identify
                        Operating Activities
     Wed 2/5            Ch 3 Con’t
4    Mon 2/10           Ch 4 Use of Additional
                        Information to Enhance
                        Reformulation
     Wed 2/12           Ch 5 Adjusting Accounting
                        Information
5    Mon 2/17           Ch 5 Con’t
     Wed 2/19           Speaker – Purchase Price
                        Allocation
6    Mon 2/24           Ch 5/Ch 6 Analysis of Enterprise
                        Operations
     Wed 2/26           Ch 6 Con’t
7    Mon 3/2            Midterm 1
     Wed 3/4            Ch 7 Full Information
                        Forecasting
8    Mon 3/9            Ch 8 Market Multiple Valuation
     Wed 3/11           Speaker - Impairments
9    Mar 16-20          Spring Break
10   Mon 3/23           Ch 9 Cost of Capital for Equity
                        and Operations
     Wed 3/25           Ch 10 Valuation Using
                        Forecasts of Cash Flows
11   Mon 3/30           Ch 10 Con’t
     Wed 4/1            Speaker Complex Financial
                        Instruments
12   Mon 4/6            Ch 11Valuation Using the
                        Residual Operating Income
                        Method
     Wed 4/8            Ch 12 Valuation Using the
                        Abnormal Operating Income
                        Growth Model
13   Mon 4/13           Ch 13 Steady State and
     Wed 4/15           Forecast Horizon
                        Ch 14 Valuation of Equity
14   Mon 4/20           Speaker Valuation of Equity
     Wed 4/22           Midterm 2
15   Mon 4/27           Speaker Valuing Intangibles
     Wed 4/29           Speaker Fair Value Opinions
16   Mon 5/4            Written Class Projects Due
     Wed 5/6            Final Exam
                5             Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


                                      Valuation Project Guide
                               McCombs ACC 327 – Spring 2020
General
The course provides a practical guide to company valuation with an emphasis on understanding and
using the information in companies’ financial statements. Almost all of the textbook discussion is based
on Procter and Gamble (PG), a member of the Personal Products industry. You are likely quite familiar
with many PG products; e.g., Tide laundry detergent, Nyquil medicine, Crest toothpaste, Gillette grooming
products, and Bounty paper towels. In doing this, the text provides a step-by-step guide through the
process leading from financial statements to valuation.
The goal of the course project is to apply the material covered in the class by replicating implementation
with another publicly traded company. After completing each module, each team will conduct the
analyses that have been done for PG in the text using their company. Throughout the course, your team
will build the analysis of your company until you arrive at the valuation and reach conclusions about the
company and industry.
Forming Teams
For this course, you are required to complete a project, which involves valuation and financial statement
analysis and uses the tools developed in the course. The project must be done in teams of four or five.
You will be allowed to choose teams, but all must be enrolled in the same section of the course. It is
advised that you find diverse team members as the skills formed by working with different backgrounds
and strengths/weaknesses are crucial for future success in the business world. At times, you may
encounter struggles in working with the other members of your team including disagreements on items
and scheduling conflicts. Learning how to work past these obstacles to achieve the goal is part of the task
ahead of you.
One group member should email bill.spiller@mccombs.utexas.edu your desired group member list no
later than 5:00pm on Friday, February 7th. The final assignment of groups (there may be
addition/adjustment of group members) will be communicated via a posting on Canvas. (Unfortunately,
delaying group assignment is necessary should someone be adding or dropping the course during the
first week of class!)
Assignment of a Company
Each team will conduct a valuation of a publicly traded company and complete a valuation report with an
emphasis on understanding your company and the extent to which the share price is believed to reflect
the intrinsic (estimated) value of these shares. Each group in the class will be working on one of three
companies: AutoZone (AZO), Advance Auto Parts (AAP), or O’Reilly Auto Parts (ORLY). As all members
of the class will be working on companies in the same industry, this will yield a more in-depth knowledge
of the industry and all class members being an expert on one of your company’s competitors.
Companies will be assigned to teams. Finalized group assignments and company assignments are
expected to be posted on Canvas before 5pm on Friday, February 14th to allow you to get started right
away.
Weekly Project Progress Expectations
The meetings of the course will be very interactive. Our goal is to learn in a number of ways:
      Before class:
      •    By reading the textbook and any other assigned readings
      In class:
                                                       6                        Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


     •   By attending and participating in class discussions of the textbook and issues arising in your
         project
     •   By applying the analyses covered in the current chapters on a company examined collectively by
         all of us together in class
     After class:
     •   By applying the learning from class regarding the current chapters to your project company
     •   By discussing issues that arise with teammates and your professor.
While your team may be tempted to take the PG or KMB valuation spreadsheets that will be provided and
modify it for your company, that is generally a very inefficient approach. Those spreadsheets should be
viewed as resources (just as the textbook is). Further, you can think of the quizzes as testing whether you
could do each step of the project individually. If you do not understand what has occurred, either due to
allocations of steps in the project to specific team members or if your team has only followed the PG
spreadsheet blindly, your understanding will assuredly be insufficient.
Application of Weekly Coverage to Your Project Company
 Chapters 1 and 2: Introduction
 Chapter 1: The message of the first chapter is get to know the operating activities of the company you
 are valuing. Of course you will become more and more familiar with your company as the course
 progresses, but your assignment related to Chapter 1 is to investigate the operations of your focus
 company as thoroughly as possible using whatever sources you imagine. The financial statements filed
 with the SEC are a key place to start and you must obtain and read these statements, particularly the
 most recent Form 10-K. Of course there are many other sources, such as the company’s website,
 newspapers, and investor websites such as www.seekingalpha.com and www.finance.yahoo.com.
 After you have investigated your company as thoroughly as time permits, get together with the other
 members of your team to discuss your company and the industry. It is suggested that your efforts
 associated with this chapter should devote roughly equal time to the industry and your chosen
 company. (While there is a smaller than desired amount of time between the assignment of a company
 to your team on Saturday and the second class, figure out a way to get this done.)
 Chapter 2: No specific project related tasks, but make sure you understand the concepts!
 Chapters 3, 4, and 5: Reformulate the financials for your company
 Chapter 3: Assemble at least the past three Income Statements, Statements of Comprehensive
 Income, and Statement of Changes in Shareholder Equity and the past four Balance Sheets in
 spreadsheet form. You may choose to copy these from the most recent Form 10-K or to download
 them from online services such as www.mergentonline.com. If you choose the later, be sure to check
 that all line-items from the online version are the same as those in the Form 10-K; this checking may
 save you a lot of time at a later stage when you will need to be sure that the aggregate numbers on
 each of the financial statements are equal to the sum of their components. (The various “spreadsheet
 tips” in the textbook, see page 3.2 for an example, are very hands on hints provided to save you time
 and energy.)
 Chapter 4: Dig into the footnotes from the recent Form 10-K’s for your company to expand the
 information beyond that which is available from the face of the financial statements. You should also
 consider any other information that you looked for (because you thought it could be useful) but were
 unable to find. Expect this issue to be discussed in class with comparisons to the other teams who are
 working on your competitors.
 Chapter 5: Where appropriate, follow the procedures outlined in the textbook to adjust the accounting
 information to render the accounting data for your company and its competitors more comparable.
                                                       7                        Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


Ensure that you are aware of differences across the competitor companies. You should focus on the
calculations you have done for your company but you should also, where appropriate, understand
comparisons to other companies in your industry.
By now you should have reformulated spreadsheets identifying NOA, NFL, NOPAT and FEAT. In
assembling the spreadsheets, you should note for discussion in class and/or final project: (1) the
assumptions that you made (and justifications for these assumptions); and, (2) unanswered questions,
which you expect would require further analysis in the future.
Please be aware that the work for Chapters 3, 4, and 5 are generally the hardest and most time
consuming of the entire course. Work together, check in with the professor, but don’t spin your
wheels endlessly!
Chapters 6 and 7: DuPont analysis and Full information forecasting
Chapter 6: Carry out a DuPont analysis and the preparation of common size financials following the
example in the textbook. Discuss with your team the differences noted over time and any information
you may have on how your company differs from the industry. A dataset with information for a variety
of companies will be provided to you to use in gathering information on competitors.
Chapter 7: In completing the forecast, you should consult all available sources of information. This
could include (but is not limited to) the company’s annual and quarterly reports, annual and quarterly
reports of comparable firms, industry analyses, and company websites, analysts’ reports, press
releases, recent press articles on your company, on comparable companies, and on the industry. (You
get the idea!) At some point, you could even seek information from investor relations personnel at your
company.
     1. Based on this knowledge of your company, your company’s product(s), your company’s share
         of the market, the market size, changes in consumer tastes, demand, etc., forecast sales for at
         least the next 5 years.
     2. Identify key expense line-items that would be considered critical for your company. Examples
         may be advertising expense (as in Coca Cola and Pepsi), R&D (as in pharmaceuticals),
         administrative expense (if this is large and there is an obvious difference between your
         company and comparable companies), etc. Forecast these expenses as a proportion of sales
         revenue for each of at least the next 5 years. For non-key items, in a similar manner to above,
         but with less emphasis on detail, prepare a forecast of each line item of NOPAT to sales for at
         least the next 5 years. In doing so, you will address the necessary forecast of your company’s
         tax rate for the next 5 years. Also, explicitly discuss any unusual items expected over the
         forecast period.
     3. Forecast the inventory, payables, receivables, PPE, cash, and any other elements of NOA
         required to support the forecasted sales level (these should be expressed as a percentage of
         forecasted sales).
     4. Review your forecasts of sales growth, operating PM, and operating ATO for reasonableness.
         You should be able to provide a carefully reasoned argument to support each of these
         sets of forecasts.
Chapters 8 and 9: Valuation using multiples and estimating the cost of capital
Chapter 8: When meeting with your team, you should identify which multiples would be most
appropriate and if any companies beyond those being done by other teams would be considered
comparables for your project company. A resource in this will be the dataset you received for the
DuPont analysis in Chapter 6. Be sure to consider if there is an industry-specific multiple such as the
one illustrated in Chapter 8 via (P – B)/R&D. Determine the data you would need to gather for your
company to calculate the multiple (i.e, R&D expenses in the example in the chapter). Discuss the level
                                                        8                       Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


of comfort you would have investing your own funds based on an analysis of multiples for your
company and members of its industry. While you are not required to implement a market multiples
analysis, you are required to have thoroughly vetted the process.
Chapter 9: To compute the cost of capital, there are several steps to be undertaken:
         1. Using the methods described in the Appendix to Chapter 9, arrive at estimates of , , and
             the corresponding standard errors. Ensure the members of your team can interpret, in
             layman’s terms, the meaning and implications of your estimates.
         2. Locate at least three estimates of  (Beta) for your company from financial websites.
         3. Choose among your estimates of  for your company. Using this estimate, an estimate of
             the risk free rate of return, and an estimate of the market premium, obtain an estimate of
             the cost of equity capital for your firm.
         4. Estimate the cost of debt capital for your firm.
         5. Calculate the weighted average cost of capital for your firm (i.e., the cost of capital for
             operations).
         6. Use a Bloomberg terminal to find their estimate of the weighted average cost of capital for
             comparison. Consider the sources of differences between your estimate and that of
             Bloomberg.
Be prepared to discuss your efforts and issues encountered in estimating cost of capital. We will be
comparing cost of capital estimates between your company and its’ competitor in your section as a part
of class.
Project Status Check:
As a part of week 5, each group will meet with the professor for approximately 15-20 minutes to
discuss the status of their project. The goal is to ensure appropriate progress is being made and
ensure any issues encountered have been addressed in a timely manner. Each group will be assigned
a score of 0 to 5 that will be included as a component in the written project score. Scoring will be
determined based on whether the group is on staying current on the project and issues noted at this
time. (The goal is ensure you have reached the point where you are ready to implement the valuation
models introduced in the remainder of the course.)
Chapter 10: Cash-flow based valuation
Chapter 10: Build your spreadsheet for the free cash flow (FCF) valuation model using your forecasts
of free cash flow from Chapter 7 and your weighted-average cost of operating capital from Chapter 9 to
estimate the intrinsic value of the operations of your firm.
Chapters 11 and 12: Residual operating income and abnormal operating income growth valuation
Chapters 11 and 12: Build your spreadsheets for the residual operating income (ROPI) and the
abnormal operating income growth (AOIG) valuation models to estimate the intrinsic value of your firm.
Note that the estimated value should be exactly the same as you obtained with the free cash flow
valuation model.
                                                       9                       Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


  Chapters 13 and 14: Steady state assumptions and valuation of equity
  Chapter 13: Consider the calculations of value from Chapters 10, 11, and 12 in determining which
  model your team would choose to employ in practice for your company. Discuss within your team the
  concerns you have about having achieved steady state as well as additional steps that could be taken
  to minimize these effects were you to have additional time/resources available.
  Chapter 14: Obtain an estimate of the market value of debt for your firm. Use this estimate and the
  estimate of the value of the operations determined in Chapters 10, 11, and 12 to estimate the value of
  an equity share in your firm after properly adjusting for dates and other issues elaborated on in Chapter
  14.
  Finally, set up a sensitivity matrix in which you show the effect on your estimate of the value of an
  equity share of increasing and decreasing your assumptions. For example, increasing or decreasing
  your assumed WACC by 1% and by 2% while also increasing or decreasing your assumed sales
  growth rate by 1% and by 2%. Also, consider effects of operating PM and operating ATO at a
  minimum.
Valuation Project Write-up
This preparation of the spreadsheet for the group valuation project is the anchor of the course. The write-
up allows you to discuss the steps taken, issues encountered, and things learned. Your team submission
will be composed of four deliverables:
      •   Valuation spreadsheet: constructed throughout the course
      •   Executive summary
      •   Full report: Ideally written “as you go” throughout the course (details below)
      •   Listing of issues: any items arising in the analysis of your company that were not covered in the
          textbook
If you write the full report and the list of issues as you go, there will be very little that remains to be
completed after week 7. Stay current!
Executive Summary
Prepare a single-page (500 word maximum) summary of your analysis and the results/conclusions as
though it is being submitted to your supervisor for review. The document should contain the following
header followed by the company analysis.
“Company Name – LastName1, LastName2, etc.                                                         Spring 2019”
Full report
The full written report is best thought of as a series of small write-ups detailing aspects of the analysis of
your company. Overall, you are attempting to communicate 1) that you completed the required analysis at
each point, 2) an understanding of the implications of each step and any assumptions required, and 3)
what additional tasks would be investigated/completed if this was expanded in time/effort beyond being a
course project.
The following is designed to help you envision what might be contained in your report. Each element
written-up should be brief (no more than 2 pages). Any supporting charts, spreadsheets, and exhibits
                                                         10                           Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


should be referenced and included at the end of the report. Please clean up all exhibits and appendices
so they are presented in good form and consistently formatted (i.e., do not append exhibits haphazardly
to your written report). Except as noted below, not every step / decision / issue has to be covered in your
write-up (focus on what you believe to be most important). As a starting point, you might choose to cover
the following questions:
     •    Chapter 1 (Required)
          What are the primary issues that are expected to impact the valuation of a company in your
          industry? Also, note the most crucial differences identified between your company and its
          competitors.
     •    Chapters 3, 4, and 5
          Did anything severely affect your ability to reformulate the financial statements and adjust the
          accounting of your company? Your attachments should include the reformulated financial
          statements you have prepared.
     •    Chapters 6 and 7
          Were any significant items noted in your ratio analysis that impacted your subsequent forecasts?
          What is the most critical forecast? Which forecasts have the most and least confidence? If
          particular issues arose during forecasting, discuss what you encountered and the method used to
          resolve.
     •    Chapter 8 (Required)
          Which multiples would be most appropriate for your company/industry? Which companies you
          would consider as comparables? Discuss the level of comfort you would have investing your own
          funds based on an analysis of these multiples for your company and members of its industry.
     •    Chapter 9
          Were any issues encountered in estimating cost of capital? What are the most critical
          assumptions made in estimating cost of capital for operations for your company? What is your
          level of comfort with the estimate you used in the valuation exercise?
     •    Chapters 10, 11, and 12
          What issues did you encounter in building your spreadsheets for the free cash flow, residual
          operating income, and abnormal operating income growth valuation models? Identify any issues
          encountered in arriving at exactly the same value across models.
     •    Chapter 13
          Which model would your team choose to employ in practice for your company? What concerns
          do you have about having achieved steady state? Are there additional steps that could be taken
          to minimize issues were you to have additional time/resources available?
     •    Chapter 14 (Sensitivity Required)
          How does the estimated equity value compare to the market value observed? What do you
          believe drove the difference observed? What factor appears to be the most important driver
          based on your sensitivity analysis? At a minimum, you should consider sensitivity to operating
          PM, operating ATO, steady state growth, and WACC in the sensitivity matrixes you prepare.
Remember, please cut out all extraneous material and do not include filler or fluff. In the end it is quality,
not quantity, which counts.
A list of references should be included as part of your written report. Citations within your document may
be informal such as “2018 10-K page 74”. However, do not under any circumstances cite or copy
material from other sources without attribution.
                                                        11                         Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


Listing of Issues
Indicate group members, company name, and the issues noted in studying your company that were not
addressed in the textbook. Please know that I may follow up for more clarification on some items. Many of
the side notes in the current textbook arose from prior students’ projects. (Yes, this is a part of gathering
information for the next edition!)
Submission
     •   The underlying valuation spreadsheet should be submitted electronically. Prior to submission,
         ensure that the file opens with links and calculations working correctly (Excel online or Google
         spreadsheets sometimes have issues).
     •   Your executive summary, full report (typed and double-spaced text), and listing of issues should
         be submitted both electronically (pdf preferred) and a hard copy hand delivered to Crow 373.
     •   Submissions are due by 5pm on May 2nd. Early submission is encouraged.
Keys to Success
     •   Stay current on the spreadsheet and write-up
     •   Seek help from professor rather than spinning your wheels
     •   Understand each element of the project since it will be directly tested on the final
The following rubric will provide insight into what is sought in the written reports comprising the final
project submission.
                                                        12                        Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


Accounting-Based Valuation Project Grading Rubric                                                                                                        Spiller – McCombs – ACC 327
 Goals and learning objectives: Communication: Students communicate effectively and professionally
                                Application: Students apply methods of analysis appropriately
                                Critical Thinking: Students clarify, frame, challenge and synthesize ideas and information
                                                                                         Exceeds                                Meets                         Below Expectations
                    Points    Points               Exceptional                         Expectations                          Expectations                      and Unacceptable
                   Possible   Earned                  100%                               85-95%                                70-80%                           65% and below
                                       Appears neat & organized;            Generally logical but occasionally    Skips around, but addresses all     Haphazard; difficult to follow;
    Organization
                                       logical; no spelling or grammar      skips around; few lapses in           the points; occasional lapses in    several grammar and/or spelling
                      4                errors; uses active voice; guides    grammar or spelling; generally        grammar and spelling; reader        errors; generally sloppy in
                                       the reader through to the point.     guides the reader.                    must work to follow the train of    appearance.
                                                                                                                  thought.
                                       Summarizes the facts and             Demonstrates an understanding         Generally understands the facts     Does not recognize the facts and
  Facts and                            assumptions completely; key          of most facts and assumptions;        and assumptions; does not           assumptions and does not
 Assumption           5                facts and assumptions identified;    generally recognizes that             distinguish between facts and       demonstrate an understanding
      s                                distinguishes between facts and      assumptions that are most             assumptions; recognizes some        of them; challenges nothing.
                                       assumptions.                         critical.                             items that should be challenged.
                                       Presents an insightful and           Generally analyzes all the issues     Analysis is superficial; treats     Appears lost; does not
                                       thorough analysis of all issues;     in light of the methods identified,   some issues as “given” when a       understand the issues sufficiently
  Discussion                           presents persuasive arguments        but does not connect in some          challenging analysis is required;   to be able to connect them to
                      8                directly relating the facts to the   areas; arguments are not always       arguments are not well              the methods identified and
 and Analysis                          issues and clearly tying them to     persuasive and leave some work        supported; arguments are one-       evaluate them; does not
                                       the methods developed in the         to the reader to connect the          sided and do not address            understand the project.
                                       course.                              dots.                                 alternatives.
                                       Provides all necessary materials     Provides most necessary               Some of the necessary materials     Materials to support the
                                       to support discussion and            materials to support discussion       to support discussion and           discussion and analysis are not
                                       analysis; materials are organized    and analysis; materials are           analysis are provided; materials    adequate; materials appear
 Supporting                            and presented consistently;          generally organized and               are presented consistently, but     thrown together rather than
                      8
                                       reader can easily determine what     presented consistently; reader        not organized; reader must          uniform; reader is unsure why
  Materials                            is contained and the source of       needs to determine what is            determine reason for inclusion.     items are included.
                                       information.                         contained and the source of
                                                                            information.
                                       Conclusions follow from the          Conclusions generally follow          Some conclusions follow from        Conclusions are unsupported;
                                       analysis; they are logical and       from the analysis but support is      the analysis, but not clearly;      they do not follow logically from
    Conclusion
                                       supported; there is no hedging       not fully integrated into the         conclusions are “hedged” with       the analysis.
                      5
                                       and no part of conclusions are       conclusions; leaves some work to      new issues or alternatives not
                                       unsupported.                         the reader; offers some               previously addressed.
                                                                            unsupported conclusions.
                                                             13                          Spiller, ACC 327, Spring 2020


