                                              ARC 694 Vertical Studio
                                                      Fall 2019
                                           Instructor: Michael Benedikt
                                         PRINCIPLES OF GREAT DESIGN
This vertical design studio is expected to consist, demographically, of roughly one third first-
semester beginning design students, one third third-semester design students, and one third
students with architecture background from elsewhere. The studio is therefore designed to
teach all experience-level students the Principles of Great Design, which only this instructor
knows.
Seriously, though: the idea is to undertake exercises that are fundamental and generalizable to
all building types, as well as developable, each one, to a high level of artistic sophistication.
There will be ten exercises in all: nine one-week exercises followed by one five-week exercise.
The nine one-week exercises will build design skill having to do with the handling of geometry,
proportion, light, shade, shadow, color, space, thresholds, relationships, animation, feelings,
and moods; the final exercise will involve all these plus structure and construction: a stand-
alone pavilion, made in wood, suitable for weddings and yoga classes. The media throughout
will be hand-drawings and models, computer-assisted where necessary; and a detailed
basswood model of the pavilion.
The studio will also deploy two teaching/learning “modes:” Learning by Example, and Learning
by Explanation. The one-week exercises will be handled mainly in Learning by Example mode;
the final project in both.
All vertical studios are required to state the intended relative emphasis among the “Four
Streams” of subject matter: Organizing Systems, Human Factors, Construction, and Contexts.
They are, respectively: 25%, 25%, 40%, 10%.
                                                  THE FINE PRINT
         EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is derived
from broader and more subjective criteria. Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the
semester. Grades are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, disruptiveness to the class, and late or
incomplete work, at the discretion of the Instructor.
Grading for each assignment is broken into three components, scored as less-than-acceptable/competent (–),
acceptable/competent ( • ), and superior (+) , and then averaged over the semester weighted according to the time


devoted, proportionally, to the exercise. A fourth component (participation) is judged over the entire semester and is
used to lean one way or another when final grades occur at break-points in the A, B, C, D spectrum.
      Product: How complete and handsome the final drawings and models are, and how informative the process
      models and drawings are; how clearly ideas are presented at reviews, and how well illustrated by examples,
      diagrams, and further analysis.
      Effort: How much time has evidently been put into the assignment, that evidence consisting of number of articles
      or books read, trial drawings and models made, photographs taken, notes taken, passages written, lectures gone
      to, as well as hours spent in studio productively focused on the work at hand.
      Grasp: How deeply the student has gone into understanding, questioning, and researching the nature of
      problem(s) posed by the assignment; how far they see the implications of the assignment extending into
      architecture and design generally; what knowledge of history and theory they appropriately bring to working on it.
      Participation. This is judged only over the whole semester. How positive and cooperative a presence was the
      student in studio, with what attendance record in studio and at lectures, gallery shows, and symposia? How great
      was their willingness to engage in respectful dialog with teacher and classmates, to contribute to student life and
      studio culture generally?
      GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-               Excellent
                   Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
                   conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above
                   and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-            Above Average
                   Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues
                   ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is
                   complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C               Average
                   Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication
                   and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-         Poor
                   Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
                   appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F                  Fail
                   Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this
                   grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X                  Excused Incomplete
                   Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on
                   time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with
                   the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be
                   completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to
                   the School of Architecture policy.
           ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is required. With four (4) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course
will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue
or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating
communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (45 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence.
Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify
instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.


          RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this
subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be
made.
          ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students,
and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct
and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-
university/#universitycodeofconduct
          CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges
or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling
emotionally and/or academically. BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115 https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
          STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from
the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY
for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the
beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
          SECURITY, SAFETY, AND THE STUDIO
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the
needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is
a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do
not leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio
mates accountable for the security of your shared space.
