          ME 366J Mechanical Engineering Design Methodology
              Mechanical Engineering Department, The University of Texas at Austin
                                          Summer 2020,
Teaching Team
Instructor: Dr. Christopher Rylander
Office: ETC 7.142D, Phone: 232-6144,                      Email: cgr@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: W 1–2 pm or by appointment
Large Lecture: TTH 10 am - 12 pm, Zoom
Lab: WF 3:30 am – 5:30 pm, Zoom (attendance mandatory)
Teaching Assistants:
Sean Brocklehurst swbrock@gmail.com
Van Herd herd@austin.utexas.edu
Learning Objectives:
In this course, you will learn how to solve open engineering design problems using systematic
design thinking and practices. At the end of the course, you will be able to:
• Define an open engineering design problem, including gathering customer needs and
    formulating engineering requirements/specifications to address a need.
• Generate a variety of concepts that are both creative and useful.
• Make well-informed, well-justified design decisions in the early and later stages of design
• Design and analyze experiments, following statistical best practices in Design of Experiments
    (DoE), to inform the design process.
• Create and interrogate simulation models to evaluate and refine potential designs.
• Design and build low- and high-resolution prototypes to inform the design process.
• Embody solutions with “Design for X” considerations, where the X could represent
    manufacturing, assembly, environment, or modularity/flexibility.
• Communicate intermediate and final designs clearly and effectively in written, oral, and
    multimedia formats.
Textbooks
Suggested readings are taken from two different textbooks. Two copies of each textbook are
    available on reserve at the PMA library in RLM.
    (1) Otto, K.N. and K. L. Wood, 2001, Product Design: Techniques in Reverse Engineering and
         New Product Development, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. (Abbreviated as O&W
         in the lecture schedule)
    (2) Ulrich, K.T. and S.D. Eppinger, 2016, Product Design and Development, 6th Edition, McGraw
         Hill Education, New York, NY. (Abbreviated as U&E in the lecture schedule)
Canvas
The teaching team will post lecture slides, assignments, and other handouts and interesting links
on the Canvas web site. Please logon at canvas.utexas.edu. The web site is password-protected.
Site activities may include exchanging email, engaging in class discussions and chats, and
exchanging files. In addition, electronic class rosters will be a component of the site. Students
                                                 1


who do not want their information included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their
directory information in the Office of the Registrar.
Grading
                                                                                                     Total
     Semester Long Project**                                                                          69%
         Project Proposal                                                                10%
         Design Review                                                                   10%
         Video Design Checks (3x 8% ea)                                                  24%
         Final Report                                                                    15%
         Final Presentation                                                              10%
     Personal Design Notebook                                                                         25%
     Lecture and Lab Attendance                                                                       6%
                                                                                                     100%
     ** The teaching team reserves the right to substantially lower or raise project grades for
     individual students based on effort, participation, peer evaluations, and lab/class attendance
     throughout the semester.
     All assignments will be graded with an 80% weighting toward technical content and 20%
     toward writing or oral communication ability.
Assignments, Exams, and Related Items
Project. As a member of a team of approximately five students, you will have the opportunity to
design, fabricate, and test an engineering system, as described in your semester-long project
assignment. The project is divided into three phases: (I) Task Clarification leading to your Project
Proposal, (II) Conceptual Design leading to your mid-semester Design Review, and (III)
Embodiment and Detail Design leading to your Final Project Report and Presentation. Subsequent
handouts will provide detailed guidelines for each of the project-related activities.
Personal Design Notebook. You will be required to maintain a Personal Design Notebook to
document your individual efforts for the project. It should include accounts of design activities,
thoughts, analyses, calculations, sketches, intermediate results, refinements, and other
information relevant to your individual contribution to the design project. Record all of your
project-related work in your Personal Design Notebook, which will be submitted weekly as a pdf
file to the Canvas web site.
Attendance, Participation, Peer Evaluations. Attendance and participation in class and lab is
mandatory and monitored. Notify the teaching team in advance if you must be absent for a
legitimate reason. The teaching team considers this assessment in your final grade, along with
the results of peer and instructor evaluations of your participation in team project activities. Peer
evaluations are due by 5 pm on Canvas the day following each of the 3 Project Notebooks
deadlines. The teaching team reserves the right to substantially lower or raise project grades for
individual students based on effort, participation, peer evaluations, and lab/class attendance throughout the
semester.
Assigned Reading. Exams and other assignments will draw upon only the material presented in
lecture and lab. The assigned readings are designed to enhance your understanding of the
material presented in lecture, and help you cover lecture materials in the event of an absence
from class. The assigned readings are available in textbooks on reserve at the PMA library.
                                                       2


Deadlines and Penalties. All assignments must be submitted on time. Assignments are due at the
times and places designated on the course schedule. Unless prior approval is obtained from the
teaching team, late assignments will be penalized 10% or one letter grade immediately following
the deadline, and increasing 10% per additional day late.
Academic Integrity
Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course. Penalties are likely to include a grade of
F for the activity and/or for the course. Ask your instructor or teaching assistant if you have any
questions about expectations for a particular activity. You are encouraged to discuss any aspect
of the course with classmates and project team members, but remember the following rules:
• Do not plagiarize the work of others by copying from the web, other students, previous
     students, articles, or other sources (aside from compiling work from your teammates for
     group project activities) without properly referencing your sources.
• Do not give or receive assistance from another student during an exam or consult any
     materials other than those specifically permitted by your instructor during an exam.
Prerequisites
Prerequisites are strictly enforced. According to the Undergraduate Catalog, the prerequisites are:
Mechanical Engineering 302, 330, 130L, 335, 338, 339, 139L, 340, 140L, 333T, or the equivalent.
Please see the instructor if you have any questions about the requirements.
ME 366J is a prerequisite for ME 266K, Mechanical Engineering Design Project. In ME 266K, you
will use much of the knowledge gained in this course, including the ability to formulate open
engineering design problems and the ability to solve them via effective use of solution generation
techniques, engineering analysis and experimentation, systematic decision-making, reverse
engineering, and speaking, writing, and collaborative team-building skills.
Adding/Dropping the Course
An engineering student must have the Dean’s approval to add or drop a course after the fourth
class day of the semester or after the second class day of a summer term. Adds/Drops are not
approved after the fourth class day, except for a good cause such as documented evidence of an
extenuating non-academic circumstance (e.g., health or personal problems) that did not exist on
or before the fourth class day. Applications for approval to drop a course after the fourth class
day should be made Engineering Student Services.
Course/Instructor Evaluation
All students will have the opportunity to evaluate the course and instructor using the standard
Course Instructor Survey form during the last week of classes. Intermediate surveys may also be
conducted by the instructor during the semester. Constructive feedback is encouraged at any
time via personal discussions or email.
ABET Requirements
ME 366J contributes to all the following ABET Program Outcomes (2018 version):
1      Ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying
       principles of engineering, science, and mathematics.
2      Ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with
       consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social,
                                                   3


      environmental, and economic factor.
3     Ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences.
4     Ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations and
      make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions in
      global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts.
5     Ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership,
      create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet
      objectives.
6     Ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data,
      and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions.
7     Ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning
      strategies
Writing Flag Requirements
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing
Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board.
Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is considered
plagiarism, a serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe penalties. Copying
someone else’s work, buying a paper and submitting it as your own, copying and pasting text
(even with changes), or borrowing images from an online source, are some examples of
plagiarism. Even if you plagiarize accidentally, you can be held responsible and penalized.
Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional. When you
are unsure about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor (who is already an expert in
the discipline) what is appropriate in the context of your assignment. Consultants at
The University Writing Center can also help you determine whether you are citing sources
correctly—and they have helpful guides online for using direct quotations and paraphrasing.
Reviewing those skills will help you feel confident that you are handling sources professionally
in your writing.
You can read the University’s definition of plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty in
Sec. 11–402 of the Student Conduct Code. For more information, visit the Dean of Students’ site.
Supplemental References
Handouts to be supplied in class.
Pahl, G. and W. Beitz, 1996, Engineering Design: A Systematic Approach, 2nd Edition, Springer-
    Verlag, NY.
Pugh, S., 1991, Total Design: Integrated Methods for Successful Product Engineering, Addison-Wesley,
    Boston.
                                                   4


Ullman, D. G., 1997, The Mechanical Design Process, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill, NY.
Special Needs
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259, 471-4641 TDD.
                                                 5
