                               Brazilian Life and Culture
                                  POR F367P (85145)
                                      Summer 2019
                 Faculty-Led Program in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil
                      Monday - Thursday from 10:30 – 12:00
Instructor: Orlando R. Kelm
Office Hours: TBA
E-mail:          orkelm@austin.utexas.edu
Homepage: http://orlandokelm.wordpress.com/
A. Description
In dealing with culture, it is sometimes difficult to move beyond the limited do’s and
don’ts, cultural pigeon-holes, and social generalities. And it is challenging to avoid
simply lumping all foreigners into some checklist of stereotypes. Another challenge we
face is to learn HOW to observe culture around us. And these “observation skills” cannot
be developed out of context. We need a methodology, a theory, a model, or some type of
approach to give a framework to the observations. In our course we achieve this within
the framework of The Seven Keys to Communicating in Brazil: In Intercultural Approach
(Kelm & Victor, 2016, Georgetown University Press).
This upper-division Portuguese class is designed to survey intercultural communication
issues related to Brazil and the United States and will be taught in Portuguese as part of
the faculty-led summer study abroad program in Salvador, Bahia, Brazil during the first
summer session of 2019. The main objective of the course is to help students learn to
analyze cultural topics, give specific examples that relate to Brazil and the United States,
and fortify the concepts by providing opportunities for direct observation, discussions and
interaction between Brazilians and North Americans.
We structure the course with seven basic units that coincide with each of the seven key
areas where intercultural communication problems most commonly arise: (1) language;
(2) the environment, i.e., physical differences; (3) social organization, i.e., how society is
put together; (4) context; (5) authority; (6) non-verbal communication; and (7) time
perception. We will work through each of these units in class, and then reinforce each by
asking the students to document a photo portfolio that provides evidence of each of the
seven features as related to Brazil. As such, we merge intercultural communication,
examples specific to Brazil and the United States, and specific examples that the students
encounter during their time in Brazil. The class discussions, interactions and
interpretations come from the photos and stories that students add to the portfolios.
Note: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed
to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
                                               1


therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
B. Course Materials
Required Materials
    Kelm, Orlando R., David A. Victor. 2016. The Seven Keys to Communicating in
    Brazil: An Intercultural Approach. Washington D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
    (Online Order with 30% discount code TGUF:
    http://press.georgetown.edu/book/languages/seven-keys-communicating-brazil )
Related Online Resources
    Kelm, Orlando R. Padlet Wall, “Cross-Cultural Competence: Making the most of our
    cultural differences” http://padlet.com/orkelm/culturalcompetence
    Kelm, Orlando R. Pathbrite, Homepage: https://pathbrite.com/orkelm/profile
C. Course Schedule
Week 1
Monday, June 3
        A. Introduction to course
        B. David Victor’s LESCANT Model
            LESCANT: http://kelmcultural.wordpress.com/david-victors-lescant-model/
        C. Pathbrite and Photo Portfolio Assignments
        Assignment 1: Pathbrite Portfolios - https://pathbrite.com. Create an account, add
        an introductory portfolio with a 200-word public bio of yourself. (Include
        optionally photos, quotes, links, interests, etc.) Send a copy of the your Pathbrite
        homepage URL to Professor Kelm. Due by 6:00am Tuesday morning.
Note: 2:30pm Highlights of Brazilian History and Contemporary Issues
Tuesday, June 4
        LESCANT: Language
        Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 1: Language, Pg 1-20
Note: 2:00pm Panoramic Tour
Note: 700pm Welcome Dinner at Boi Preto
Wednesday, June 5
        LESCANT: Language, cont.
Note: 6:00pm Capoeira Workshop
Thursday, June 6
        LESCANT Photo Portfolio Review: Language
        Assignment 2: Add 3 original photos taken in Salvador to your pathbrite portfolio
        that exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture as it relates to Language.
                                                2


       Include a 50-word justification (in Portuguese) for each photo. Post your photos
       to your Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Note: 2:30pm Afro-Bahian dance and rhythms
Note: June 7-9 Optional Field Trip to Lençois
Week 2
Monday, June 10
       LESCANT: Environment
       Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 2: Environment, Pg 21-44.
Note: 2:30pm Afro-Brazilian Religions
Tuesday, June 11
       LESCANT: Environment, cont.
       Assignment 3: Review the portfolios from at least 5 classmates as related to
       “Language.” Write comments (or questions) in the Pathbrite discussion thread to
       each of these classmates (in Portuguese and at least 50 words for each), Post your
       comments/questions to the Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Note: 2:00pm Historic Tour in Pelourinho
Note: 6:00pm Mass at Rosário dos Pretos Church
Wednesday, June 12
       LESCANT Photo Portfolio Review: Environment
       Assignment 4: Add 3 original photos taken in Salvador to your pathbrite portfolio
       that exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture as it relates to Environment.
       Include a 50-word justification (in Portuguese) for each photo. Post your photos
       to your Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Note: 2:00pm Casa Branca Terreiro and Casa do Rio Vermelho
Thursday, June 13
       LESCANT: Social Organization
       Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 3: Social Organization, Pg 45-
       74.
       Quiz #1 Language & Environment: This canvas quiz is designed to be
       completed in less than 1 hour, however, you have a three-hour window to
       complete the quiz. The quiz is designed to be open book. Feel free to refer to the 7
       Keys book during the quiz. However, the quiz should represent your own work
       and not that of others. Complete the quiz by 11:59pm.
Note: 2:00pm Escola Aberta and Base da Policia in Calabar
Friday, June 14
       LESCANT: Social Organization, cont.
       Assignment 5: Review the portfolios from at least 5 classmates as related to
       “Environment.” Write comments (or questions) in the Pathbrite discussion thread
       to each of these classmates (in Portuguese and at least 50 words for each), Post
       your comments/questions to the Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
                                            3


       Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 3: Social Organization, Pg 45-
       74.
Note: June 15 Visit Engineering College
Note: June 16-17 Visit to Arembepe
Week 3
Monday, June 17
       No Class, Return from Arembepe
Tuesday, June 18
       LESCANT Photo Portfolio Review: Social Organization
       Assignment 6: Add 3 original photos taken in Salvador to your pathbrite portfolio
       that exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture as it relates to Social
       Organization. Include a 50-word justification (in Portuguese) for each photo. Post
       your photos to your Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Note: 2:00pm Casa do Carnaval
Note: 4:30pm Steve Biko
Wednesday, June 19
       LESCANT: Context
       Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 4: Context, Pg 75-96.
Note: 2:30pm Caribé and Verge’s Exhibitions in Barra
Thursday, June 20
       No Class, Corpus Christi Holiday
Note: June 22-24 São João
Week 4
Monday, June 24
       No Class, São João Holiday
Tuesday, June 25
       LESCANT: Context, cont.
       Assignment 7: Review the portfolios from at least 5 classmates as related to
       “Social Organization.” Write comments (or questions) in the Pathbrite discussion
       thread to each of these classmates (in Portuguese and at least 50 words for each),
       Post your comments/questions to the Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Note: 2:30pm Neojibá’s Project
Wednesday, June 26
       LESCANT Photo Portfolio Review: Context
       Assignment 8: Add 3 original photos taken in Salvador to your pathbrite portfolio
       that exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture as it relates to Context. Include a
       50-word justification (in Portuguese) for each photo. Post your photos to your
       Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
                                             4


Note: 2:30pm Afro-Brazilian Diaspora and Fashion
Thursday, June 27
       No Class, Day trip to Cachoeira
Friday, June 28
       LESCANT: Authority
       Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 5: Authority, Pg 97-127.
       Quiz #2 Social Organization & Context: This canvas quiz is designed to be
       completed in less than 1 hour, however, you have a three-hour window to
       complete the quiz. The quiz is designed to be open book. Feel free to refer to the 7
       Keys book during the quiz. However, the quiz should represent your own work
       and not that of others. Complete the quiz by 11:59pm.
Note: 8:00pm Ballet Folclórico
Week 5
Monday, July 1
       LESCANT: Authority, cont.
       Assignment 9: Review the portfolios from at least 5 classmates as related to
       “Context.” Write comments (or questions) in the Pathbrite discussion thread to
       each of these classmates (in Portuguese and at least 50 words for each), Post your
       comments/questions to the Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Tuesday, July 2
       No Class, Bahia Independence Holiday
Wednesday, July 3
       LESCANT Photo Portfolio Review: Authority
       Assignment 10: Add 3 original photos taken in Salvador to your pathbrite
       portfolio that exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture as it relates to
       Authority. Include a 50-word justification (in Portuguese) for each photo. Post
       your photos to your Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Thursday, July 4
       LESCANT: Non-Verbal
       Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 6: Non-Verbal, Pg 129-155.
Note: 3:00pm Percussion Workshop
Friday, July 5
       LESCANT: Non-Verbal, cont.
       Assignment 11: Review the portfolios from at least 5 classmates as related to
       “Authority.” Write comments (or questions) in the Pathbrite discussion thread to
       each of these classmates (in Portuguese and at least 50 words for each), Post your
       comments/questions to the Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
                                            5


Week 6
Monday, July 8
       LESCANT Photo Portfolio Review: Non-Verbal
       Assignment 12: Add 3 original photos taken in Salvador to your pathbrite
       portfolio that exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture as it relates to Non-
       Verbal. Include a 50-word justification (in Portuguese) for each photo. Post your
       photos to your Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Tuesday, July 9
       LESCANT: Time
       Reading assignment before class: 7 Keys, Chapter 7: Time, Pg 157-176.
Note: 2:00pm Graffiti in Bahia and Brazil (street art)
Wednesday, July 10
       LESCANT: Time, cont.
       Assignment 13: Review the portfolios from at least 5 classmates as related to
       “Non-Verbal.” Write comments (or questions) in the Pathbrite discussion thread
       to each of these classmates (in Portuguese and at least 50 words for each), Post
       your comments/questions to the Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
Thursday, July 11
       LESCANT Photo Portfolio Review: Time
       Assignment 14: Add 3 original photos taken in Salvador to your pathbrite
       portfolio that exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture as it relates to Time.
       Include a 50-word justification (in Portuguese) for each photo. Post your photos
       to your Pathbrite Portfolio by 6:00am.
       Quiz #3 Authority, Non-Verbal, Time: This canvas quiz is designed to be
       completed in less than 1 hour, however, you have a three-hour window to
       complete the quiz. The quiz is designed to be open book. Feel free to refer to the 7
       Keys book during the quiz. However, the quiz should represent your own work
       and not that of others. Complete the quiz by 11:59pm.
Friday, July 12
Note: 12:00pm Farewell Lunch at SEANC Casa do Comércio
Week 7
Monday, July 15
       Oral Pass-Off of Can-Do Statements (by appointment)
       Oral and Written Proficiency Testing (by appointment)
Tuesday, July 16
       Oral Pass-Off of Can-Do Statements (by appointment)
       Oral and Written Proficiency Testing (by appointment)
Wednesday, July 17
                                            6


        Oral Pass-Off of Can-Do Statements (by appointment)
        Oral and Written Proficiency Testing (by appointment)
Thursday, July 18
        Oral Pass-Off of Can-Do Statements (by appointment)
        Oral and Written Proficiency Testing (by appointment)
D. Pathbrite Portfolio Assignments
There are 14 days when students are required to add photographs / artifacts / comments /
questions to their Pathbrite Portfolio, together with a 50-word justification and
explanation of how each exemplifies some aspect of Brazilian culture. There are 7 days
when students add photographs to the portfolio. There are 6 days when students add
comments and questions about other classmates’ contributions. And there is 1 day when
students create the initial portfolio. The assigned photos fall under the various LESCANT
topics. Each assignment is worth 30 points, for a total of 420 points. No late work or
make-up work is allowed.
E. Attendance
Attendance at each class session is mandatory. Each student starts the semester with 80
points for attendance. Each absence reduces the total by 10 points. Absences related to
illness and emergencies require documentation (e.g., doctor’s note.) No points are
reduced with the approval or documentation.
F. Grading
The final grade is based on the percentage of total points earned (A = 94+, A- =
90+, B+ = 87+, B = 84+, B- = 80+, C+ = 77+, C = 74+, C- = 70+, D+ = 67+, D = 64+,
D- = 60+). Scores are not rounded. No late work or make up work is allowed.
Points are distributed on the following basis:
                420 pts         Pathbrite Portfolio (14 x 30 = 420 pts)
                300 pts         Quizzes (3 x 100 = 300
                 80 pts         Attendance (80 – 10 per = 80 pts)
                800 pts         TOTAL
                                             Notes
Students with Disabilities
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) is housed in the Office of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth
floor of the Student Services Building. Information on how to register, downloadable
forms, including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request letters, and
                                               7


releases of information are available online at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/index.php. Please do not hesitate to contact SSD at
(512) 471-6259, VP: (512) 232-2937 or via e-mail if you have any questions.
Academic Dishonesty
Academic dishonesty damages the reputation of the school and demeans the honest
efforts of the majority of students. The minimum penalty for an act of academic
dishonesty will be a zero for that assignment or exam. The responsibilities for both
students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are described on
http://mba.mccombs.utexas.edu/students/academics/honor/index.asp If the application of
the Honor System to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask for clarification.
Classroom Professionalism Policy
The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the class. Faculty are
expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and every class
session. Students are expected to be professional in all respects. The classroom
experience is enhanced when:
•   Students arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and
    finish at the scheduled time. On time arrival shows respect for both fellow students
    and faculty and it enhances learning by reducing avoidable distractions.
•   Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment
    improves when disruptions are limited.
•   Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning takes place during
    classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they cannot contribute to the
    overall learning process. This affects not only the individual, but their peers who
    count on them, as well.
•   Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. The expression and
    defense of opinions are encouraged and part of the academic environment.
    Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.
•   Laptops and wireless devices are only used for course activities. In this class we
    use the Internet for the delivery of almost all of our course content. You a welcome
    and encouraged to bring your laptop or mobile devices to class. However, when
    students are surfing the web, responding to e-mails, instant messaging each other, etc.
    they are doing a disservice to their peers and potentially causing a distraction. Restrict
    use to items related to the course.
Updated: May 8, 2019
                                              8
