                          THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                         STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number: SWN382R                         Instructor: Robert Ambrosino, Ph.D.
Unique Number: 87585                           Email: Robert.ambrosino@utexas.edu
Semester: Summer 2020                          Office: On-line (see hours below)
Meeting Time: T/TH 1:30pm-4pm                  Office Phone: (210) 268-9043
& Place: On-line*                              Office Hours: T-TH 11:00 am – 12:30 pm
                                               and by appointment via Zoom
*This class will be conducted using asynchronous (non-face to face) on-line format, with the
exception of the 1st and last classes and three lab days, all of which will be held using Zoom.
______________________________________________________________________________
                               Policy Analysis and Social Problems
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course critically examines, from both historical and current perspectives, the overall
structure of the American social welfare system, with a focus on the disproportionate social,
economic, and political problems of vulnerable populations. The course also considers the
parallel historical development of the profession of social work, including the ways in which it
responded to social problems across key periods of social welfare policy development.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
     • Understand the dominant historical themes that have shaped social welfare policy in the
        United States;
     • Understand the economic and political constraints and opportunities in the development
        of social welfare problems and policies;
     • Understand the relationship between the history of the social work profession and the
        development of social welfare policy;
     • Apply social work values to critically analyze social problems;
     • Gain knowledge and skills as a background for analyzing major policies that form the
        foundation of social welfare and analyze organizational, local, state, national and
        international issues in social welfare policy and social service delivery;
     • Understand social welfare policy arenas impacting service delivery, social work practice,
        and attainment of individual and social wellbeing;
     • Understand how social policies differentially affect diverse populations in American
        society; and


SW N382R
Summer 2020
     •   Gain knowledge of the roles and responsibilities of social workers in the policy process,
         including advocacy, leadership, research, and community organizing, with the goal of
         promoting and advocating for social and economic justice through both organizational
         and social change.
EPAS Competencies
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work (UT SHSSW) has been continuously accredited by the
Council on Social Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain its accreditation
status, the UT SHSSW engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance
with CSWE Education Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of knowledge,
skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following competencies:
Competency 5: Engage in Policy Practice
Outcome 5.1: Identify social policy at the local, state, and federal level that impacts well-being,
service delivery, and access to social services.
Outcome 5.2: Assess how social welfare and economic policies impact the delivery of and access
to social services.
Outcome 5.3: Apply critical thinking to analyze, formulate, and advocate for policies that
advance human rights and social, economic, and environmental justice.
III. TEACHING METHODS
The class will use a form of blended learning in which students learn content both in
synchronous and asynchronous on-line formats. Specially-designated lab days will serve as
protected time for students to work on class assignments as well as a means for the course
instructor to check-in with students.
Canvas will be used for communication between students and the instructor. Some materials,
grades, and attendance will also be posted online. The course Canvas site can be accessed at
http://courses.utexas.edu or the Social Work web page (requires Internet connection and UT EID
and password). The Help Desk available through the UT home page (www.utexas.edu/its/help)
or at 475-9400 is available to assist students with Canvas-related questions.
IV. REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Segal, Elizabeth. (2016). Social welfare policy and social programs: A values perspective (4th
   edition). Boston, MA: Brooks-Cole Cengage Learning.
                                                  2


SW N382R
Summer 2020
Lopez, William D. (2019). Separated: Family and community in the aftermath of an immigration
   raid. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Additional reading material will be posted on the course Canvas site throughout the semester.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Assignment #1 - Food insecurity project (20% of course grade)
Students will work in groups of four to five members each to complete this assignment
(group membership will be determined by the course instructor). Each group will be
assigned one (or two, depending on size) of the Texas Health and Human Services service
regions and be required to produce the following information for each county in the region
as well as for the entire region (note that emphasis is on households and not individuals):
    • Official poverty rate (100%) as reported by the U.S. Census Bureau (www.census.gov)
    • Number of households that qualify for Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
        (SNAP) benefits (this information will be provided by the instructor)
    • Number of households who actually receive SNAP benefits (12-month average for
        calendar year 2019) as reported by the Texas Health and Human Services Commission
        (HHSC) (www.hhsc.state.tx.us)
    • SNAP take-up rate (percentage of households eligible for SNAP benefits that actually
        receive them) (rate = actual/eligible x 100)
Each group will also be responsible for providing the following information:
    • Description of the socioeconomic and geographic characteristics of the region
    • Interpretation of the SNAP take-up rate in assigned region (expected vs. actual, anomalies
        or outliers)
    • At least three strategies that could be employed to combat food insecurity in the region,
        including the pros and cons of each strategy
Each group will present its findings via Zoom on the last day of class, and should be prepared to
field questions about their work from the course instructor as well as other class members.
Group presentations must be supported by a series of Power Point slides.
Additional resources for completing this assignment will be posted in the Food Insecurity folder
on the course Canvas site.
Class presentations will be held on July 28.
                                                  3


SW N382R
Summer 2020
Assignment #2 - Policy analysis (35% of course grade)
Students will work in groups of four to five members each to complete this assignment (group
membership will be determined by the course instructor). Group members will examine the
historical antecedents of an important contemporary social welfare policy, analyze the impact of
those antecedents on the current and future direction of that policy, and make recommendations
for policy changes and strategies to achieve them. The analysis will be developed in two (2)
installments as shown below. Each installment will be assigned a grade and suggestions for
revision; the final paper will be assigned a separate grade and will be a composite of both
installments (as revised).
The policy analysis should contain the following content:
Installment I
Background and description of problem/issue
     • Importance and relevance of the problem/issue to the development of social welfare
        policy
     • Nature and scope of problem/issue (be sure to include relevant statistics)
     • Population(s) affected by the problem/issue and in what ways
     • Known or suspected causes of the problem/issue
Historical background of problem/issue
     • Root cause(s) of the problem/issue
     • Value premises or ideological assumptions that underlie the problem/issue and how these
        have changed over time
     • Key events in history that have had an impact on the problem/issue*
     • Major stakeholders throughout history that have had an impact on the problem/issue,
        along the role(s) played by each stakeholder
* Note that the entire spectrum of history must be addressed, from the time the problem/issue
first emerged, to the present. A timeline should be included to highlight the discussion of key
historical events.
Installment II
Analysis of the problem/issue
     • Major themes that emerged from the historical background information determined in
        Installation I.
     • Factors that appear to be most salient or important in shaping public opinion about
        problem/issue over time
                                                  4


SW N382R
Summer 2020
    •   Major legislation passed to address the problem/issue over time, extent to which the goals
        of the legislation have been just and democratic, and extent to which the legislation
        contributed to greater social and economic justice
Conclusions
    • Conclusions reached about the problem/issue
    • Three role(s) social workers might play in ameliorating the problem/issue in the future
    • Brief discussion of whether the problem/issue can ever be resolved to the satisfaction of
        all those that have a stake in it
    • Brief discussion of whether society-at-large has an obligation to help resolve the
        problem/issue
Recommendations
    • Recommendations for addressing the problem/issue in the future
    • List three strategies that could be used to get people to “think outside the box” about the
        problem/issue
    • List three examples of how a professional social worker might bring about change that
        will help ameliorate the problem/issue in the future
Bibliographic References
The paper must include no fewer than twenty bibliographic references, including scholarly
works.
The proposed policy analysis topic is due on June 9. Note that the topic must be approved by the
course instructor prior to the group beginning this assignment.
Installment I and Installment II are due on June 25 and July 21, respectively. The final (revised)
version of both installments is due on July 28 (last day of class).
Additional resources for completing this assignment will be posted in the Policy Analysis folder
on the course Canvas site.
Assignment #3 - Opinion editorial (common assignment, 15% of course grade)
Each student in the class will write an opinion editorial related to the policy analyzed by the
group to which they were assigned. Opinion editorials, or "op-eds," are short commentary pieces
that offer an excellent way to communicate an important message and advocate directly to a
broad audience, including elected officials and other decision makers, opinion leaders, and
members of the community-at-large. Op-eds appear in almost every newspaper and address
current issues, express a viewpoint, and frequently offer policy or other solutions to social
problems.
                                                 5


SW N382R
Summer 2020
The op-ed should accomplish the following as articulated by Competency 5 (Engage in Policy
Practice) of the Council on Social Work Education (CSWE) Educational Policy and
Accreditation Standards (EPAS):
    (1) Identify social policy (and/or a social problem) at the local, state, and/or federal level that
        impacts human well-being, service delivery, and access to social services;
    (2) Assess how social welfare and economic policies impact the delivery of and access to
        services and/or otherwise affect human well-being; and
    (3) Demonstrate the application of critical thinking to analyze, formulate, and advocate for
        policies that advance human rights and social, economic, and/or environmental justice.
        The op-ed should offer viable policy alternatives to improve human well-being and
        suggest actions that policymakers and/or members of the public should take.
The student may submit the editorial in traditional, written form or in an electronic format such
as a video, blog post, infomercial, of an entry on a Facebook page. Written op-eds should be 500
to 750 words in length, single spaced. If an electronic format is selected, the length of the op-ed
will depend on the format used. Videos should be no more that 3-4 minutes in duration. In either
case (written or electronic), the op-ed must be based on solid evidence and use sources that are
cited in a manner appropriate to an editorial.
Students who present proof that their op-ed was submitted for publication will earn two points to
be added to their course assignment total.
The date for submitting the op-ed is July 23.
Additional resources for completing this assignment will be posted in the Op-ed folder on the
course Canvas site.
Assignment #4 – book analysis (20% of course grade)
Each student will read the Separated book by William Lopez and respond to the following
content:
    • Give a brief overview of the book and the author’s perspective on the issue/problem
    • Identify the social welfare policy issue/problem addressed. How is this issue/problem
        defined? Who is impacted and in what ways?
    • How has this issue/problem been addressed historically?
    • What values perspectives, beliefs, and frameworks can be used to understand this
        issue/problem?
    • Discuss this social welfare issue/problem from the perspectives of power, privilege,
        oppression, and marginalization. Who has the power to implement changes so this issue/
        problem is reduced or eradicated?
    • What is the public reaction to this issue/problem?
                                                   6


SW N382R
Summer 2020
    •   If you ruled the world, what policy or policies would you put in place to address this
        issue/problem? Justify your choice(s)
    •   Identify at least five specific actions a social work advocate can play to address this
        issue/problem
The due date for this assignment is July 14.
Assignment #5 – discussion assignments (15% of course grade)
Each student will complete five (5) discussion assignments posted on the course Canvas site.
Instructions for completing these assignments will be included in each posting.
The due dates for the discussion assignments are contained in the course schedule.
A summary of due dates for each course assignment is contained in the following table.
                                          Assignment                                        Due Date
  1   Food insecurity project (presentation and accompanying Power Point slides)             July 28
  2   Policy analysis
                                                                                 Proposal    June 9
                                                                      Installment I (draft) June 25
                                                                     Installment II (draft) July 21
                                                              Installment I + II (revised) July 28
  3   Opinion editorial (op-ed)                                                              July 23
  4   Separated book analysis                                                                July 14
  5   Discussion assignments                                                                 Various
VI. GRADES
The following distribution will be used to assign grades in this course:
                          Score Range         Grade       Score Range        Grade
                          94.0 - 99.999          A        74.0 - 76.999        C
                          90.0 - 93.999         A-        70.0 - 73.999        C-
                          87.0 - 89.999          B+       67.0 - 69.999        D+
                          84.0 - 86.999          B        64.0 - 66.999        D
                          80.0 - 83.999          B-       60.0 - 63.999        D-
                          77.0 - 79.999          C+        Below 60            F
                                                    7


SW N382R
Summer 2020
VII. CLASS POLICIES (note that some of the following policies have been modified to
accommodate the fact that the class will be conducted on-line)
Conduct and Civility: Social work students adhere to the Student Standards for Professional
Conduct of the NASW Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for their conduct. Scholastic
honesty and integrity are to be consistent social work values. The instructor will comply with
University guidelines regarding scholastic dishonesty, including plagiarism. Social work
practitioners respect others; therefore, differences in values, opinions, and feelings of class
members and guest speakers will be respected. Students will help create and support a learning
environment that does not interfere with the learning of fellow students. When students voice an
opinion with which you do not agree, feel free to voice opinions in a civil manner that can
enhance the flow of ideas and dialog.
Readings and Preparatory Assignments: Students are expected to be active participants in the
learning process by completing all assigned readings and viewing all Power Point presentations
and related videos.
Professional Communication and Interactions: Disrespect toward the professor, students, or
others is unacceptable and will be handled directly and in the context in which it occurs.
Disrespectful behavior includes overt acts, such as talking over others or making derogatory
remarks toward others, and covert acts, such as excluding class members from completing
assigned tasks.
Electronic Devices: All communication devices should be turned off or placed on silent mode
and put away during on-line class sessions, unless otherwise required by the class.
Class Attendance Policy: All students are expected to participate in all on-line class sessions.
Assignments and Grades: Assignments should be turned in via Canvas on the date they are due
barring serious, unforeseen medical illness or family emergencies. Penalties for late assignments
will factor into the grade achieved for the assignment.
Writing Style: The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association Sixth Edition
(APA) is the style manual to be used by all students in this course.
Use of Canvas: The professor will use the Canvas Web-based course management /collective
workspace for this class. An orientation to the course Canvas site will be given the first day of
class.
                                                   8


SW N382R
Summer 2020
Course Modification: To ensure achievement for course objectives, the professor reserves the
right to make modifications to any part of this syllabus related to schedule and assignment due
dates. Should any modifications ne made, students will be notified in class and modifications will
be posted to Canvas. Students should check their email frequently. Note that some of the links to
documents and videos on the Internet may change. In such cases, new links or alternate options
will be provided.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
                                                     9


SW N382R
Summer 2020
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
                                                  10


SW N382R
Summer 2020
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the
policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of
the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links
menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
                                                   11


SW N382R
Summer 2020
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                 12


     SW N382R
     Summer 2020
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE (Class dates highlighted in yellow will be conducted via Zoom)
 Date              Topic                                       Readings                     Assignment(s)
 June
  4   • Review of course             Chapter 1 of course text                             Discussion
        assignments                  Power Point slides                                   assignment #1 –
      • Four-factor framework for    • Preparing for the food insecurity assignment       Why is Texas in
         understanding social        • The Welfare State                                  the bottom 10?
         welfare policy              • Four-factor Framework for Policy Analysis          (available from
      • View and discuss The         • Development of social welfare policy               6/4 to 6/7)
         Many Faces of Texas         • Models of policy analysis
       • Break into assigned
         groups to begin planning
         for policy analysis project
  9   • How a bill becomes a law     Chapter 4 of course text                             Policy analysis
         in Texas                    Power Point Slides                                   topic due
      • Finding and tracking         • Brief primer on using census data
         legislation                 On-line Resources
      • Analyzing and researching    https://capitol.texas.gov/
         social welfare policies and www.congress.gov
         programs
 11   • Conceptual foundations of    Chapter 3 and Chapter 5 of course text
         social welfare policy       Power-point Slides
      • Delivery of social welfare   • Typical rule- development process
         services                    • Conceptual foundations of social welfare policy
      • Policy advocacy skills and   • Delivery of social welfare services
        competencies                 • Policy-making models
      • Rule development process
 16   Lab Day (via Zoom)             Instructor check-in, protected time to work on class
                                     assignments.
 18   • Historical foundations of    Chapter 2 of course text
        social welfare in America:   Videos
        colonial times through       • The orphan train movement
        passage of the Social        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WDJx8m5DCL4
        Security Act of 1935
                                     • The Mary Ellen story
                                     www.youtube.com/watch?v=bygP_su1o_g&oref=https
                                     %3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D
                                     bygP_su1o_g&has_verified=1
 23   • Historical foundations       See block immediately above.                         Discussion
        of social welfare in                                                              assignment #2 –
        America: WWII through                                                             The past as
        Donald Trump’s first term                                                         prologue
        as POTUS                                                                          (available 6/23 –
                                                                                          6/26)
                                                       13


     SW N382R
     Summer 2020
Date               Topic                                     Readings                         Assignment(s)
 25 • Preparing a policy brief     Posted on Canvas (Policy Brief and Op-ed folders)        Installment I
      • Preparing an opinion       • Sample policy briefs and opinion editorials            due
         Editorial or op-ed        • Logic Model Development Guide
      • Using a logic model in     Power Point Slides
         policy advocacy           • Op-ed Guidelines
                                   • Op-ed Steps
                                   • Preparing a Policy Brief
                                   • Preparing a Logic Model
 30   Lab Day (via Zoom)           Instructor check-in, protected time to work on class
                                   assignments.
July
  2   • Poverty and economic       Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 of course text                   Discussion
        inequality                 Power Point slides                                       assignment
      • Food insecurity in         • FY 2020 - 2021 federal budget
                                                                                            #3 -Fix the
        America                    • Working Poor in America
                                   • Varieties of Inequality                                national debt
      • Navigating the Federal
                                   • Food Insecurity in the Unites States                   (available
        budget
                                   • Poverty in America                                     7/2 – 7/5)
      • Navigating the Texas
                                   On-line resources
        Budget                     https://www.cbpp.org/house-farm-bill-briefswho-would-
                                   its-snap-proposals-harm
                                   https://www.childrensdefense.org/wp-
                                   content/uploads/2020/05/CDF-SNAP-Brief-May-
                                   2020.pdf
                                   https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56351
                                   http://www.crfb.org/
  7   • Health care disparities in Power Point Slides
      America                      • Health Care in America
                                   On-line Resource
                                   www.kff.org
  9   • Homelessness in America    Canvas                                                   Discussion
                                   Multiple documents related to the antecedents and        assignment #
                                   consequences of homelessness in America posted to the    4 - Why can’t
                                   Supplemental Materials folder                            we solve the
                                   Power Point Slides                                       problem of
                                   • Homeless in America                                    homelessness?
                                   • Homeless Women                                         (Available
                                                                                            from 7/9 –
                                   • Youth Homelessness
                                                                                            7/12)
                                   Videos
                                   Poor Kids of Silicon Valley
                                   https://www.ted.com/talks/lloyd_pendleton_the_housing_fi
                                   rst_approach_to_homelessness?language=en
 14   Lab Day (via Zoom)           Instructor check-in, protected time to work on class     Separated book
                                   assignments.                                             analysis due
                                                      14


    SW N382R
    Summer 2020
Date               Topic                                       Readings                        Assignment(s)
 16 • Developing a Legislative       Canvas (posted to the Supplemental Materials folder)
        Appropriations Request or    • Selected materials from the Texas Legislative
        LAR                            Library
      • Texas “rainy day fund”       • Sample LAR from Texas state agency
21    • Aging and social welfare     Chapter 10 of course text                              Installment II
         policy                      On-line resources                                      due
      • The changing face of         https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC54537
         retirement                  37/
      • We are living longer, but at https://www.apa.org/pi/about/publications/caregivers/f
         what cost?                  aq/health-effects
                                     https://www.caregiving.org/research/impact-of-
                                     caregiving/
                                     https://www.ncoa.org/
                                     https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/12848256/
 23   • Social problems in the       Chapter 13 of course text                              Discussion
        global arena                 Power Point slides                                     assignment #5 –
                                     • The worldwide refugee crisis                         What if we
                                     • The story of Aleppo                                  opened our doors
                                     • Policy Advocacy in the International Arena           to displaced
                                     International Social Work                              refugees?
                                     • International Federation of Social Workers           (available from
                                     On-line resource                                       7/23 – 7/26)
                                     www.ifsw.org
                                                                                            Op-ed due
 28   Last day of class               No readings                                           • Food security
      • My greatest take-away                                                                  assignment
        from this class                                                                        presentations
                                                                                               via Zoom
                                                                                            • Revised
                                                                                               Installment I +
                                                                                               II due
    X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
    Alexander, M. (2012). The new Jim Crow: Mass incarceration in the age of colorblindness.
     NY: New Press.
    Bardach, E.S., & Patashnik, E.M. (2019). A Practical Guide for Policy Analysis: The Eightfold
     Path to More Effective Problem Solving (6th edition). Washington, DC: CQ Press.
    Barusch, S. (2017). Foundations of social policy: Social justice in human perspective (6th
     edition). Boston, MA: Brooks Cole Cengage Learning.
                                                       15


SW N382R
Summer 2020
Birkland, T.A. (2015). An introduction to the policy process: Theories, concepts, and models of
  public policy making (4th edition). Florence, KY: Routledge.
Brown, L., Langanegger, J.A., Garcia, S., Lewis, T.A., & Biles, R. (2015). Practicing Texas
   Politics (16th edition). Boston, MA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.
Clemons, R., & Mcbeth, M.K. (2016). Public Policy Praxis (3rd Edition). Florence, KY:
  Routledge.
Deluca, S., Clampet-Lundquist, S. & Edin, K. (2016). Coming of age in the other America. NY:
  Russell Sage Foundation.
Edin, K.J., & Shaefer, H.L. (2016). $2.00 a day: Living on almost nothing in America. Boston,
  MA: Houghton-Mifflin Harcourt.
Engler, M. & Engler, P. (2016). This is an uprising: How nonviolent revolt is shaping the twenty-
  first century. New York: Nation Books.
Hill, M. (2016). Nobody: Casualties of America’s war on the vulnerable, from Ferguson to Flint
  and beyond. New York: Atria.
Hoefer, R. (2015). Advocacy practice for social justice (3rd edition). Chicago, IL: Lyceum.
Holmes, S. (2013). Fresh fruit, broken bodies: Migrant farmworkers in the United States.
  Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Jansson, B. (2018). Reluctant welfare state (9th edition). Boston, MA: Brooks Cole Wadsworth
  Learning.
Karger, H.J., & Stoesz, D. (2017). American Social Welfare Policy: A Pluralist Approach (8th
  Edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Libby, P. (2012). The lobbying strategy handbook: 10 steps to advocating any cause effectively.
  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Moore, W. (2011). The other Wes Moore: One name, two fates. New York: Spiegel & Grau.
NAW Press. (2018). Social work speaks, 11th edition: NASW policy statements. Washington, DC:
  Author.
Popple, P.R. (2018). Social Work Practice and Social Welfare Policy in the United States: A
  History. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
                                                 16


SW N382R
Summer 2020
Popple, P.R., & Leighninger, L. (2018). The policy-based profession: An introduction to social
  welfare policy analysis for social workers (7th edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Seccombe, K. (2015). So you think I drive a Cadillac? (4th edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Smith, K.B. (2016). The public policy theory primer (3rd edition). Florence, KY: Routledge.
Smith, C.F. (2018). Writing public policy: A practical guide to communicating in the policy-
  making process (5th ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Stern, M. & Axinn, J. (2017). Social welfare: A history of the American response to need (9th
  edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Weible, C.M., & Sabatier, P.A. (Eds.). (2017). Theories of the policy process (4th edition). Boulder,
  CO: Westview Press.
Suggested websites
Brookings Institution www.brook.edu
Center for the Study of Social Policy http://www.cssp.org
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities www.cbpp.org
Center for Law and Social Policy www.clasp.org
Center for Research on Child Well-being http://crcw.princeton.edu
Children’s Defense Fund www.childrensdefense.org
Child Welfare Information Gateway https://www.childwelfare.gov/
Kaiser Family Foundation www.kff.org
Institute for Research on Poverty www.ssc.wisc.edu/irp
Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation www.mdrc.org
Mathematica Policy Research www.mathematica-mpr.com/
National Association of Social Workers http://www.socialworkers.org/
National Indian Child Welfare Association (NICWA)www.nicwa.org
Pew Hispanic Center http://www.pewhispanic.org
RAND Center for the Study of Social Welfare Policy http://www.rand.org/
Urban Institute www.urban.org
Texas Policy Advocacy Research Organizations and Resources
Center for Public Policy Priorities http://forabettertexas.org/
National Association of Social Workers/Texas Chapter http://www.naswtx.org/
Texas Legislative Reference Library http://www.lrl.state.tx.us/index.cfm
Texas House Research Organization http://www.hro.house.state.tx.us/
                                                  17


SW N382R
Summer 2020
Texas Senate Research Center http://www.senate.state.tx.us/src.php
Federal Government sites
U.S. Census Bureau www.census.gov
Congressional Budget Office www.cbo.gov
Bureau of Labor Statistics www.bls.gov
United States House of Representatives http://www.house.gov/
United States Senate http://www.senate.gov/
Find a bill or law http://congress.gov
                                               18
