           MAS 374-40065 + AMS 321-31128 + HIST 366N-38884 + HIST 365G-38871
                               Mexican American Studies at UT
              Department of Mexican American + Latina/o Studies | University of Texas at Austin
                                     Spring Semester 2020 ǀ 3 Credit Hours
                             TTH ǀ 9:30am-11:00am ǀ RLP, Room 0.120
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION
Instructor ǀ Antonio Vásquez, Ph.D.
Email | antonio.vasquez@utexas.edu                              Office | GWB 2.334
Telephone | 512-471-4557 (MALS office)                          Hours | Tuesdays + Thursdays, 11-12:30pm
Fax | 512-471-9639 (MALS office)                                          + by appointment
COURSE INFORMATION
DESCRIPTION + FORMAT
Welcome to Mexican American Studies at UT!
Intended for Mexican American and Latina/o Studies majors and minors in junior-and-senior-standing, this
advanced undergraduate course complements MAS 301 (“Introduction to Mexican American and Latina/o
Studies”) by engaging in more in-depth research and analysis regarding the origins and development of
Mexican American Studies at the national, regional, and local level. Students will first critically examine the
intellectual formation of Mexican American Studies in concert with the historical emergence of the Chicano
Movement. This inquiry will provide a foundation to then assess past and present challenges and strengths
of Mexican American Studies as an academic discipline. To help realize the latter objective, students will
work collaboratively to conduct distinct research projects aimed at preserving and recognizing the role of
Mexican American Studies at the University of Texas at Austin in historical and contemporary contexts.
These assignments will be integrated throughout the semester in conjunction with collaborative critical
discussion over select foundational readings in Mexican American Studies. Through this course, students
will deepen their understanding of Mexican American and Latina/o Studies as an academic discipline and
strengthen their individual research skills in the collection and examination of primary sources.
Our class format will consist of small/large group discussion, presentation, and project-based learning.
Grading will be based on attendance, critical response essays, class discussion, and a collaborative research
project. All digital submissions for this class will be made through our course Canvas site, which is available
at https://utexas.instructure.com. You should also know that all work submitted for this class may be
screened for academic misconduct.
While our class content will be based on collaborative discussion and project-based learning, it is expected
that you, as a student, be present for every scheduled class activity. Do your absolute best to come to class
and be prepared to share any constructive responses to assigned readings in accordance with our course
calendar. Feel free to also contact and visit with me directly should you have any questions related to the
course. My preference is that you communicate with me through Canvas email first, and, secondarily, my
contact information provided.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the


practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
underrepresentation.
Consistent with other classes in Mexican American and Latina/o Studies, this course will also enhance our
critical thinking skills in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Welcome again to the class!
OBJECTIVES
     §   Increased understanding of the history of the discipline of Mexican American and Latina/o Studies at
         the national, regional, state and local level
     §   Strengthened skills in oral history research methodologies
     §   Strengthen skills in the collection, examination, and preservation of archival material
     §   Demonstrated critical thinking skills in reading, writing, listening, and speaking related to course
         content through in-class discussion, critical responses, and research
     §   Strengthened skills in writing, collaboration presentation related to the course content
TEXTBOOKS + SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
TEXTBOOKS
The following books are REQUIRED for this course. They are available for purchase at the University Co-op
Bookstore. Students majoring in MALS should consult with the department regarding access to texts.
     §   Acuña, Rodolfo F. Sometimes There is No Other Side: Chicanos and the Myth of Equality. University of
         Notre Dame Press, 1998.
     §   Mariscal, George. Brown-Eyed Children of the Sun: Lessons from the Chicano Movement, 1965-1975.
         University of New Mexico Press, 2005.
     §   Soldatenko, Michael. Chicano Studies: Genesis of a Discipline. University of Arizona Press, 2011.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
     §   In addition, supplementary course material, grades, and announcements will be available through
         our course Canvas site at https://utexas.instructure.com.
GRADING + ASSESSMENT
GRADING COMPONENTS + SCALE
There are four components that will make-up your grade. These include Attendance (10%), Critical
Response (20%), Class Discussion (20%), and Research Portfolio (50%).
A break of these are listed below, along with a grading scale.
                                                                    Mexican American Studies at UT | Vásquez | Spring 2020


                                                                                   Grade Percentage
                                                                                      A        94-100%+
                I. Attendance                           10%                           A-        90-93%
                                                                                      B+        87-89%
                II. Critical Response                   20%                           B         84-86%
                                                                                      B-        80-83%
                III. Class Discussion                   20%                           C+        77-79%
                                                                                       C        74-76%
                IV. Research Portfolio                  50%                           C-        70-73%
                                                 Total 100%                          D+         67-69%
                                                                                      D         64-66%
                                                                                      D-        60-63%
                                                                                       F          0-59%
GRADING DESCRIPTIONS
I. Attendance (10%)
Attendance counts for 10% of your total grade. Daily attendance will be taken and so do your best to come
to every scheduled class activity. Please note that more than two (2) unexcused absences can serve as
grounding for losing your points. Excessive absences will result in a failing grade for the course. Do not let
this happen to you.
II. Critical Response (20%)
To strengthen skills in critical thinking and demonstrate knowledge of course content, you will be asked to
read, write, and submit four (4) brief critical responses to select readings. More information will be posted
in Canvas and discussed in-class. This assignment is worth 20% of your total grade, or 5% each.
III. Class Participation (20%)
Consistent participation in class discussion is absolutely critical for the success of this class. Approximately
20% of your total grade will count toward in-class participation, including discussion over select readings,
and this will be added at the very end of the semester.
IV. Research Portfolio (50%)
In addition to class discussion, the heart of our work together will be the completion of a series of research
assignments related to the collection, examination, and preservation of local history. This will be individual
and collaborative project-based work, which together will count toward 50% of your total grade. More
information will be shared in-class and posted in Canvas.
Extra Credit? When possible, extra credit assignments will be offered during the semester. Come to class
every day to stay informed on possible extra credit opportunities.
                           All written material submitted for this class
                       is subject for screening for academic misconduct.
GUIDELINES + EXPECTATIONS
Course Readings + Assignments
Please note that all course readings and assignments will be posted on our Canvas homepage. The best way
to stay informed about weekly readings and assignments for this course is to access our homepage. It is also
expected that all work will be submitted before assigned deadlines as stated in Canvas for full consideration.
Please read each assignment carefully in Canvas to determine cut-off dates for late submissions, if applicable.
                                                                  Mexican American Studies at UT | Vásquez | Spring 2020


Generally, you will have no more than two-weeks to turn late work with deductions, but this is not always
the case. Please refer back to Canvas.
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Several are
listed in this syllabus, and I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact UT Services for Students with
Disabilities ( http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability ) at (512) 471-6259 (voice), 1 (800) 329-3986 (video
phone), or email at sssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Title IX
Title IX, a segment of the Education Amendments of 1972, protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking
at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community,
the University can:
1.Intevene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating;
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
involved in a Title IX investigation;
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the University’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title
IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you or someone you know
has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources at
https://www.utexas.edu/student-affairs/policies/title-ix.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
Absences
Just to be clear, it is expected that you are present and prepared for every class during the semester. More
than two unexcused absences will lower your grade and excessive absences will result in a failing grade. Do
not let this happen to you. If you are absent, you are responsible for any work missed if applicable. It is also
expected that you communicate in writing with me (your instructor) prior to the class.
The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays, University commitments, or
extenuating emergency circumstances. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday or
University commitment, please let your instructor know in advance. If you miss due to an emergency, be
                                                                   Mexican American Studies at UT | Vásquez | Spring 2020


prepared to provide formal documentation. You will not be penalized for excused absences, although you
will still be responsible for any work missed on that day if applicable.
In the event that class may need to be cancelled for any unexpected emergency, I will do our absolute best to
let you know as soon as possible.
Grading
It is expected that all assignments will be completed on-time. Grades and individual feedback, if any, should
be posted no later than two (2) weeks after each assignment deadline. Should you have any follow-up
questions regarding a specific assignment grade, you should contact me directly within two-weeks after
being posted for full consideration. Do not wait until the end of the semester.
TurnItIn
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an
archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to
determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the
faculty member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
Email Communication
When sending an email to me, always include your name and course title in the subject line. In this way, I
can best respond and address your inquiry. Remember as well that any email related to this class should be
considered formal communication. Your email is not a text.
It is expected that I would respond to any email requests once received. If you do not receive an email
response after two-weeks, send another follow-up email and let me know in-person.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc.). Please advise me of this preference early in the semester
so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the teaching team of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Integrity
This course adheres with all expectations regarding academic integrity, including the principles of honesty,
trust, fairness, respect, and responsibility. Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use
words or ideas that aren’t your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty (including cheating on tests, plagiarism on
written assignments, etc.) are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course. It is each and every student’s responsibility to be familiar with UT’s Academic Honesty and the
University Honor Code which can be found at the following:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php.
The University of Texas Honor Code reads as follows: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Long live Longhorn nation!
R-E-S-P-E-C-T
As this class relies upon individual-and-group-centered learning experiences, it is expected that mutual
respect is applied in everything that we do in this course. This means that we should refrain from any
behavior that could disrupt our learning environment, such as calling, texting, smoking, yelling, and the like.
                                                                   Mexican American Studies at UT | Vásquez | Spring 2020


Be sure to turn off or put on vibrate mode your cell phone before the class begins. Use of laptops are
acceptable when taking notes during lectures but should be put away during other class activities. In
addition, you are not allowed to use any video or audio recording devices during class.
In other words, respect is respect, is respect.
STUDENT RESOURCES
University Writing Center
The University Writing Center provides a relaxed, yet professional atmosphere in which writers from
across the curriculum can become more comfortable with processes of writing at all levels. Appointments
are available for all UT students at http://uwc.utexas.edu/appointments or by calling the UWC Front
Desk at 512-471-6222.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Services are available here at UT, and treatment
does work. The UT Counseling and Mental Health Center ( http://chmc.utexas.edu/ ) provides
counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals
and enhance their personal growth and well-being. The CMHC crisis line is available 24/7/365 at 512-471-
2255.
Copyright Information
More information about copyright law can be accessed at The TEACH Act or directly at
https://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/teachact.html.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call (512) 471-3614 (JES A332).
Libraries
For more information about The University of Texas Libraries, visit http://lib.utexas.edu or call 512-495-
4250.
IT Services
Walk-up services for any computer and IT help is available on the first-floor lobby of the Flawn Academic
Center (FAC), open Monday through Friday except during University Holidays. You can also contact IT
Services at http://it.utexas.edu or call 512-475-9400. For particular questions about Canvas, technical
support is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the semester at 855-308-2494.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
                                                                Mexican American Studies at UT | Vásquez | Spring 2020


BeVocal Syllabus Statement
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce
harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, please visit
http://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Emergency Evacuation
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
       that the nearest exit door may be the one you used when entering the building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
       week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
       building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
       at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
       found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
For more information regarding emergency evacuation, contact the Office of Campus Safety and Security at
512-471-5767 or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/.
COURSE CHANGES
                     The professor reserves the right to change and/or
              alter any component of this course, with notice to students.
                                                                Mexican American Studies at UT | Vásquez | Spring 2020
