                                        Texas Applied Arts
 SPECIAL PROJECT IN DESIGN AND FABRICATION: ESCAPE ROOM—FALL 2019
              TD 354T (25740) — TD 388L (25912) — ES 377 (12734) — AET 339 (20565)
INSTRUCTOR:              J.E. JOHNSON                         TA:            CHRIS CONARD
OFFICE:                  PAC 2.310                            EMAIL:         chris.conard@gmail.com
OFFICE PHONE:            512 471-0630
E-MAIL:                  jjohnson@texasperformingarts.org
OFFICE HOURS:            By appointment
CLASS:                   Monday 9:00-10:30am
LAB SCHEDULE:            Monday 5:00pm-7:00pm
LOCATION:                Hatchery PAC 3.204A and Scenic Studio PAC 2.216 (other locations as
specified)
WEBSITE:                 http://sites.utexas.edu/appliedarts/
COURSE DESCRIPTION
In this course students will build and test a full-scale escape room that will transport players to a
distressed research station on the Gulf Coast in the year 2042. Students will collaborate with MJ
Johns’s AET 334K Video Game Prototyping, Karen Maness’s T D 354T Scenic Painting, and Matt
Smith’s AET 329F Interactive Lighting Environments courses to design, fabricate, program, install, and
test physical versions of digital game puzzles. Designs may include pneumatic and servo automation
as well as imbedded systems. All will receive direct instruction in traditional fabrication, welding,
surface finish, and digital fabrication. This experience will build portfolios, resumes, and leadership
skills for career paths in design, architecture, live entertainment, film, gaming, and engineering.
Projects are student-driven and dependent on student research and planning. Students will have
opportunities to specialize on specific areas within the project including fabrication, testing, and
operations. We will research player safety, puzzle effectiveness, the evolution of the escape room
industry, and the role of immersive entertainment in education.
*** All students are required to commit to a minimum of 4 hours on the week of December 2 to present
the final project for a public event. ***
STAKEHOLDERS
Our project is funded and driven by the missions of The College of Fine Arts and Planet Texas 2050.
The preliminary scenario, narrative, and design of the Escape Room has been developed by College
or Fine Arts faculty, students, and alumni and is inspired by campus-wide collaborative research
made possible by the Bridge Barriers initiative, which was launched by President Fenves in 2016 with
one overarching mission: break down academic silos and foster research that addresses the toughest
questions facing humanity and the world.
Every student enrolled in this course is a stakeholder in the success of this project. Without your
leadership, creativity, and dedication success will not be possible.


COURSE OBJECTIVES
  1. We will deliver excellent and engaging production elements that are:
      a. Are on time and under budget
      b. Prioritize health and safety of collaborators, performers, and players
      c. Serve stakeholder needs
  2. Assemble effective teams
      a. recognize opportunities to collaborate with others who provide diverse experiences and
          perspectives
      b. gauge the costs & benefits of “Doing-it-Yourself” (DIY) or “Doing-it-Together” (DIT)
      c. recruit team members with diverse skills appropriate for specific project requirements
      d. join a team where one’s skills are sought and valued
      e. solicit advice, knowledge and specific skills from experts
  3. We will assess the availability and appropriateness of tools and materials
      a. research various equipment and materials to determine limitations and suitability for a
          specific application
      b. choose the most appropriate tools and materials (physical, digital, and rhetorical) for the job
      c. acquire the necessary tools and materials
      d. investigate alternate tools and materials when a desired tool or material is not available
      e. fabricate necessary tools, reimagine material choices, develop alternate workflows, and/or
          revise project scope when alternative tools or materials are not available
  4. We will develop a project plan
      a. identify who the relevant stakeholders are
      b. specify actionable and measurable project goals and requirements
      c. utilize time management and project management tools
      d. outline project milestones, including sequential action items
      e. anticipate time for multiple prototype iterations
      f. work effectively within project constraints, be they financial, material, spatial, and/or
          temporal
COURSE GUIDING PRINCIPLES
We are flat and open.
  § Our decision-making process is not hierarchical. We rely on consensus.
  § We seek participation from all students, staff, and faculty.
  § We welcome participation from all disciplines.
  § Ownership of the project belongs to all stakeholders.
We are problem solvers who say, “Yes.”
  § We envision and execute.
  § We have a growth mindset and have a high tolerance for uncertainty.
  § We trust that everyone is creative and ready to contribute.
  § We take risks and fail forward.
We contribute to a community of creativity (i.e. the whole world).
  § We foster an abundance mindset.
  § Our project faces outward and is transparent to all stakeholders.
  § We “steal like artists” and give back to creative communities.
  § We actively seek expertise from outside the university.
2


COURSE FORMAT
Class time (aka Sprint Meeting)
Sprint Meetings are critical to the success of projects. They are a time to assess progress, set specific
sprint goals for the next week and address any new constraints.
Lab times – PAC Safety and Stewardship
Proximity card access to the Texas Performing Arts building and the Scenic Art Studio door 6am to 10pm
daily. No one may work in the Hatchery, Automation Lab, or Scenic Art Studio alone outside standard
working hours, Monday through Friday 8am to 5pm. No one may work in the building between the hours of
1:00am and 6:00am. Plan accordingly. The Loading Dock and Scenic Art Studio doors are armed at
6:00pm. If the doors are left propped open, they will trigger a silent alarm, UT PD will arrive, and we will
be fined. Security will be present on Bass Concert Hall event days. Please stay contained to the Raptor
Lab or Scenic Art Studio during these events.
Prerequisites
There are not prerequisites for this class but all students must complete University Environmental Health
and Safety modules before the first day of class September 9, 2019.
Online Platforms
Each member of the class has the responsibility to become proficient in the following online tools.
    •   Canvas: This course management platform will be used to upload assignments and blog posts for
        peer assessment.
    •   Slack: This is and online messaging tool and should be used for primary communication for student
        teams. Slack should NOT be used for any grade related information or inquiries.
        https://utplai.slack.com/
    •   WordPress: Our class website is hosted by the university with the WordPress content
        management system. Some assignments will be required to be posted here. If you prefer not to post
        publicly with your real name, an alias is acceptable. http://sites.utexas.edu/appliedarts/blog/
    •   Trello: We will use Trello for project management. Our class calendar is also posted here. It is a
        living, flexible document and will be updated as needed. Trello is also where the team will make all
        purchase requests. https://trello.com/b/uVjHFmVg/escape-fabrication-course-schedule
    •   Social Media: Students will be encouraged to post to social media to promote their work and
        network with other makers using when appropriate. Course instructors will also promote student
        work on the Applied Arts accounts. If you do not wish to have images of your face or project posted
        publicly please notify an instructor.
             – YouTube https://www.youtube.com/c/TexasAppliedArts
             – Facebook https://www.facebook.com/texasappliedarts
             – Twitter https://twitter.com/utappliedarts
             – Instagram https://www.instagram.com/utappliedarts/
    •   UT Box: This is the UT supported cloud storage service. Any file necessary for the design,
        planning, or production of projects must be saved in the Class Share folder. Please maintain good
        filename and folder hygiene and version control. https://utexas.box.com/v/escape-room-fab-
        SHARE
3


PROJECT DOCUMENTATION AND RESEARCH
All students will be required to document work at least once on our blog. Documentation may include,
photos, videos, text or any other electronic media. Our intent is to engage other artists, product
developers, and industry professionals in our exploration and conversation.
http://sites.utexas.edu/appliedarts/blog/
ASSESSMENT
Only instructors of record will issue final grades. However, instructors will make judgments based on data
gathered from self, peer, and professional performance appraisals to provide relevant feedback and scores.
Readiness—50 points
Onboarding—30 points (satisfactory/no credit)
     § 5 points: OH 500 Machine Shop Safety, OH 501 Hearing Protection, and OH 507 Respiratory
        Protection
     § 5 points: 30 second introduction video
     § 5 points: Pre-course survey
     § 15 points: Clifton Strengths Assessment
Cleanliness and Stewardship of workspaces—20 points
Dependability—50 points
After teams are assigned, collaborators should arrive to meetings on time and ready to present a progress report
with visuals and/or prototypes. Students attendance in class is not only for their own benefit. All teams will
benefit from engaged respondents.
Attendance quiz—50 points (56 possible)
     § The class will depend on engagement from all members of the class.
     § To incentivize and measure attendance a single question quiz will be given. Quizzes count for 2
        points each (satisfactory/no credit).
Research and Documentation—50 points
     § 10 points: Industry Research Question
     § 10 points: Project Element Brief
     § 10 points: Org Chart Research
     § 20 points: Blog Update
Engagement, Performance, and Growth—50 points
Evaluation criteria will include key competencies including: goal setting, decision making and critical thinking,
effective communication, problem solving, relationship management, accuracy and attention to detail,
producing results, flexibility and adaptability, teamwork, quality of failure, and followership.
     § These competencies will be measured by five short self-evaluations throughout the semester.
Final Deliverables—50 points
     § 10 points: player evaluation
     § 10 points: peer evaluation
     § 20 points: documentation
There is no final exam for this course.
4


CALENDAR
This is a dynamic project-driven course. Schedule changes will be communicated to class via Canvas
and updated on our live course calendar. https://trello.com/b/uVjHFmVg/escape-fabrication-course-
schedule
Week    Date  Class 9-10:30am           Lab 5-7pm               Milestones    Assignment      Assignment Due
  0                                                                            – EHS modules
                                                                               – Video selfie
                                                                               – Pre-course
                                                                                 survey
  1      9/2  LABOR DAY – NO CLASS      LABOR DAY – NO LAB                                    – EHS modules
  2      9/9  TOPIC: Personal           MEET IN HATCHERY                      - Strengths
              Assessment and Team       Constraints and Org                   Finder
              Building                  Chart                                 - Org Chart
              GUEST: Tim Rogers –
              Strengths
              GUEST: Jenny Nelson –
              PT2050
              TOPIC: Chris Conard
              presents design
              READINGS:
              I like, I wish, I wonder
              The Great Escape
              VIDEO:
              PT2050
              Creative confidence
  3     9/16  TOPIC: Business of Escape ACTIVITY: Tool Training               Research        Strengths Finder
                  Room and Potential as and Lab Orientation                   Problem
                  Education Tool
              GUEST: Haley E. R.        FOUNDRY VISIT
              Cooper
              READINGS:
              Escape Rooms and the
              Future of Advertising
              Trello Onboarding
              Slack Onboarding
  4     9/23  GUEST: Greg Salyers                               Puzzle Briefs
              (tentative)                                       and Best
                                                                Practices
                                                                Research to
                                                                AET 334K
  5     9/30                                                                                  Reflection 1
5


   6  10/7 GUEST: Karen Maness
           Testable Prototype with
           AET 334K
   7 10/14                                                 -- Final Digital Reflection 2
                                                           Prototypes
                                                           -- Flats
                                                           complete
   8 10/21
   9 10/28                                                 -- Operation     Reflection 3
                                                           SOPs Draft
                                                           -- Physical
                                                           Prototypes
  10  11/4                         MILESTONE:              Paint surface
                                   Paint surface treatment treatment
                                   begins                  begins
  11 11/11 GUEST: Haley E. R.                              First test       Reflection 4
           Cooper
  12 11/18                                                 Set dressing
  13 11/25                                                                  Reflection 5
  14  12/2 Workday                 FINAL TEST EVENTS
  15  12/9 Strike                  Lab Clean Up Party!!!                    Final
                                                                            Documentation
6


Grading Scale:
A 92.5 - 100
A- 89.5 - 92.49
B+ 86.5 - 89.49
B 82.5 - 86.49
B- 79.5 - 82.49
C+ 76.5 - 79.49
C 72.5 - 76.49
C- 69.5 - 72.49
D+ 66.5 - 69.49
D 62.5 - 66.49
D- 59.5 - 62.49
F 0 - 59.49
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441
TTY.
Risk Statement
*Caution: Students participating in Department of Theatre & Dance classes do so at their own risk. As with any
physical activity, there is always the chance of personal injury occurring during the normal conduct of Production
Lab and Advanced Production Lab. The instructor is not responsible for student injuries or accidents, which may
occur during the normal conduct of classes.
University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students:
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to
check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at
a minimum, twice per week.
Title IX
The University encourages affected individuals to promptly report incidents of sex and gender discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence, and stalking as provided in this policy. The
University also encourages individuals who may have witnessed instances of prohibited conduct to report such
information as outlined in this policy.
Responsible employees of the University are required to promptly report incidents of prohibited conduct. The
University will respond to all reports made under this policy. The University will conduct a prompt, fair, and impartial
investigation and resolution for complaints and, where appropriate, issue remedial measures and/or sanctions.
Please be advised that I am considered a “responsible employee” at UT. As such, I am required to report any
incidents of sexual harassment or assault to the UT Title IX Coordinator. If you would like to have a confidential
conversation about sexual misconduct, please contact the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center at (512) 471-
3515 to schedule an appointment. The CMHC crisis line is (512) 471-CALL (2255) . You may also call Austin
SafePlace 24/7 at (512) 267-SAFE (7233).
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
7


Documented Disability Statement:
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
          § Please notify instructors as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
(e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
etc.).
          § Please notify instructors as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field
trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
          § Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are
worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher
education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
dropping more than that number.”
Religious Holidays:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify instructors of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order
to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time after the absence.
Changes:
This syllabus is subject to change upon the discretion of the instructors.
It is the policy of the Department of Theatre and Dance that our majors attend department season productions and
that this attendance is a part of the coursework for our majors' classes. For the 2019 fall semester, you are required
to attend the following performances: 12 Ophelias (a play with broken songs), Fall For Dance and Spring Awakening.
Information on how majors may obtain discounted admission is available on the Department of Theatre and Dance
wiki under the "Student Resources" tab (https://wikis.utexas.edu/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=51841138) or on
the department’s website at uttadstudenttickets.org.”
Note that while all Theatre and Dance majors are required to see departmental productions, only Theatre and Dance
majors' courses are required to utilize this as part of the coursework. There are multiple discount ticket
opportunities for Theatre and Dance Majors. Please direct your students here to learn about how to save 45% and
greater.
8
