                 Integrated Communications
                                 Management
                                       ADV 370/PR 367
                        Unique Course Number: 06600 and 07055
                                          Spring 2020
                                          BMC 4.212
                                         M 2pm – 5pm
PROFESSOR:               Tim A. Scott
                         Office: BMC 4.356 (Belo Building, 4th floor)
                         Email: timscott@utexas.edu
                         832-818-6373
                         Office Hours: Thursday 1pm to 3pm and by appointment
TA:                      TBD
                         Office: BMC fourth floor grad student cubicles TBD
                         Email: TBD
                         Office Hours: TBD and by appointment
COURSE OVERVIEW:
The course PR 367/ADV 370J stresses the interrelationships between Integrated Brand
Positioning activities and the competitive environment. The course focuses on strategic
decision-making across a broad range of interrelated areas: crafting the most effective
Integrated Brand Positioning mix; ethical concerns; utilizing research findings;
establishing objectives; determining appropriations and budgets; developing creative
strategy; utilizing personal selling; sales promotion; direct marketing; public relations;
crisis management; branded events; social network communication; off- and on-line
media; viral and guerrilla marketing; and, client/agency relations.
READINGS
Readings will be drawn from case studies, books, and journals. All readings are
posted on Canvas. There is no textbook or reading packet to buy.
OBJECTIVES
This writing-intensive course has three main objectives:
1. Help you develop the skills needed to make a wide range of interconnected
advertising and public relations management decisions – decisions similar to what you
will encounter in the “real world.”


2. Familiarize you with “the case method” – a structured, field-tested approach to
decision-making that is a practical and useful method for addressing a variety of
communications management issues.
3. Guide you in the further development of your professional presentation skills.
To accomplish these objectives, this course requires you to:
     •   Assess problems and opportunities, isolate key facts, and rank-order salient
         management issues.
     •   Learn independently and from each other to make up for areas you haven’t yet
         studied.
     •   Think in a precise and structured manner and follow a structured decision-
         making process.
     •   Make decisions and create action plans appropriate to the situation under
         consideration.
     •   Efficiently and persuasively write up and present your analysis and sell your
         recommendations.
     •   Defend your position and analyses against comments and criticism from your
         colleagues.
PREREQUISITES
You are expected to have successfully completed prerequisite courses and have a solid
foundation in marketing as well as the advertising and public relations functional areas.
If necessary, quickly identify background voids that exist and bring yourself up to date
on any areas that may be new to you. Because the course requires a common
advertising and public relations foundation, students are responsible for timely
background leveling. Advertising and PR management teams form the basis for a
significant portion of the course. The ability to work effectively and efficiently in a group
is essential to successfully completing this course.
Attendance and participation
It is assumed that students will attend every class, and I will take regular attendance
to track this. However being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be
engaged and involved scholars. Class format will include lectures, small group
activities, work sessions, guest speakers, etc. Participation – not just attendance – is
integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to you earning a high grade. Active
participation means contributing to the discussion, listening to what your colleagues
have to say and engaging with the readings and in-class activities. It means showing
up on time, not checking social or email on your computer, not texting on your
phone. If you do not participate in class discussions, you will not earn full points for
attendance even if you come to every class.


EVALUATION:
Individual and group written case briefs =                                     40%
Small group project =                                                          10%
Team Project: written analysis and presentation (50:50) =                      40%
Class participation (see note above) =                                         10%
Total =                                                                        100%
GRADING SYSTEM:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the
university’s provost office (http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/) and
described below:
                                                    This is the percent        And the GPA
   To earn an:      You must earn:                  equivalent of:             equivalent of:
   A                94.00 — 100 points              94-100                     4.00
   A-               90.00 — 93.99 points            90-93.99                   3.67
   B+               87.00 — 89.99 points            87-89.99                   3.33
   B                84.00 — 86.99 points            84-86.99                   3.00
   B-               80.00 — 83.99 points            80-83.99                   2.67
   C+               77.00 — 79.99 points            77-79.99                   2.33
   C                74.00 — 76.99 points            74-76.99                   2.00
   C-               70.00 — 73.99 points            70-73.99                   1.67
   D+               67.00 — 69.99 points            67-69.99                   1.33
   D                64.00 — 66.99 points            64-66.99                   1.00
   D-               60.00 — 63.99 points            60-63.99                   0.67
   F                    0 — 59.99 points              0-59.99                  0.00
 What the letter grades mean:
 A, A–           Earned by work of excellent quality indicating full mastery of the
                 subject; in the case of an A, it indicates extraordinary distinction.
 B+, B, B–       Earned by work that indicates commendable comprehension of
                 the course material and the student’s full engagement with the
                 course requirements and activities.
 C+, C, C–       Earned by work that indicates average and satisfactory
                 comprehension of the course material and the student has met the
                 basic requirements for completing assigned work and participating
                 in class activities.
 D+, D, D–       Earned by work that is unsatisfactory but that indicates some minimal
                 command of the course materials and some minimal participation in
                 class activities that is worthy of course credit toward the degree.
 F               Earned by work that is unsatisfactory and indicates a failure to
                 do minimal passing work
 Some Words on Grading:


•    I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an
     89.6% that translates into a B+ and will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-
     ).
•    Any questions or concerns about a grade must be presented in writing within
     seven (7) days after the grade is announced or posted. I will not discuss grades
     after this seven-day period.
•    When we grade your work, you start with zero points. You do not start with 100
     percent and then lose points based on mistakes you might make. Your final points
     represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the number of points
     “taken away” for errors or omissions.
MOODY COLLEGE WRITING SUPPORT PROGRAM
The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3.322,
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting offers one-on-one assistance
without charge to students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of
communication. We have specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and
Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen core writing skills in each
field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-hour
appointments on our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing
process.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
OTHER UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES:
1. Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the university's official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the university informed as
to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a
frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with university-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at: http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
2. Documented Disability Statement


Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259
(voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
     §  Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in
        class is not accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course
        packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
     §  Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-
        866-329-3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more
        disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
3. Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class,
an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time after the absence.
4. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
5. Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
        “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education
        may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped
        courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another
        institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
        dropping more than that number.”
6. Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and
assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made.
Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
        § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
            Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
            you entered the building.
        § If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the
            first week of class.


        §   In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class
            instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions to do so.
7. Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful
student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is
getting in your way, there are options available for support.
    §   Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB,
        5th floor
                | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
    §   CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
        cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    §   CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby
        Simpson, LCSW|CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if
        she is unavailable)
    §   FREE Services at CMHC:
        o Brief assessments and referral services
        o Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
        o MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
