                                  Introduction to Cultural Anthropology
                                                 ANT S302
                                                                                        Photo by Mike Ackerman
Instructor: Kenza Yousfi
Class time: MWTTHF: 11:30-13:00
Office hours: Mondays 13:00—14:30 & Thursdays 10:00-11:00. Also available by appointment
Welcome to an introduction to sociocultural anthropology! We live in a globalized world marked by new
technologies of communication, globalized economies and shifting frameworks of rights and governance.
Anthropologists study how humans live in these environments and how social and cultural practices emerge
around such issues. At the core of anthropology lies the question of the global circulation of money, goods,
knowledge, power, and people across cultural and spatial boundaries, which is the focus of this course.
Ethnographic fieldwork—one of the primary methodological tools for anthropologists—is itself an integral
part of such circulation, forcing anthropologists in recent years to critically examine the roles they play in
observing, representing, and analyzing other people. This course introduces you to the tools that
anthropologists use to make sense of and engage with issues in both distant places and their local
communities. This course thus serves as an introduction to the perspective of anthropology: in other words,
what do you see when you wear anthropological glasses? What actions will you take once you learn to see
through the lens of anthropology?


                                            Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                                Summer 2019
The course focuses on issues of the 21st century and engages contemporary anthropological work. We will
also cover some key foundational texts during class lectures. The course is organized around a set of objects
and things that circulate in our daily lives. For each class, we will think about the objects designated for
that session. The goal is to trace the object’s journey, discover how, who, and where it was made, and the
role it plays in our lives. We will rethink the world around us and realize that we are already part of a global
economy. These objects are also in conversation with the assigned readings and students will use the
readings to think through the object, and vice versa.
This course is not meant to be comprehensive. It rather aims to teach students how to work with
anthropology and to prepare them for further encounters with the discipline.
Course Format
This course combines lectures, small group work, and independent work. We will cover a range of
different materials in a number of different, creative, and fun ways. I expect your full, active, and serious
participation in both class lectures and group work. This means that you will:
    1.    Attend all classes
    2.    Show up on time having read the required material in order to contribute
    3.    Discuss and participate respectfully with the instructor and your peers
    4.    Be responsible for all of the assigned readings and materials. If you miss a class, it is your
          responsibility to do the reading and get class notes from one of your classmates.
Course Materials:
All readings will be posted online or available through PCL. You aren’t required to purchase any reading
material for this class.
Learning Goals of the Course
Approaching this class with a good attitude and fulfilling the requirements in both letter and spirit will
give you:
    • An introduction to methodological and analytical tools that anthropologists use to make sense of
          and engage with issues in the world;
    • Critically engage contemporary issues concerning development, global political economy,
          environment, inequality and justice, structural violence, humanitarian intervention, and wars and
          their aftermaths.
    • Experience conducting original ethnographic research and skills for presenting your findings in
          front of your peers;
    • Practice in writing ethnographic essays through ethnographic field research;
    • Practice in analytical reading and writing, which includes synthesizing different perspectives,
          taking good notes, and developing your own voice;
    • A multi-perspectival view of global problems drawn from anthropological methodologies;
    • Insights into your own role as a member of society as you navigate your encounters, choices, and
          interactions at the local and global scale.
                                                                                                              2


                                          Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                              Summer 2019
Assignments and Grades
The following is a breakdown of how I will evaluate your performance in the class. More in-depth
descriptions, rubrics, and prompts will be provided with each assignment.
    •   Class Participation: 35%—Active, informed, and respectful participation in class discussions and
        small group work. Course leadership on days you are a course leader is a significant factor in this
        grade.
    •   Newspaper Analysis Papers: 15%—You are responsible for writing a summary of a newspaper
        article on an event, phenomenon, problem, etc., developing an analysis using concepts we cover
        in class, and writing a discussion question based on your analysis, and a justification of that
        question’s purpose. You will have to turn in one paper during the semester of 500 to 700 words.
    •   Podcast Analysis: 15%—You will write a 500-word analysis on the 99% Invisible Podcast “Life
        and Death in Singapore.”
    •   Ethnographic Project: 35%—You will develop an ethnographic project throughout the course of
        the class. You will have every Friday off to do your fieldwork for at least one hour and half. The
        assignment is composed of two parts: 1) submitting fieldnotes on things you observe, hear, and
        ask about during your fieldwork for 15% of the total grade; and 2) writing a solid, creative, and
        comprehensive analysis of your fieldnotes and answering your research question by using
        materials from the class. This will be 20 % of your total grade.
Assignment Deadlines
All assignments will be posted on canvas. You are required to submit a word document online by the due
date and time.
07/29 Newspaper article analysis 1 due online by 8:00 AM
08/02 Fieldnotes 1 due online by midnight
08/10 Podcast analysis due online by midnight
08/15 Fieldnotes 2 due online by 8:00 AM
08/19 Ethnographic project due online by noon.
                                                                                                           3


                                         Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                           Summer 2019
Week I | Sociocultural Anthropology: Issues, Questions and Approaches
7/15 Introduction
What is sociocultural anthropology? How does it help us understand issues both local and global? How
might anthropology influence how we understand the world around us? What can we expect to learn in
this class?
No readings.
7/16 Culture
What is culture? What do anthropologists study and how do they study it? How has the way that
anthropologists understand ‘culture’ changed over time? What is ethnography and thick description?
What is ethnocentricism?
     -   Abu-Lughod, L. (n.d.). Do Muslim Women Really Need Saving? Anthropological Reflections on
         Cultural Relativism and Its Others. American Anthropologist.
7/17 Culture
     -   Geertz, Clifford. 1973. “Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight” in The Interpretation of
         Cultures. New York: Basic Books.
7/18 Ethnographic methods
What methods do anthropologists use in their research? Is anthropology a scientific or a humanistic
discipline, or both? What is ethnographic research? What is participant-observation? What does
anthropological data look like, and how do anthropologists draw conclusions from that data? When
anthropologists do a study, can they claim to speak for other people? Is anthropology ‘objective’? What
kinds of ethical issues might arise when doing anthropological fieldwork?
     -   Audra Simpson, 2014. “Ethnographic Refusal: Anthropological Need.” In Mohawk
         Interruptus. Pp. 95–114. Durham: Duke University Press.
     -   Ieva Jusionyte, 2015. “Breaking the Code of Silence.” In Savage Frontier: Making News and
         Security on the Argentine Border. Oakland: University of California Press. Pp. 37-59.
     -   Jason De León, 2015. “Documenting the Undocumented.” In The Land of Open Graves: Living
         and Dying on the Migrant Trail. Oakland: University of California Press. Pp. 11-14.
7/19 Ethnographic Research Session
                                                                                                        4


                                         Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                         Summer 2019
Week II | The Universal, the Particular, and Power
07/22 Water (you think you know it?!)
    -  Veronica Strang. 2005. “Common Sense: Water, Sensory Experience and the Generation of
       Meaning.” Journal of Material Culture. 10 (1).
07/23 Seed (the local in the global)
    -  Tania Murray Li. 2014. “What is Land? Assembling a Resource for Global Investment.”
       Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers. 39 (4).
07/24 Rain Boot (indigeneity and citizenship)
    -  Comaroff, Jean; Comaroff, John. 2014. “Ethnicity, Inc. On the Affective Economy of Belonging”
       In Greg Urban (Ed.), Corporations and Citizenship. University of Pennsylvania Press.
07/25 No exit from culture
    -  Geertz, Clifford. 1973. “Thick Description” in The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: Basic
       Books.
    -  Abu Lughod, Laila. 1996. “Writing Against Culture.” Richard G. Fox (ed.) Recapturing.
       Anthropology: Working in the Present.
07/26 Ethnographic Research Session
Week III | Cultural Categories, Structures, Systems
07/29 Temple (you know religion when you see it!)
    -  Asad, Talal. 1993. “The Construction of Religion as an Anthropological Category” (in
       Genealogies of Religion)
    Þ Newspaper article analysis 1 due online by 8AM.
07/30 Gifts (women married to god)
    -  Ramberg, Lucinda. 2014. Given to the Goddess: South Indian Devadasis and the Sexuality of
       Religion. Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. (selections)
                                                                                                      5


                                           Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                             Summer 2019
07/31 Pill (embodiment, kinship and bodies)
    -    Hamdy, S., & Nye, C. (2017). Lissa: A Story about Medical Promise, Friendship, and
         Revolution. University of Toronto Press.
         Make a list of all the concepts/ideas/patterns that you think of while you read. We will analyze the
         book together in class so come prepared to ask and answer questions.
08/01 Speculum (rituals and rites of passage)
What is ritual and why has it been such a central concern for anthropologists over the history of the
discipline? What is ‘liminality’ and why is this concept important for understanding cultural practices?
How have anthropologists theorized ritual in other cultures, and how can we analyze rituals that occur in
our own lives?
    -    Davis-Floyd, Robbie. “One Year: The Stages of the Pregnancy/Childbirth Rite of Passage” in
         Birth as an American Passage. Pp. 34-41.
08/02 Ethnographic Research Session
    Þ Fieldnotes 1 due online by midnight
Week IV | Modernity, Colonialism, and Culture
08/05 Visit to Blanton Museum Exhibition “Jeffrey Gibson: This Is the Day”
https://blantonmuseum.org/exhibition/jeffrey-gibson-this-is-the-day/
                 Assignments will be posted on canvas in preparation for the visit
08/06 Race and racism
    -    Smedley, Audrey; Smedley, Brian. 2011. “Dismantling the Folk Idea of Race: Transformations of
         an Ideology” In Race in North America: Origin and Evolution of Worldview. Routledge
08/07 Structural Violence
    -    Farmer, Paul. 2004. “An Anthropology of Structural Violence.” Current Anthropology, (45) 3:
         305-325
08/08 Multiculturalism
    -    Audra Simpson, 2014. Mohawk Interruptus. Durham: Duke University Press. Ch1
                                                                                                            6


                                          Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                        Summer 2019
08/09 Ethnographic Research Session
    Þ Podcast analysis due 08/10 online by midnight
Week V: Thinking Anthropologically
08/ 12 How does one study the global?
    -   Tsing, Anna. 2005. Introduction. In Friction: An Ethnography of Global Connection. Princeton:
        Princeton University Press.
08/ 13 Working Session
    -   No readings
08/ 14 Individual Presentations
08/ 15 Wrap-up: Thinking Anthropologically in Our Daily Lives
    -   Gomberg-Muñoz, Ruth. 2013. “2012 Public Anthropology Year in Review: Actually, Rick,
        Florida Could Use a Few More Anthropologists.” American Anthropologist 115(2): 286-296.
    -   Katherine Carroll, 2015. “What Do You Bring to the Fight? A Year in Iraq as an Embedded
        Social Scientist.” In Social Science Goes to War: The Human Terrain System in Iraq and
        Afghanistan, edited by Montgomery McFate and Janice Lawrence, 121-141. London: Hurst.
    Þ Fieldnotes 2 due online at 08:00AM
08/ 16 Ethnographic Research Session
08/ 19 Final Project Due Online
                                                                                                      7


                                            Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                               Summer 2019
                                      Course Policies and Procedures
Course readings and syllabus
I believe that a course and its instructor should be adaptable. This means that readings and course
activities may change to suite course developments, forward fruitful discussions, or to address student
interests. For this reason, the readings in this syllabus should be regarded as provisional. For any given
week, the readings will be available on Canvas.
While readings may, from time to time change, the course policies and procedures listed in this syllabus
will not. It is your responsibility to know them.
Cheating and Plagiarism
I expect you and encourage you to study with your peers because learning is a collaborative venture.
However, your papers, exams, and any other form of oral or written assignment should be the product of
your OWN work. It is equally important to learn how and when to use citations. Any ideas acquired from
other people should be acknowledged with proper citations.
In cases where any form of intellectual dishonesty is confirmed, at a minimum, you will fail the class and
may be subject to disciplinary procedures. See below for links to the University Policy on Academic
integrity.
Classroom and Conversations Etiquette
Anthropology is focused on understanding the diversity of human life. The readings, discussions and
assignments required in this class will address many controversial topics, including sexual behavior,
gender norms, religious beliefs and practices, and political views and affiliations. Many of these examples
covered will seem strange and possibly objectionable to you, just as your own way of life may seem
objectionable to many others around the world.
This class doesn’t require you to agree with, believe in, or choose to follow any particular way of life and
it does not ask you to be uncritical about social or cultural patterns and norms. However, you should not
pass judgment about a culture you know very little about. You are expected to approach alternative
perspectives with respect and to listen to and seek to understand unfamiliar points of view, and to have
others respect yours. Feel free to come and see the instructor at any point in the semester if you have any
concerns.
In short, please do your part to make our class productive. That means doing the following things:
     •   Respect your classmates and respect yourself. Being a good listener is the first step to becoming a
         good speaker, who can ignite and facilitate productive discussion. How you speak is as important
         as what you speak.
     •   You are required to turn off your phones or put them on silence.
     •   Using computers and other electric devices are not allowed in class. If you have special
         needs to take notes with these devices, please contact the instructor.
                                                                                                            8


                                           Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                              Summer 2019
Office hours
I will hold office hours in SAC 5.114 on Mondays 13:00—14:30 and Thursdays 10:00-11:00. If you can’t
come by during that time, please email me to schedule a meeting. Outside of my office hours and without
a prior schedule, please don’t drop by. I may be there, but I will be working on other things.
Office hours are a great opportunity to:
    •    Clarify any questions you have from lectures
    •    Talk about confusing parts of the reading
    •    Go over any questions you might have about course policies
    •    Talk about your academic interests
    •    Pursue further reading suggestions
    •    Etc.….
Please don’t hesitate to come to office hours – after all, I’m holding them for you!
Email
I’m available by email for any class-related questions you might have, and I prefer that you contact me via
email rather than canvas. However, I only reply to emails during weekdays and working hours. Please plan
accordingly.
When you send me an email, please include both a salutation (e.g., “Dear Kenza”) and a closing (e.g.,
“Thank you, Jane Doe”). Try to maintain a professional tone, and compose your email with the care you
would give to any other writing assignment.
Missed Classes
Attendance is mandatory, and more than two missed class will result in grade penalty. As a courtesy, if
you have to miss your class, please send a note explaining the reason to the instructor.
Late Submission of Assignments
Late submission of assignments will not receive any credit for the assignment. We all face various time
constraints, and learning to manage time is an important part of learning. However, you get a one-time
pass for 24 hours late submission for all assignments except the final ethnographic project without
providing reasons to the instructor. If you are using your pass, let the instructor know via email.
Writing Policy
While this is not a writing flag course, there are assignments that will require that you write and
communicate clearly. There are resources at UT to help you with your writing. See further below for
links.
Global Cultures Flag
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
                                                                                                          9


                                            Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                               Summer 2019
Attendance Policy
Attendance at all course and section meetings is required. There will be an attendance sheet available
when you come into class.
You are permitted two unexplained course absences. After that, each absence will reduce your overall
participation grade by 3.33% (i.e., by 1/3 of a letter grade). If you have a legitimate reason to miss class, it
is your responsibility to let me know by email before class. If you are absent on the day you are a course
leader, you will receive an F on that assignment.
Grade Cutoffs
I use the following cutoffs for grade assignments
Grade        Cutoff
A            94%                                             C+          77%
A-           90%                                             C           74%
B+           87%                                             C-          70%
B            84%                                             D           65%
B-           80%                                             F           <65%
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. We will develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the
course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed
on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
•    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
•    You have a right to respect.
•    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
•    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
•    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
•    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
     learning environment.
•    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
     isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
 With these rights come responsibilities:
•    You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
     teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
                                                                                                            10


                                           Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                               Summer 2019
•    You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
•    Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
     and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
•    You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
     excluded.
•    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
     standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender
pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
                               UNIVERSITY POLICIES & RESOURCES
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop (Links to an external site.)
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259
(voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/ (Links to an external
site.)
•    Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
•    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
•    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.”
                                                                                                             11


                                           Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                             Summer 2019
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external site.)
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning,
use these to help you succeed in your classes
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc (Links to an external site.)or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing.
The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-
reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/ (Links to an external site.)
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and
prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and
well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/ (Links to an external site.)
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/ (Links to an external site.)
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/ (Links to an external site.)
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/ (Links to an external site.)
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
                                       Important Safety Information
                                                                                                         12


                                            Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                               Summer 2019
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety (Links to an external site.)
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                           13
