                                    RELIGION AND FILM
                                        RS F346E (83275)
                                        AMS F321 (79150)
Course Description:
This course surveys representations of religious beliefs, practices, persons, and institutions in
popular film. Focusing on the media consumption of box office movies in the United
States, we will examine how religion is imagined in film and how that religious imagination
relates to social constructions of national, ethnic, racial, gender, and sexual identities.
Although we will briefly address some of the technical aspects of film production, our
primary concern will be to interpret the ways in which films portray religion against the
backdrop of American history. We will use the vehicle of the silver screen to reflect on how
a shared religious imagination has shaped the way we understand ourselves as Americans.
To note, this class has a writing flag, which means you will be required to submit three types
of written work for instructor evaluation and peer comment. With the goal of improving
writing skills and critical thinking, you will keep a reading response journal which you will
use for the basis of class discussion, you will submit two short essays for instructor
comments, and you will revise those essays based on those comments.
Course Goal:
By the end of this course, students should be able to think, discuss, and write critically about
film from a religious studies perspective. Students should be able to identify a range of
religious traditions as depicted in film, compare and contrast those depictions, and situate
them within a larger narrative of American religious history.
Prerequisites: None. This course assumes no prior knowledge of the subject.
Texts:
Readings are posted on Canvas. Films are on reserve in the Fine Arts Library. We will
discuss the readings and films in class. You will be responsible for reading materials and
viewing films before the class meeting that they are discussed. For weeks when we will
discuss more than one film, you will pick one of the films to watch ahead of time.
Canvas:
Course information, handouts, assignments, review sheets, etc. will be posted on the class
website on Canvas. To find the Canvas site, and go to http://canvas.utexas.edu/ and log in
with your EID and password.
                                                                                                1


Grading and Course Requirements:
Your grade for the course will be based on the total cumulative points from the following
assignments:
    1. Participation (20%) - Over the course of the semester, you will have the opportunity to
       participate in various class discussion exercises. Each exercise will count 2 points and
       will be graded pass/fail. You will need to successfully complete 10 class exercises for
       full credit on this assignment. Any additional participation exercises completed beyond
       the cumulative 20 points are counted as extra credit at up to 0.2 points per journal entry.
    2. Reading Journal (30%) – For each assigned reading, you will be given the option of
       writing a journal entry. Journal entries should briefly answer the reading guide questions
       posted on Canvas. This assignment requires you to keep a record of your responses to
       the readings, and helps you sharpen critical thinking and writing skills. Each entry counts
       up to 3 points. Reading journals should be submitted on Canvas by 10am the day of the
       given class in which they are assigned. Journal entries must directly answer the questions
       in your own words. You can quote from the assigned reading, but you must explain or
       use the quote to demonstrate your own analysis. You can submit as many journals as
       needed to receive full credit. However, you cannot submit journal entries after the class
       in which they are assigned. Any additional entries completed beyond the cumulative 30
       points are counted as extra credit at up to 0.3 points per journal entry.
    3. Film Reaction Journal (24%) – This assignment is designed to help you keep a record of
       your reactions to the films and help you participate in class discussion. In two double-
       spaced pages or less, you will describe a scene that engendered a strong reaction in you
       as a viewer. You should (a) briefly describe the scene (b) record your emotional reaction
       to it, and (c) explain why it seemed more powerful than other scenes in the movie. Each
       film journal entry counts up to 3 points. To get full credit for this component, you will
       need to successfully complete at least 8 journals. Film journals should be submitted on
       Canvas by the posted deadline, which typically is within 24 hours after the film
       screening.
    4. Final Essay (26%) – This assignment is designed to help you develop critical thinking
       and writing skills.
            a.  Essay Outline with Thesis Statement Due in Class Wednesday July 10 (3 points)
            b.  Peer Review in Class – Wednesday July 10 (2 points)
            c.  Essay Draft Due in Class – Thursday July 11 (3 points)
            d.  Peer Review in Class – Thursday July 11 (2 points)
            e.  Final Essay Due on Canvas by 5pm – Friday July 12 (16 points)
University of Texas Honor Code and Academic Integrity
                                                                                                 2


The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community. If you are uncertain about what constitutes plagiarism, or
other violations, please feel free to ask me. Students who violate the University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possible failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. The policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. For more information, you can talk with me or visit the Student Judicial
Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sis.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Accommodations: Documented Disability Statement
If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or
hard of hearing). Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss
the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should
remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                                                 3


                                           Course Schedule:
Cosmic Myth and Religious Origins
R June 6 - Course overview
In-class film screening The Tree of Life (Terrence Malick, 2011) (part 1)
F June 7
Readings: • The Reality of the Sacred,” in Pals, Nine Theories of Religion, 227-262.
In-class film screening The Tree of Life (Terrence Malick, 2011) (part 2)
M June 10
In-class film screening The Tree of Life (Terrence Malick, 2011) (part 3)
Readings: • S. Brent Plate, “Visualizing the Cosmos: Terrence Malick’s Tree of Life and Other
          Visions of Life in the Universe,” Journal of the American Academy of Religion 80 (June
          2012): 527-536.
Spiritual Travel and Religious Experience
T June 11
Readings: • Mircea Eliade, “The Sacred and the Profane,” in Olson, 161-168.
W June 12
In-class film screening The Darjeeling Limited (Wes Anderson, 2007) (part 1)
R June 13
In-class film screening The Darjeeling Limited (Wes Anderson, 2007) (part 2)
F June 14
In-class film screening The Darjeeling Limited (Wes Anderson, 2007) (part 3)
Racial Myth and White Nationalism
M June 17
Readings: • John Lyden, “To Commend or To Critique?: The Question of Religion and Film
          Studies,” Journal of Religion and Film Vol. 1 (No. 2) (October 1997).
In-class film screening Rebirth of a Nation (DJ Spooky 2008) (part 1)
T June 18
Readings: • Richard C. Salter, “The Birth of a Nation as American Myth,” The Journal of
          Religion and Film Vol. 8 (No. 2) (2004).
In-class film screening Rebirth of a Nation (DJ Spooky 2008) (part 2)
W June 19
                                                                                                 4


Readings: • Melvyn Stokes, “Transforming the American Movie Audience,” in D. W.
          Griffith’s the Birth of a Nation: A History of the Most Controversial Motion Picture of All Time
          (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 111-128.
In-class film screening Rebirth of a Nation (DJ Spooky 2008) (part 3)
Immigrant Religion and Racial Transcendence
R June 20
In-class film screening The Jazz Singer (Alan Crosland 1927) (part 1)
F June 21
• In-class film screening The Jazz Singer (Alan Crosland 1927) (part 2)
Readings: • Michael Rogin, “Chapter 4: Black Face, White Noise: The Jewish Jazz Singer
          Finds His Voice” in Blackface, White Noise: Jewish Immigrants in the Hollywood Melting Pot
          (Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1996), 73-120.
Racial Myth and Black Religion
M June 24
In-class film screening Hallelujah! (King Vidor, 1929) (selections)
Readings: • Judith Weisenfeld, “For Rent: `Cabin in the Sky': Race, Religion, and
          Representational Quagmires in American Film,” Semeia 74 (1996): 147-165.
T June 25
In-class film screening The Blood of Jesus (Spencer Williams, 1941) (selections)
Readings: • Thomas Cripps, Black Film As Genre, selections.
Secular Myth and Racial Transcendence
W June 26
In-class screening: O Brother, Where Art Thou? (Coen Bros., 2000).
R June 27
In-class screening: O Brother, Where Art Thou? (Coen Bros., 2000).
F June 28
Readings: • Chad Seales, “Race and Religion in O Brother, Where Art Thou?,” The Coen Brothers’
          Religion: Mythology, Morality and the American Landscape, Elijah Siegler, ed. (Baylor
          University Press, 2015).
The Racial Trickster
M July 1
In-class screening: Tropic Thunder (Ben Stiller, 2008).
T June 2
In-class screening: Tropic Thunder (Ben Stiller, 2008).
                                                                                                          5


W July 3
In-class screening: Tropic Thunder (Ben Stiller, 2008)
Readings: • Andrew Sargent, "How to Get Away with Blackface: Performances of Black
Masculinity in Tropic Thunder," The Journal of Popular Culture (Vol. 50, No. 6, 2017).
R July 4 - NO CLASS
The Areligious Antihero
F July 5
In-class screening: Inside Llewyn Davis (Ethan Coen, Joel Cohen, 2013) (part 1)
M July 8
In-class screening: Inside Llewyn Davis (Ethan Coen, Joel Cohen, 2013) (part 2)
T July 9
In-class screening: Inside Llewyn Davis (Ethan Coen, Joel Cohen, 2013) (part 3)
Readings: Jason Bivins, “Absence in Inside Llewyn Davis,” in The Coen Brothers’
          Religion: Mythology, Morality and the American Landscape, Elijah Siegler, ed. (Baylor
          University Press, 2015).
Final Essay
W July 10 – Essay Outline Due in Class for Peer Review
R July 11 – Essay Draft Due in Class for Peer Review
F July 12 - Final Essay Due on Canvas by 5pm
                                                                                                6
