                           THEUNIVERSITYOFTEXASATAUSTIN
           ACC 380K.2, Financial Accounting Standards and Analysis II
                                           Course Syllabus
                                            Spring 2020
Time and Location
    Mondays and Wednesdays from 9:30 - 11:00 a.m. in CBA 5.328 (unique no. 02460)
Instructor
    Mark Bradshaw, J.D., M.P.A., M.B.A.
    Of Counsel, Matheson, Keys & Kordzik PLLC (2008-Present)
    KPMG Professor in Residence (2007)
    Office: GSB.5.124E; Phone: 512-475-8852; E-mail: mark.bradshaw@mccombs.utexas.edu
    Office hours: Mondays 1:30 – 3:30 p.m. (and by appointment)
    Note: Please e-mail to make an appointment outside of office hours.
Teaching Assistant
    Yessenia Sosa
    E-mail: yesseniasosa@utexas.edu
    Office hours: As announced, following the return of graded cases.
    Yessenia will assist with the grading of cases and exams. After graded cases are returned,
    office hours will be scheduled. If you have grading or other questions concerning a case that
    has been returned, please make every effort to attend her scheduled office hours. Please bring
    all other questions (concerning course material, case preparation and exam-related
    matters) to my attention.
Canvas
    We will use the web-based Canvas software extensively. To access, follow the links from your
    MyUT Student Portal or the University website.
    I will use Canvas to post announcements, course materials and scores. Please check it
    frequently and before every class.
Enhancing the Enjoyment of this Course
    I prefer an informal classroom, as I have found such an environment to be more enjoyable and
    conducive to student attendance and participation. In my classes, silence is not golden – please
    begin or join the class discussion if you have a question, comment or response!
    Please also assist me in maintaining a positive, productive learning environment by showing
    courtesy and respect for your fellow students (and me). To that end, please make all
    reasonable efforts to be on time to class and exams – arriving late is distracting and
    disruptive to me and those around you.
    In my experience as an instructor and a student, use of electronic devices by students in class is
    also distracting and disruptive. Accordingly, the use of electronic devices is not permitted in
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                Page 1                                      1/15/2020


    this class. Please turn off and put away your cell phone, tablet, laptop and other electronic
    devices before class begins.
Required Course Materials
    Course files. I will provide any supplemental, non-textbook course materials, including
        PowerPoint slides, homework suggestions and solutions, cases, and in-class exercises, on
        Canvas. These materials do not substitute for class itself, so it is important to attend each
        class session. Issues and problems similar to those discussed in class are frequently tested
        on the midterm and final examinations.
   Advanced Accounting, Fourth Edition (4e), by Hamlen (Cambridge Business Publishers, 2019).
        Please note that the University Co-op carries a version of the text that has been customized for
        this course, by deleting chapters that we will not cover and adding a chapter on segment
        reporting (from another Cambridge text). Used versions of this customized text may be
        available, as I used it last semester. If you acquire the normal 4e version of the text, text content
        will be the same, but you will lack the chapter on segment reporting.
Course Objectives
Topics addressed in the course include:
1. Types of corporate investments and acquisitions and reasons for their use;
2. Accounting for and reporting investments and acquisitions;
3. Methods and procedures for preparing consolidated financial statements with wholly owned and
     less than wholly owned subsidiaries;
4. Variable interest entities;
5. Goodwill impairment;
6. Accounting for transfers of inventory, other assets and services among consolidated entities;
7. Transactions involving foreign currency and related derivatives and hedging;
8. Financial reporting for multinational companies;
9. The bankruptcy process;
10. Accounting for bankrupt and reorganized companies;
11. Partnership accounting;
12. Segment reporting; and
13. The nature and scope of transactional advisory services and the role of data analytics therein.
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                    Page 2                                          1/15/2020


Grading
         Course grades will be based on a 400-point scale, as follows:
                                                                          Points Possible
 Midterm examinations (3)                                                 200 (50%)
 Final examination                                                         80 (20%)
 Cases (3)                                                                100 (25%)
 Attendance and participation                                              20 (5%)
 Total possible points                                                    400
     I do not, prior to the semester, establish fixed point or percentage cut-offs regarding letter
     grades. I will make these determinations at the end of the course based on both absolute
     and relative performance considerations. Historically, my grade distribution in this course
     has been approximately 30-35% A, 15-25% A-/B+, 40-50% B, and the remainder B- and
     below. However, each class is different and this semester’s distribution may differ from the
     foregoing.
     As students are naturally curious about their standing during the semester, I will provide the
     class with an interim assessment of performance following the second midterm exam.
     However, any mid-semester indication of course performance is merely to assist you in
     evaluating your performance to date and achieving your goals in this course. It is not a
     guarantee or suggestion of percentages required to obtain particular final grades or that you
     will receive any particular grade in this course.
Each graded component is described below:
Examinations (three midterms with 200 total points available and a final exam with 80 points
available)
         Examinations will emphasize concepts and issues discussed in class and covered in
recommended homework. I will provide additional exam-related information prior to each exam.
         The final examination will emphasize material covered after the third midterm, but will also be
partially “cumulative” in that it will test certain topics relating to consolidation. I will identify relevant
chapters and concepts to study prior to the final exam.
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                      Page 3                                            1/15/2020


Cases (three with 100 total points available)
         To refine your writing skills and your ability to analyze and resolve more realistic and less
structured problems in Advanced Accounting, there will be three graded case exercises based on real-
world examples that have been adapted for teaching purposes. Each case will be allocated a maximum
of 40 points.
         Cases will be graded for breadth, depth and quality of analysis, quality of writing and
professional impression. It is important to be both complete and concise in your case analyses and to
carefully follow case announcements and instructions. Do not repeat or summarize the case facts,
except where needed to support a position. Your case analyses will be limited to four pages each and
must be in memorandum format (addressed to me), double-spaced, use a font no smaller than 10,
and have left and right margins of at least 1”.
         In the formative stage of a case assignment, you are welcome to discuss the case with other
members of this class, including on Canvas. However, you may not discuss cases with persons who
are not in this class. Moreover, copying from another student's solution is scholastic dishonesty,
and will be penalized severely. See "Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty" later in this syllabus for
clarification. Students should not use this policy to jointly or collaboratively prepare cases, but rather
to clarify case issues before preparing solutions independently.
         Assigned cases will be posted on our Canvas site. Due dates will be as set forth in the
“Anticipated Course Schedule” at the conclusion of this syllabus, unless changed per class
announcement.
         All cases will be due in class (hard copy) and online by class time on the due date, unless
otherwise announced. Discussion of cases is an important part of the course, so please be
prepared to discuss and defend your positions in class (see “Participation,” below).
         Certain cases may require research using the Codification. Access here:
http://aaahq.org/Research/FASB-GARS -
         Username - aaa75945
          Password – 7A9zAnW
Participation (20 points)
         Your active participation will make this course substantially more enjoyable (for you and me) and
significantly enhance the clarity of points discussed in class. Moreover, the ability to provide meaningful
input in a professional setting is a critical element of career success. In reviewing student performance
from past semesters, I observed a strong positive correlation between students’ final grades and their
level of attendance and participation in this course.
         Thus, to give you an additional incentive to attend and participate, 20 points will be based on my
genuine assessment of your cumulative in-class participation in this class and your attendance, if and when
taken. Although assessing participation at the conclusion of the course requires my subjective judgment, you
can trust me to do my best to form a fair assessment over the semester of your participation in the course.
           To earn significant participation credit, consistent, constructive classroom participation is
necessary. Furthermore, any student who is absent or materially late to class on 50% or more of the days
on which attendance is taken (as indicated by sign-in sheets I will circulate, and that are your responsibility
to complete if present) will receive an attendance and participation score of zero (out of 20) in the course.
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                       Page 4                                          1/15/2020


         In evaluating course performance, I reserve the right to take into account any violations of course
policies, such as consistent tardiness or arriving late for an exam, the use of electronic devices in class, or
any other activities that are distracting or disruptive.
See me for feedback!
         As in any course, it is common for some students’ early performance in the course to fall short of
their goals or expectations. Unfortunately, it is also common for many such students to not seek input or
assistance in a timely manner, leading to anxiety and diminished hopes for a particular grade.
As noted above, if at any point you have a concern about your performance in the course, please see me. I
will be happy to provide suggestions on how you might improve your performance over the remainder of the
course.
Homework
         Each chapter in the text is followed by numerous exercises and problems, certain of which
I will recommend that you complete outside of class. Some homework reinforces concepts
discussed in class, while other homework address matters (discussed in the text but) not
discussed in class. Homework may also provide alternate means of resolution, relative to
approaches and solutions discussed in class. Recommended homework will be posted on
Canvas at the beginning of each segment of the course. Solutions will be posted as we cover related
material in class.
         Homework is voluntary and will not be collected. Hence, homework does not technically count
as part of your course grade. However, in my experience with this and similar courses, it is very
important to complete the homework as we cover the related material in class. I strongly suggest
that you timely complete the suggested homework – initially, without relying on the solutions - and
not fall behind.
         I will consider the assigned homework when I prepare each examination, i.e., some exam
questions may be similar to recommended homework. I expect that students who put diligent effort
into the homework will do better on examinations. In past discussions with students who performed
poorly on midterm examinations, such students commonly reported falling behind or relying too
heavily on solutions when completing homework (or both), as significant factors.
Discussion Forum
         Along with other features of Canvas, I encourage you to take advantage of the discussion
forums for this course. Postings can relate to class discussions, homework problems, case issues, exam-
related matters, careers, current events or any other topics/issues that are relevant to this course. I
monitor the discussion forum periodically (and more frequently prior to exams and case due dates).
Ground rules for discussion forum:
 1. For questions or comments of general interest to the class (i.e., not personal matters), please
      use the discussion forums, not e-mail! I may ask you to post your e-mail query on a discussion
      forum so that your classmates will receive the benefit of your questions or insights and any responses
      thereto.
2. Be professional and courteous. Discussion forums of this type are used throughout the business
      world. You do not need to be overly formal, but forums such as this offer a good opportunity to
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                       Page 5                                           1/15/2020


      practice professional business communication. Please keep in mind that I will read your posts.
3. From time to time I will establish special forums within the discussion board for exams and cases.
      To maximize the usefulness of your posting, please use the most appropriate forum. For
      example, questions about homework problems in the days leading up to the first midterm exam
      should be posted in the “Midterm Exam 1 Forum.”
Canvas Downtimes and Course Requirements
         As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes and
unanticipated interruptions of the Canvas system. Notification of these disruptions will
be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for turning
in a case late or failing to timely complete other course requirements. As downtimes are
often unpredictable, I advise you to print out cases and any related instructions as soon
as they are available.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
         In general, medical emergencies, family emergencies and university-sponsored conflicts
are the only valid reasons for missing an examination or failing to turn in a case when due. I
may require some form of supporting documentation, such as a signed note from a physician or other
verification of the emergent situation or conflict and, if appropriate, I ask that you register your
situation with the Office of Student Emergency Services. At that point I will decide the best make-
up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a make-up exam, an extension, or
recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed component, depending on the circumstances. In the
case of a conflict due to a university-sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of
the conflict and before the examination date or assignment due date.
         An interview or office visit is not a valid reason to miss an examination or to fail to turn in a
case when due. If you anticipate a conflict with an exam or case due date for any reason (see
“Course Schedule” below), I urge you to make alternate arrangements for that activity or event in
the case of an exam, or to turn your case in to me (with a copy to our TA) via email prior to class.
Religious Holidays
          Religious holy days sometime conflict with class and examination schedules. By University
policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss an examination or an assignment in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Students with Disabilities
         Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are a qualified student with a disability, please
provide your accommodations letter as soon as practicable and see me to discuss any appropriate
accommodations that have been recommended for this course.
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                     Page 6                                         1/15/2020


Assistance with Case Writing
         I encourage you to use the University Writing Center (UWC), located in the
Learning Commons of the Perry Castaneda Library (PCL), to assist you in writing your
case analyses. The UWC offers constructive, expert help with writing, by appointment or
on a drop-in basis (although I suggest you make an appointment and not wait until the
“last minute”). The UWC works with students on both academic and non-academic
writing and their services are not just for writing with “problems.” Getting feedback from
an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help
students develop strategies to improve their writing. Further, the assistance they provide
is intended to foster independence - each student determines how to use the consultant’s
advice and the consultants are trained to help you in ways that preserve the integrity of
your work.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
         All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Electronic Class Roster and Student Privacy
         The University has requested that students be notified of their privacy rights in regard to
electronic class rosters:
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at the
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information
that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail
rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of
the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory
information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar.
Diversity and Inclusion
         It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be
well served by this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the
diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed
as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with
any concerns.
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                 Page 7                                            1/15/2020


Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Cases
Policy of the Department of Accounting
         The Department of Accounting has a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA
Program. It is available via the Department website at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-
Code-of-Ethics.aspx.
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Department's Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By
teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in
that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of
our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You
should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
         Integrity is a public good from which we all benefit and a trait of successful businesswomen
and men. I intend to conduct this course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only
achieve this, however, if you maintain an atmosphere of absolute ethical integrity in this course. If
in doubt, ask me!
Personal Policy on Working Together on Cases (applies only to this course)
         For this class, you may discuss issues related to assigned cases with other students in this class
(but not others). You may work in the formative stages of an assignment to clarify issues or exchange
ideas. However, I expect the final product of each collected assignment to reflect individual thought
and composition. You may not copy or paraphrase from others' draft or final solutions. Examples
intended to clarify this policy follow.
Examples of acceptable collaborative efforts (applies only to this course):
• A student is confused about an ambiguous aspect of a case, and asks another student what s/he
     thinks.
• Students ask questions and share helpful insights in class or on Canvas.
Examples of collaborative efforts that are unacceptable:
• Student A completes a case before student B. B asks A for (or A simply provides to B) A's
     solution. B bases his/her solution on A's solution, in whole or in part. Both A and B are guilty of
     scholastic dishonesty.
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                   Page 8                                         1/15/2020


• A student finds a source relevant to a case and copies extensively from it, without using quotation
      marks, indentation or other references to acknowledge the source. This example constitutes
      plagiarism, which is a clear case of scholastic dishonesty.
•    A student reviews a case solution (graded or ungraded) completed by another person
     in a prior semester.
• Any collaboration, breach of security or other cheating on a course examination.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation,
provided by the Office of Campus Safety and Security. More info at:
https://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
-- Occupants of buildings on the University campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
-- Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building.
-- Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.
-- In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
-- Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
-- Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
-- Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                   Page 9                                    1/15/2020


Anticipated Course Schedule
Assigned chapters are from the course text (see “Required Course Materials” above). Various other
materials will supplement the text and be added to our Canvas site from time to time.
IMPORTANT: Please complete each day's assigned reading before class. The readings provide
     background that is necessary for understanding classroom discussion.
 Date                    Topic                                                     Reading Assignment
 Jan.      22            Course introduction and overview
           27            Investments                                               Ch. 1
           29            Investments, continued/Mergers and acquisitions           Ch. 2
 Feb.       3            Mergers and acquisitions, continued
            5            Mergers and acquisitions, continued
           10            Mergers and acquisitions, continued/Case 1
                         due in class (and online)
           12            Consolidated financial statements (CFS) upon Ch. 3
                         acquisition
           17            CFS subsequent to acquisition                             Ch. 4
           19            Midterm Exam 1 – Chs. 1-3 (in class)
           24            CFS subsequent to acquisition, continued
           26            CFS with minority interests                               Ch. 5
 Mar.        2           CFS with minority interests, continued (no
                         class – Canvas audio lecture to be provided)
            4            CFS with intercompany transactions                        Ch. 6
            9            CFS with intercompany transactions, continued
            11           CFS with intercompany transactions,
                         continued/Case 2 due in class (and online)
          16/18          Spring Break
            23           Segment Reporting                                         New chapter in
                                                                                   customized text
           25            Midterm Exam 2 – Chs. 4-6 (in class)
           30            Guest Speaker (transactional advisory
                         services and data analytics)
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                Page 10


 Date            Topic                                      Reading Assignment
 Apr.    1       Foreign currency-denominated financial     Ch. 7
                 statements (multinational accounting)
         6       Consolidating foreign currency-denominated
                 financial statements
         8       Foreign currency transactions (FCT) and    Ch. 8
                 hedging
        13       FCT and hedging, continued/ Case 3 due in
                 class (and online)
        15       Partnerships                               Ch. 14
        20       Midterm Exam 3 – Segment Reporting and
                 Chs. 7-8 (in class)
        22       Partnerships, continued
        27       Bankruptcy and reorganization              Ch. 15
        29       Bankruptcy and reorganization, continued
 May     4       Bankruptcy and reorganization, continued
         6       Final Exam – Consolidation and Chs. 14-15
                 (in class)
ACC 380K.2
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                     Page 11
