                                       Black Political Thought
                  Prophecy, Pessimism, and Flight: Traditions of Black Politics
                                       AFR F372c, AMS F370
                                 University of Texas, Summer 2020
                                    M, T, W, T, F, 10:00- 11:30
               Professor Stephen Marshall, GWB 2.116c Office Hours: M 1- 3:30
                                stephenmarshall@austin.utexas.edu
Black political reflection is constituted by a distinctive and ongoing preoccupation with freedom.
Conceived and practiced in and/or against the political evils of slavery, segregation, racial terror,
and mass incarceration, these reflections rank among political theory’s most acute treatments of
freedom and domination. In this course, we shall examine some of the some of the most
important of these reflections and the multiple traditions of Black political thought they
represent. By doing so, this course seeks to provide a substantive engagement and critical
assessment of Black Political Thought; illuminate the particular substance and character of our
own conceptions of freedom and domination; and facilitate acquisition of conceptual tools
necessary for understanding the political legacies of slavery and empire within post-slavery
liberal political regimes like the U.S.
Books for Purchase
    James Baldwin; The Fire Next Time
    Toni Morrison; Home
    Additional readings will be posted on Canvas and are indicated on the syllabus with an
asterisk (*).
    COURSE REQUIREMENTS
    2 in class exams @ 20% (40%)
    4 in-class quizzes (30%) TBA
    Participation (30%)
*Class Participation: regular attendance and participation in class discussion is worth 30% of the
final grade. In class quizzes are worth 30%. Note that it is imperative to show up prepared to
discuss the readings and lectures to do well in this course.
Class Policies
1.      Class will begin promptly at 10:00 AM. Please make every effort to be on time.
2.      Please TURN OFF cell phones, alarms, etc. before coming to class.
3.      Please be courteous and respectful of all listeners and discussants. To that end,
        please refrain from all web browsing and laptop activity not directly related to class.
        Also, please respect that others’ views and opinions on various historical topics (and
        interpretations of historical and literary documents) may vary widely from your own.
        This is to be expected. Our subject matter concerns the essence of the United States and


        its institutions and features the dynamic debates that have formed the ideological
        frameworks for the US even before its formal inception. Recent political developments
        and ongoing contestations over belonging may intensify our conversations in ways that I
        hope are productive.
4.      Attendance is expected. I will not be taking attendance; however, it will not be
        possible to earn full credit on final exam questions without referring to material covered
        in lecture.
5.      I expect everyone to be available to take exams and turn in papers/exams on the dates
        indicated in the syllabus. In order to make-up an exam, you must have a compelling
        reason for missing it and you must let me know as far in advance as possible. By UT
        Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
        your observance of a religious holiday. The paper is due ON CANVAS by 11:59pm on
        the specified date. Papers turned in after that date will be discounted by one grading
        increment (from A to A-, from A- to B+, etc.). Late papers will be discounted one
        grading increment per each late day thereafter.
Academic Dishonesty includes but is not limited to cheating; plagiarism (the appropriation of
another’s work and unauthorized incorporation of that work in one’s own written work offered
for credit); and collusion (the unauthorized collaboration with another person in preparing
college work offered for credit). Also, it IS possible to plagiarize yourself, believe it or not. If
you plan to submit work of which a substantial portion was or will be submitted for credit in
another course (dual submission), please get my prior written authorization and that of the other
instructor as well. These acts will be subject to academic penalties.
Special Needs Policy: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who
requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities
area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations. More information can be found here:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/accommodations-and-services/
Reading Schedule
June 4                   Introduction
American Mastery and the Politics of Slavery
June 5                   Plantation Politics
                         Thomas Jefferson, Notes on the State of Virginia; Hamilton, Madison, and
                         Jay, Federalist Papers, Federalist 54.*
June 8           Edmund Morgan, An American Paradox.*
                         Orlando Patterson, Slavery as Social Death.*


June 9       Colored Cosmopolis
                    David Walker, Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World
                    http://docsouth.unc.edu/nc/walker/walker.html
June 10             David Walker, Appeal to the Colored Citizens of the World
                    http://docsouth.unc.edu/nc/walker/walker.html
June 11
       Viewing:     Twelve Years a Slave
June 12             Class Discussion
Prophetic Black Political Thought
June 15             Dawn of a New Republic
                    Frederick Douglass, What is the Fourth of July to the Slave?*
June 16             Baldwin’s Jeremiad
                    James Baldwin, The Fire Next Time pg.TBA
June 17             James Baldwin, The Fire Next Time pg.TBA
June 18             Achieving our Country
                    James Baldwin, The Fire Next Time pg.TBA
June 19             FIRST EXAM
The Politics of Black Nationalism
June 22      The Roots of Black Nationalism
             Martin Delany, The Condition, Elevation, Emigration, and Destiny of the Colored
             People of the United States, chapters 16-24.*
June 23      The Politics of Return
              Marcus Garvey, “Africa for the Africans”, “The Hidden Spirit of America”, “The
             Handwriting is on the Wall”, “The Negroes Greatest Enemy” in Selected Writings
             and Speeches of Marcus Garvey.*
June 24      The Politics of Black Power
             Kwame Ture & Charles V. Hamilton, Black Power, chapters 1, 2, 3.*


June 25      Black Power cont.
             Kwame Ture & Charles V. Hamilton, Black Power, chapters 4, 5, 6.*
June 26
       Viewing: Whose Streets
June 29      Class Discussion
The Politics of Afro Pessimism
June 30      Mass Incarceration and Institutions of Anti Blackness
             Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow,*
July 1       The Ontology of Blackness and AntiBlackness
             Frank B. Wilderson III, Red, White, and Black, , Ch. 1, p. 35-53.
July 2       Frank B. Wilderson III, Red, White, and Black, Ch. 2, p. 54-94.
July 3       Viewing: Get Out
The Politics of Black Fugitivity
July 6       Fugitive Ethics
             Toni Morrison, Home, (Vintage International, 2013) p?
July 7       The Politics of Flight
             Toni Morrison, Home, (Vintage International, 2013) p?
July 8       FINAL EXAM (In-class)
