                           THEUNIVERSITYOFTEXASATAUSTIN
                 ACC 383K.4, Fraud Examination (unique no. 02775)
                                           Course Syllabus
                                              Fall 2019
Time and Location:
    Mondays and Wednesdays from 8:00 – 9:30 a.m. in UTC 1.118
Instructor
    Mark Bradshaw, Lecturer, J.D., M.P.A., M.B.A.
    KPMG Professor in Residence (2007)
    Of Counsel, Matheson, Keys & Kordzik PLLC (2008-Present)
    Office: GSB.5.124E; Ph.: 512-475-8852; E-mail: mark.bradshaw@mccombs.utexas.edu
    Office hours: Mondays from 11:00 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. (and by appointment)
    Note: Please e-mail to arrange an appointment outside of office hours.
Teaching Assistant
    Name: Conner Mann
    E-mail: connermann@utexas.edu
    Office hours: As announced, following the return of graded cases.
     Conner will assist with the grading of cases and exams. After graded cases are returned,
    office hours will be scheduled. If you have grading or other questions concerning a returned
    case, please make every effort to attend his scheduled office hours. Please bring all other
    questions (concerning course material, case preparation and exam-related matters) to my
    attention.
Canvas
    We will use the web-based University of Texas at Austin Canvas software extensively. To
    access, follow the links from your MyUT Student Portal or the University website.
    I will use Canvas to post announcements, course materials, cases and scores. Please check it
    frequently and before every class.
Enhancing the Enjoyment of this Course
    I prefer an informal classroom, as I have found such an environment to be more enjoyable and
    conducive to student attendance and participation. In my class, silence is not golden – please
    join the discussion if you have a question, comment or response!
    Please assist me in maintaining a positive, productive learning environment by showing
    courtesy and respect for your fellow students (and me). To that end, please make all
    reasonable efforts to be on time to class and exams. Entering the classroom after class or an
    exam begins is distracting and disruptive to all.
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                Page 1


    In my experience as a professor and a student, the use of electronic devices in class is also
    distracting and disruptive. Thus, the use of electronic devices in class is not permitted, unless
    otherwise announced. Please turn off and put away your laptop, tablet, cell phone and other
    electronic devices before class begins.
    PowerPoint slides for text chapters will be available on Canvas before class. Although only a
    small portion of the PowerPoints will be covered in class – they are primarily to assist you with
    exam preparation - I recommend that you print out the slides (4 or 6 to a page) before each
    class and write your notes in the margins or space provided as we cover selected material.
Required Course Materials:
    Course files. As noted above, I will provide PowerPoint and other materials (including
        supplemental non-textbook readings) for the class. These materials will be available on
        Canvas. Posted materials do not substitute for class itself, so it is important to attend each
        class session.
    A Guide to Forensic Accounting Investigation, 2nd edition, by Skalak, Golden, Clayton & Pill
        (Wiley, 2011), available online at no charge via the UT Library (sign-in needed) at
        https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/doi/book/10.1002/9781119200048. If you
        would like a free hard copy of the 1st edition of the text, which has similar (but not the same)
        content as the 2nd edition, please pick one up in the Accounting Office (CBA 4M.202) during the
        first three weeks of class (or at my office thereafter).
Course Objectives
At the end of the semester, you will have a better understanding of the following:
1. The nature of fraud, its prevalence, and the growth of the fraud examination profession;
2. Differences between audits and fraud investigations;
3. Legal and independence obligations of the auditor and fraud examiner;
4. Fraud psychology and characteristics of frauds and fraudsters;
5. Financial reporting fraud, asset misappropriation, and bribery and corruption;
6. Fraud detection and investigation techniques;
7. The role of internal audit in fraud detection and deterrence;
8. Handling anonymous communications;
9. Interviewing skills;
10. Commencing and conducting a fraud investigation;
11. Challenges and issues faced in investigations;
12. Investigation reports;
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                     Page 2


13. Money laundering;
14. Corporate intelligence; and
15. Ponzi schemes.
Grading
        Course grades will be based on a 350-point scale, as follows:
                                                                    Points Possible
 Midterm examination                                                 100 (28.5%)
 Final examination                                                   100 (28.5%)
 Cases (3)                                                           100 (28.5%)
 Class attendance and participation                                    50 (14.5%)
 Total possible points                                              350
     I do not, prior to the semester, establish fixed point or percentage cut-offs regarding letter
     grades. I will make these determinations at the end of the semester based on both relative
     and absolute performance considerations. Historically, my grade distribution in this class
     has been approximately 35-40% A, 15-20% A-/B+, 35-50% B, with the remainder B- or
     below. However, each class is different and this semester’s distribution may vary from the
     foregoing.
Each graded component is described below:
Examinations (midterm and final each with 100 points available)
        Examinations will emphasize concepts and issues discussed in class and/or the PowerPoints,
although any material from assigned readings is "fair game" for testing. Exams typically contain
objective (multiple choice and true-false) questions to which approximately 75% of the total points are
allocated, with the remaining points allocated to short-answer and/or essay questions. I will provide
additional exam-related information and preparation guidance prior to each exam.
        The midterm examination will test material covered to that point in the course, as announced.
The final examination will cover the remainder of the material in the course (i.e., it will not be
“cumulative,” as such term is normally used). Of course, as some material in this course builds on
previous concepts, the final examination will be “cumulative” in the broad sense of that term.
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 3


Cases (three with 100 total points available)
         To refine your writing skills and your ability to deal with more realistic and less structured
problems in fraud examination, there will be three case exercises based on real-world examples and
scenarios that have been adapted for teaching purposes.
         Cases will be graded for breadth, depth and quality of analysis, quality of writing and
professional impression. Case questions may involve subjective issues for which there will be no single
“right answer” and multiple views can be defended. It is important to be both complete and concise in
your case analyses and to carefully follow case announcements and instructions. Do not repeat or
summarize the case facts, except where needed to support a position. Your case analyses will be
limited to four pages each and must be in memorandum format (addressed to me), double-spaced,
use a font no smaller than 10 and have left and right margins of at least 1”.
         In the formative stage of a case assignment, you are welcome to discuss the case with other
students in this class (but not others), including on Canvas. However, copying from another student's
draft or final solution is scholastic dishonesty, and will be penalized severely. See "Policy on
Scholastic Dishonesty" later in this syllabus for clarification. Students should not use this policy to
jointly prepare cases, but rather to clarify case issues before preparing solutions independently.
         Assigned cases will be posted on our Canvas site. Due dates will be as set forth in the
“Anticipated Course Schedule” at the conclusion of this syllabus, unless changed per class
announcement. Each case will be worth 30-40 points, as announced when each case is assigned.
         I will announce whether cases are to be submitted in class (hard copy), electronically via Canvas, or
both. We will discuss the first two cases in class. Discussion of cases is an important part of the
course, so please be prepared to discuss and defend your positions in class.
Class Attendance and Participation (50 points)
         Your attendance and active participation will make this course substantially more enjoyable (for
 you and me) and significantly enhance the clarity of points discussed in class. Moreover, the ability to
 provide meaningful input in a professional setting is a critical element of career success. To give you an
 added incentive to attend and participate, 50 points will be based on your attendance and my assessment of
 your cumulative participation and contribution in this class.
          To earn points for participation and attendance:
      • Ask and answer questions and offer insights in class discussions.
      • Actively participate in any discussions led by guest speakers.
      • Attend class consistently.
         To earn significant participation points, consistent, constructive classroom participation is
necessary. Assessing participation at the conclusion of the course requires my subjective judgment, but
you can trust me to do my best to form a fair assessment of your participation and contribution.
         Attendance will usually be taken on days when we have guest speakers or significant video
presentations, or do in-class group exercises (which videos and exercises could occur in any class and not be
previously announced), but may be taken any day in my discretion. Attendance is a material factor in
determining your overall attendance and participation score. Any student who is absent or materially late to
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                      Page 4


class on 50% or more of the days on which attendance is taken (as indicated by sign-in sheets I will
circulate, and that are your responsibility to complete if present) will receive an attendance and participation
score of zero in the course.
In evaluating course performance, I reserve the right to take into account any violations of course policies,
such as consistent tardiness or arriving late for an exam, the use of electronic devices in class, or any other
activities that are distracting or disruptive to the class.
Don’t be Shy!
          As in any course, it is common for some students’ early performance in the course to fall short of
their goals or expectations. Unfortunately, it is also common for many such students to not seek input or
assistance in a timely manner, leading to anxiety and diminished hopes for a particular grade.
          If at any point you have a concern about your performance in the course, please see me. I will be
happy to provide suggestions on how you might improve your performance.
Discussion Forums
          Along with other features of Canvas, I strongly encourage you to take advantage of the
discussion forums for this course. Postings can relate to class discussions, case issues, exam-related
questions, current events, career matters, or any other topics/issues that are relevant to this course. I
monitor the discussion board periodically, and more frequently approaching case due dates and exams.
Ground rules for Discussion Forums:
 1. For questions or comments of general interest to the class (i.e., non-personal matters), please
      use a discussion forum, not e-mail!
2. Be professional and courteous. You do not need to be overly formal, but forums such as this offer a
      good opportunity to practice professional business communication. Please keep in mind that I will
      read your posts.
3. I will establish special forums for each exam and case. To maximize the usefulness of your post,
     please use such forums for case- and exam-related questions. For example, questions about course
     material in the days leading up to the midterm exam should be posted in the “Midterm Exam
     Forum.”
Canvas downtimes and cases:
           As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well
as unanticipated interruptions of the Canvas system. Notification of these disruptions
will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for
turning in a case late or failing to complete other course requirements. As downtimes are
often unpredictable, I advise you to print out case materials as soon as they are
available.
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                         Page 5


Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
        In general, medical emergencies, family emergencies and university-sponsored conflicts are
the only valid reasons for missing an examination, or for the late submission of a case. In such
instances, I may require some form of supporting documentation, such as a signed note from a
physician or other verification of the emergent situation or conflict. If appropriate (an emergent
situation or serious illness), I ask that you register your situation with the Office of Student
Emergency Services. In the case of a conflict due to a university-sponsored event, you must notify me
as soon as you are aware of the conflict and before the examination date or assignment due date.
        At that point I will decide the best make-up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could
mean a make-up exam, an extension, or recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed component,
depending on the circumstances. Examinations or assignments that are late or missed for reasons
other than emergencies or university-sponsored conflicts will generally receive no credit.
        Please note that interviews and office visits are not valid reasons for missing an examination
or turning in a case late. If you anticipate a conflict with an exam (see “Anticipated Course Schedule”
below), I urge you to make alternate arrangements for that activity or event. If you are unable to attend
a class at which a case is due (in hard copy form), please turn in your case to me via email (with a copy
to our TA) prior to such class.
Religious Holidays
         Religious holy days sometime conflict with class and examination schedules. By University
policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss an examination or an assignment in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Students with Disabilities
         Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are a qualified student with a disability, please
provide your accommodations letter as soon as practicable and see me to discuss any appropriate
accommodations that have been recommended for this course.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
         All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                    Page 6


Electronic Class Roster and Student Privacy
         The University has requested that students be notified of their privacy rights in regard to
electronic class rosters:
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at the
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information
that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail
rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of
the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1.
Assistance with Case Writing
I encourage you to use the University Writing Center (UWC), located in the Learning
Commons of the Perry Castaneda Library (PCL), to assist you in writing your case
analyses. The UWC offers constructive, expert help with writing, by appointment or on a
drop-in basis (although I suggest you make an appointment and not wait until the “last
minute”). The UWC works with students on both academic and non-academic writing
and their services are not just for writing with “problems.” Getting feedback from an
informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help
students develop strategies to improve their writing. Further, the assistance they provide
is intended to foster independence - each student determines how to use the consultant’s
advice and the consultants are trained to help you in ways that preserve the integrity of
your work.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served
by this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that
students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource,
strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Cases
Policy of the Department of Accounting
         The Department of Accounting has a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA
Program. It is available via the Department website at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-
Code-of-Ethics.aspx.
         The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Department's Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By
teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described
in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the Statement on
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                 Page 7


Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of
our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You
should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
         Integrity is a public good from which we all benefit and a trait of successful businessmen and
women. I intend to conduct this course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only achieve
this, however, if you maintain absolute ethical integrity in this course. If in doubt, ask me!
Personal Policy on Working Together on Cases (applies only to this course)
         For this course, you may discuss issues related to assigned cases with other students in this
class (but not other persons). You may work in the formative stages of an assignment with others to
clarify issues or exchange ideas. However, the joint or collaborative preparation of case solutions is
not permitted and I expect the final product of each collected assignment to reflect individual
thought and composition. You may not copy or paraphrase from others' draft or final solutions.
Examples intended to clarify this policy follow.
Examples of acceptable collaborative efforts (applies only to this course):
• A student is confused about an ambiguous aspect of a case, and asks another student in the class
      what s/he thinks.
• Students ask questions and share helpful insights in class or on Canvas.
Examples of collaborative efforts that are unacceptable:
• Student A completes a draft or final case analysis before student B. B asks A for (or A otherwise
      provides to B) A's solution. B bases his/her solution on A's solution, in whole or in part. Both A
      and B are guilty of scholastic dishonesty.
• A student finds a source relevant to a case and copies extensively from it, without using quotation
      marks, indentation or other references to acknowledge the source. This example constitutes
      plagiarism, which is a clear case of scholastic dishonesty.
•     A student reviews a case solution (graded or ungraded) completed by another person
      in a prior semester.
• Any collaboration, breach of security or other cheating on a course examination.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation,
provided by the Office of Campus Safety and Security. More info at:
https://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                   Page 8


-- Occupants of buildings on the University campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
-- Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in
writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the
instruction of faculty or class instructors. Emergency evacuation routes and emergency
procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
-- Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
-- Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
-- Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                             Page 9


Anticipated Course Schedule
Assigned chapters are from the course text. Chapters initially listed below are from the 2nd edition,
while chapters noted parenthetically are from the 1st edition. Various other readings will
supplement the text and be added from time to time.
***An evening session with PwC will be scheduled based on PwC availability, in which PwC will
facilitate a forensic training simulation (which includes data analytics) for students. Date, time and
location TBA. As with guest speakers, attendance is mandatory. The course schedule provides relief
from two class sessions to compensate for this evening session, which is anticipated to last three hours
and is likely to begin at approximately 6:30 p.m.***
IMPORTANT: Please complete each day's assigned reading before class. The readings provide
      background that is necessary for understanding classroom discussion.
 Date                       Topic                                                   Reading Assignment
 Aug.       28              Course overview and introduction to fraud               Syllabus;
                            examination                                             Chs. 1, 29 (1, 27)
 Sept.       2              No class – Labor Day
              4             Comparing audits and fraud investigations               Chs. 3, 5 (2, 12)
              9             Guest speakers*
            11              Auditor responsibilities regarding fraud                Ch. 4 (5) and
                                                                                    supplemental readings
            16              Independence considerations for audit firms Ch. 11 (6)
                            and fraud examiners (catch up day)
            18              Fraud psychology: characteristics of frauds             Ch. 2 (3) and
                            and fraudsters                                          supplemental
                                                                                    readings
            23              Fraud red flags and detection techniques;               Ch. 13 (8)
                            Case 1 due
            25              Financial reporting fraud and asset                     Chs. 21, 22, 23 (4,
                            misappropriation schemes (in-class exercise) 10, 11)
            30              Public corruption -- guest speaker*
 Oct.         2             Midterm Exam (in class)
              7             Bribery and corruption - U.S. and U.K. laws Supplemental
                                                                                    readings
              9             Guest speaker*
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 10


            14              Role of internal audit in fraud detection,                   Ch. 6 (9)
                            deterrence and investigation – guest speaker*
           16               Commencement of an investigation:                            Chs. 8, 7, 14 (13, 9,
                            anonymous communications and other early 8) and supplemental
                            investigative matters                                        reading
           21               Conducting an investigation – guest
                            speakers*
           23               Case 2 due
           28               Privacy issues and other challenges in                       Chs. 9, 12 (17, 14)
                            international investigations                                 and supplemental
                                                                                         readings
           30               Data analytics and technology in
                            investigations – guest speaker*
 Nov.        4              Interviewing skills - guest speaker*                         Ch. 16 (18) and
                                                                                         supplemental reading
             6              Deception – guest speaker*
            11              Reporting on an investigation; Case 3 due                    Ch. 18 (23)
            13              Fraud trial – video presentation                             Chs. 10, 19, 20 (17,
                                                                                         22, 24)
            18              Guest speaker*
            20              Money laundering and corporate intelligence Ch. 15 (no 1st ed.
                                                                                         counterpart) and
                                                                                         supplemental
                                                                                         reading
            25              No class (due to evening session - TBA)
             27             No class -- Thanksgiving Break
 Dec.         2             Ponzi schemes - video presentation                           Ch. 24 (no 1st ed.
                                                                                         counterpart)
             4              No class (exam preparation)
             9              Final Exam (in class)
*Guest speaker(s) tentative as to availability on this date; if unable to attend or reschedules, topics and
assigned readings will shift earlier or later, as appropriate.
ACC 383K.4
FALL 2019
Mark L. Bradshaw                                      Page 11
