ARH 301
Introduction to Visual Art
The University of Texas at Austin
Fall 2019
Unique Number: 19365
T/TH, 5:00-6:30 pm
ART 1.110
Course Instructor
Nader Sayadi
Department of Art and Art History
College of Fine Arts
nsayadi@utexas.edu
Office hours: Tuesday 3:00-4:00 pm,
and by appointment
DFA 2.108
Course Description:
This is an introductory course in art and architectural history. The course is designed in two sections:
first, we will explore the art and built-environment of some of the prominent civilizations of the Old
World. In this section, we will learn how to look at objects and spaces from the past. Second, we will
be focused on a particular period, roughly between the 12 th to the 16th centuries, in the Islamic world
and will learn more in-depth some aspects of the art and architecture of this era.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should, therefore, expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Learning Objectives:
This course aims to help students to develop a series of skills in understanding and appreciation of art
and architecture. In order to accomplish this objective, this course situates major works of visual,
material culture, and built environment within the relevant historical and geographical contexts to
which they belonged. By taking this course, the students are expected to see the world of art from an
interpretive perspective. The course will provide a suitable platform for students to engage with a
glimpse of cultural diversity in the world we live today. Furthermore, this course offers an opportunity
to expand students' general knowledge of important non-western cultural contexts. One of the main
goals of this course is to practice how to see things, how to make relevant questions to those things, and
how to find possible answers. There are no prerequisites for this class.
                                                      1


Readings
All readings will be available on the course’s Canvas website. You should read all the assigned readings
before each class. There might be some additional readings for some weeks. Unless a reading is marked
as additional, it is required to be read. Although the additional readings are not mandatory, they are
highly recommended.
Grading Components and Scale:
Attendance                                           14.5% (29 days/0.5% each)
Participation                                        5.5%
Reading Responses                                    12% (12 rrs/1% each)
Assignments                                          18% (12 assignments/1.5% each)
Two Exams (see the time table below)                 30% (15% each)
Term Paper Assignment (see the time table below)     20%
93 to 100 %           A
90 to 92%             A-
87 to 89%             B+
83 to 86%             B
80 to 82%             B-
77 to 79%             C+
73 to 76%             C
70 to 72%             C-
60 to 69%             D
59% or less           F
     Reading Responses: You are required to write weekly reading response exercises. The readings
        will be available on Canvas. Each response should be 1-2 page long and should be delivered in
        Times New Roman 12 point font, 1-inch margins, pdf format via Canvas (designated folder) by
        12 PM on the day it is due. For your response, choose one idea from the readings assigned for a
        given day, and explain why you find it interesting, then relate that idea to a work of art or
        architecture. The latter need not be the subject of the reading. These need not be formal essays
        but must engage with the readings. These responses will help you with completing the research
        paper and the final exam.
     Assignments: You are required to do the weekly assignments. The instructions will be available
        on Canvas. It is your responsibility to read the instructions and occasionally read the
        supplementary readings to be able to do the assignment. Each assignment should be delivered in
                                                     2


      Times New Roman 12 point font, 1-inch margins, pdf format via Canvas (designated folder) by
      12 PM on the day it is due.
    Exams: There will be two exams. Each of them will include two or three essay questions on the
      themes and contents covered either in lectures or readings. Exams are not cumulative but there
      might be some works of art from the previous sections of the course for the sake of comparison.
    Term paper assignment: See the instructions posted on Canvas.
Submissions:
    All reading responses, assignments and your term paper are due in digital-copy on Canvas.
    The only acceptable format is pdf unless, I change this policy later during the semester. Save or
      print your doc file in pdf.
    Name your files as below:
      ◦ First nameLast name-assignment (or weekly reading response) number. No space between
          first and last names.
          ▪ an example of assignment 3:
               NaderSayadi-assignment03
          ▪ an example of reading responses from week 5:
               NaderSayadi-readings05
    Name your term paper file as below:
      ◦ First nameLast name-TermPaper.
          ▪ an example:
               NaderSayadi-TermPaper
    All assignments are due before the class based on the schedule given in the table below. Upload
      your files before coming to the class. If your assignment is late, you will get only half-credit.
    All assignments must be uploaded to Canvas. VERY IMPORTANT: Remember that you must
      upload each assignment in the folder dedicated to that week. If you accidentally upload your file
      in another folder, I may not find it and therefore you may get an F for it.
    If your file does not open, it will be considered as an F. Be sure that your files work before
      submission.
Attendance
    Attendance counts as 14.5% of your final grade and will be taken every class day. In the
      beginning of each class, there might be in-class worksheets available. You should complete
      these during the lecture and return them at the end of the class. Do not forget to write your name
      and the date on your sheets. If there is no worksheet for the day, there will be a sign-up sheet.
      Do not forget to write your name on the sign-up sheet at the beginnings of each class. In order
      to get easy access to either of these, do not be late to our class!
    Possible Exceptions to Late Policy:
      ◦ Official Department of Intercollegiate Athletics travel days are approved and do not take
          up your excused absences. HOWEVER, you must still inform me of your impending
          absences through the proper paperwork. You are still responsible for any assignments due. If
                                                    3


            travel days fall on any quizzes or tests in the course calendar of this syllabus, please notify
            the instructor so arrangements can be made in advance.
        ◦ If you have an illness, injury, personal or family emergency, your absence will be
            excused only with notification from the Student Emergency Services in the Office of the
            Dean of Students: familiarize yourself with their response to student needs and absences
            from class: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/students.php
        ◦ Religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
            least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. You will be
            given an opportunity to complete missed work.
Participation
    • Participation counts as 5.5% of your final grade. Students are expected to participation in
        discussions during the lectures as a vital part of the learning process in class. So, I urge you to
        be actively invovled in the discussions.
        ◦ If you are not comfortable to speak in front of class, you should let me know by September
            10. Please come talk to me after lectures, and/or during my office hours, as well as emailing
            me about this matter. If so, you might be allowed to make up for it by writing reports on
            lectures and submit them later instead of speaking in class. IMPORTANT: The permission,
            and also terms and conditions shall be discussed with the instructor individual students
            ahead of time.
Communication
     Please be sure that your email address is up-to-date as I will use Canvas as the primary method
        for delivering announcements to you outside of class time. You are responsible for checking
        your email regularly and keeping the university informed about changes to your e-mail
        address. You can find instructions for updating your e-mail address at
        http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
IMPORTANT DATES:
Oct 22: First exam
Nov 07: Term paper due
Dec 10: Second exam
Important note:
Regarding UT Campus Carry Policy: If you are a concealed carrier, I should neither hear about nor see
your gun in my classroom, in lecture, my office, or during our outdoor sessions if applicable. As per
policy, I am obligated to contact UTPD if you violate these guidelines.
Research and Editing Resources
                                                      4


    Relevant Libraries
       ◦ Architecture and Planning Library (BTL)
       ◦ Benson Latin American Library (LAC)
       ◦ Harry Ransom Center (HRC)
       ◦ Perry-Casteñeda Library (PCL)
    Image Sources (ALWAYS CITE!)
       ◦ UT Austin’s Image Databases: https://www.lib.utexas.edu/indexes/titles.php?type=Image
           %20Collections
       ◦ DASE
       ◦ ARTStor
       ◦ Oxford Art Online
    Study Resources
       ◦ Sanger Learning Center (SLC): https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc/study
       ◦ University Writing Center (UWC): http://uwc.utexas.edu
*Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Services for
Students with Disabilities, 471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. Please inform me privately,
well in advance of any exam with the official University paperwork, and we will accommodate your
needs.
University of Texas Honor Code and Academic Misconduct
    Academic Integrity
       ◦ The University’s Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin,
           I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” and a high
           standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. At a minimum,
           you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the
           utmost honesty, which requires you to:
       ◦ acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
       ◦ complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek assistance in
           preparing them;
       ◦ avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
       ◦ For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to
           Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities. Familiarize yourself
           with the Honor Code here: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
    Academic Dishonesty
       ◦ In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
           dishonesty - basically, all conduct that violates this standard, including any act designed to
           give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
                                                     5


        ◦ Cheating, Plagiarism, Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
        ◦ Falsifying Academic Records or Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to
            postpone an exam, obtain an extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned
            financial benefit)
        ◦ Multiple submissions (e.g., submitting the same written assignment for two courses without
            authorization)
        ◦ Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
        ◦ Please be aware that UT Austin policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
            Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
            penalties.           If         you        have         questions,          please         visit
            http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php.
        ◦ In addition to violations such as cheating on a test: 1) Be careful when composing your
            essays not to copy or paraphrase directly from the article without a citation; without a
            reference, such act can constitute plagiarism. 2) The assignments are not collaborative; all
            writing (essays, discussion comments, etc.) should reflect your ideas. If you have concerns
            over what constitutes scholastic honesty in writing, please contact the Undergraduate
            Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu
     TLDR; University standards for academic integrity pertain to materials downloaded from the
        Internet in addition to books, articles, and other students’ work. Your work should be your
        own, if it is not, it should be cited appropriately.
Campus Resources for Undergraduate Students Regarding Mental Health
There are myriad resources available to you if you should find yourself in distress, in need of
counselling, or a victim of assault, harassment, or hate speech. If you want to utilize these resources but
are confused about whom to contact, PLEASE feel free to ask me or contact the Office of the Dean
(deanofstudents@austin.utexas.edu or in person at SSB 4.400). Unfortunately, I cannot promise that I
will not disclose any information you share with me to these appropriate channels.
     Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
(512) 232-5050 (available 24/7 days, 365 days a year)
     Student Emergency Services
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/index.php
     UT Counseling and Mental Health Center Crisis Line:
(512) 471-2255; http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     Reporting Misconduct, Harassment, Assault, or Hate Speech:
        ◦ Against another UT Student:
                Student Judicial Services online referral form: (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/)
                Contact: Student Services          Building  (SSB)     4.104   or   (512)    471-2841    or
                sjs@austin.utexas.edu
         Against a UT Faculty/Staff Member:
                Office of the Dean: SSB 4.400; deanofstudents@austin.utexas.edu
                                                      6


Weekly schedule
Section I: Art and Architecture of the Ancient World
Week 1     L01     TH, Aug 29            Introduction/ Basics      -
Week 2     L02     T, Sep 03             Pre-history/ Mesopotamia  Assignment 01 due
           L03     TH, Sep 05            Pre-history/ Mesopotamia  Reading response 01 due
                                                                   [readings of Sep 03 & 05]
Week 3     L04     T, Sep 10             Ancient Egypt             Assignment 02 due
           L05     TH, Sep 12            Ancient Egypt             Reading response 02 due
                                                                   [readings of Sep 10 & 12]
Week 4     L06     T, Sep 17             Greek Art                 Assignment 03 due
           L07     TH, Sep 19            Greek Art                 Reading response 03 due
                                                                   [Readings of Sep 17 & 19]
Week 5     L08     T, Sep 24             Roman Art                 Assignment 04 due
           L09     TH, Sep 26            Roman Art                 Reading response 04 due
                                                                   [Readings of Sep 24 & 26]
Week 6     L10     T, Oct 01             Byzantine/Early Christian Assignment 05 due
                                         Art
           L11     TH, Oct 03            Byzantine/Early Christian Reading response 05 due
                                         Art                       [Readings of Oct 01 & 03]
Week 7     L12     T, Oct 08             Mesoamerica               Assignment 06 due
           L13     TH, Oct 10            Mesoamerica               Reading response 06 due
                                                                   [Readings of Oct 08 & 10]
Week 8     L14     T, Oct 15             Buddhist/Hindu Art        Assignment 07 due
           L15     TH, Oct 17            Buddhist/Hindu Art        Reading response 07 due
                                                                   [Readings of Oct 15 & 17]
Week 9     -       T, Oct 22             EXAM 1                    No assignmnet due
Section II: Art and Architecture of the Late Medieval and Early Modern Eras
Week 9     L16     TH, Oct 24            The Early Modern World    Reading response 08 due
                                         System, and intro to      [Readings of Oct 24]
                                         Islamic art and arch
Week 10 L17        T, Oct 29             Ilkhanids                 Assignment 08 due
           L18     TH, Oct 31            Timurids                  Reading response 09 due
                                                                   [Readings of Oct 29 & Oct 31]
Week 11 L19        T, Nov 05             Mamluks                   Assignment 09 due
           L20     TH, Nov 07            Ottomans                  No Reading response due
                                                                   (TERM PAPER due)
                                                    7


Week 12 L21 T, Nov 12  Ottomans             Reading response 10 due
                                            [Readings of Nov 05, 07, & 12]
        L22 TH, Nov 14 Safavids             Assignment 10 due
Week 13 L23 T, Nov 19  Safavids             Reading response 11 due
                                            [Readings of Nov 14 & 19]
        L24 TH, Nov 21 Mughals              Assignment 11 due
Week 14 L25 T, Nov 26  Mughals              Reading response 12 due
                                            [Readings of Nov 21 & 26]
        -   TH, Nov 28 THANKSGIVING         -
Week 15 L26 T, Dec 03  Southeastern Africa  Assignment 12 due
        L27 TH, Dec 05 Southeastern Africa  No assignment due
Week 16 -   T, Dec 10  EXAM 2 + Conclusions -
        -   TH, Dec 12 No Class             -
                                 8
