                              Introduction to Advertising Creativity
                                                 ADV 325, 05945
                                                    Spring 2020
Course Description: This course provides an overview of the inner workings of creative advertising agency. We will
employ hands-on activities centered around various methods for building an effective creative campaign. This
interactive training is built to give students a practical working knowledge of what goes inside an agency, utilize
creative thinking for business problem solving and craft a perspective of the creative landscape. Three lecture
hours a week for one semester. Prerequisite: Advertising 318J with a grade of at least B.
Class Meets: Monday, CMA 2.306, 4:00pm-7:00pm
Instructor: Sandra Rivera, MA
Pronouns: She/Her/Hers
Email: sandra.c.rivera@gmail.com
Office: BMC 4.380
Office Hours: By appointment: Wed 4:30-6:30pm
An Intro to the Intro.
What are the elements that make up advertising?
     •    Business.                                                   •   Future-technologies.
     •    Culture.                                                    •   Media.
     •    Anthropology.                                               •   And lots of play money once you start
     •    Data.                                                           playing with the big wigs
Advertising is an art, a science, an invention that stems from creativity. We will address how creativity
compliments the elements that surround advertising. Because one of the biggest myths within advertising is that
all you need is a big creative idea. NOPE! What you need is a big creative idea that solves the challenges of:
     •    Business.                                                   •   Media.
     •    Culture.                                                    •   Having lots of play money once you start
     •    Anthropology.                                                   playing with the big wigs.
     •    Data.
     •    Future-technologies.
Be aware, in this class you will have to roll-up your sleeves and deliver consistent: projects, creative assets and
decks. Why? Because no one gives you a multiple-choice quiz on Madison Avenue.
This class is intended for students who want an understanding of current creative trends and creative school of
thoughts that are impacting the world of advertising.


                            Introduction to Advertising Creativity
What will you learn: Objectives
At the end of the course students will accomplish the following:
     •   Obj. 1: Create Effective Campaigns/Programs
     •   Obj. 2: Explore Creative Approaches
     •   Obj. 3: Exercise Creative Quick Thinking
What to expect. What is expected.
 Mandatory Resources
     • Optional: Hey Whipple, Squeeze This - by Luke Sullivan 5th Edition
     •   Mandatory: The Hero and the Outlaw: Building Extraordinary Brands Through the Power of Archetypes -
         by Margaret Mark, Carol S. Pearson
     •   Index Cards
Course evaluation
There are no exams in this course, just assignments. All assignments will need to be turned in right before class, at
the latest.
Each assignment has been designed to prepare students for real-world scenarios.
     •   Group Homework Assignments: 15%
              o Objective 1; Objective 3
              o Description: A variety of activities that help build the elements of Project 1 and project 2.
                  Each assignment will have equal grading weight.
     •   Individual Homework Assignments: 20%
              o Objective 1; Objective 3
              o Description: A variety of activities that help build the elements of Project 1 and project 2.
                  Each assignment will have equal grading weight.
     •   Project 1: 15%
              o Objective 1, Objective 2; Objective 3
              o Description: Phase 2 of an existing campaign utilizing current insights based on various activities.
     •   Project 2: 20%
              o Objective 1, Objective 2; Objective 3
              o Description: An inclusivity program for a brand/event/company.


              •   Idea Journal 15%
                      o Objective 3
                      o Description: Mental threads, big ideas and oddities written in a journal.
              •   Participation: 15%
                       o Objective 2, Objective 3
                       o Description: Attendance, vocal participation and Group 1 group assessment
       Graduate Assistance
       Instructor: Lindsay Bouchacourt
       Pronouns: She/Her/Hers
       Email: lbouchacourt@utexas.edu
       GA Hours: Mondays 1:45pm -3:45pm
       Instructor: Na Yu
       Pronouns: She/Her/Hers
       Email: yuna96@utexas.edu
       GA Hours: Tuesday / Thursday 2:00pm – 3:00pm
        Course Outline
        All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
        https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
        Please be aware, changes within schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
        responsibility to note these changes when announced.
Week      Date    Day     Class Topic                             Out of Class Assignments          Assignments Due
1      Jan.       M       Intro to Advertising Creativity
       27th                                                   Read: Hey Whipple, Squeeze
                        Inside an Ad Agency: Functions and    This; Chapter 1-4
       Class 1          Roles
Unit 1: Selling an Idea
 2    Feb.       M                                            HWG1: Mind Maps
      3rd                     o    Creative Process
                              o    Making Connections         Read: Hey Whipple, Squeeze
       Class 2                o    Finding insights           This; Chapter 5-10
                              o    Research Methods


  Feb.    M                                    HWG2: Research Exercise
3 10TH          o    Research Methods (Cont)                               HWG1: Mind Maps
                o    Audiences/Persona         HW IND 1: Data Persona
  Class 3
  Feb.    M                                    HW IND 2: MadLib
4 17TH          o    UX Experience                                        HW IND 1: Data Persona
                o    Narrative Transportation  Read: Hey Whipple, Squeeze
  Class 4       o    Transmedia Storytelling   This; Chapter 11-15
                                               Read: Hero and the Outlaw;
                                               Part 1 and Part 6
  Feb.    M                                   HWG3: Archetypes            HWG2: Research Exercise
5 24TH          o    Branding / Archetypes
                o    Strategy Briefs          HWG4: Create a Brief        HW IND 2: MadLib
  Class 5
                                              HW IND 3: Backwards Brief
                                              Read: Hey Whipple, Squeeze
                                              This; Chapter 19
  March   M                                                               HWG3: Archetypes
6 2nd           o    Big Idea                 HW IND 4:2: Storyboard
                o    Copywriting
  Class 6       o    Art Direction            HWG5: Copy Roulette
  March   M                                                               HWG4: Create a Brief
7 9th           o    How to Present                                       HWG5: Copy Roulette
  Class 7                                                                 Idea Journals Due (1-30)
                                                                          March 12
8 March M   Spring Break
  16TH


Week        Date   Day   Class Topic                             Out of class activities   Assignments due
Unit 2: Selling Yourself
      March M                                                                              ALL PROJECT 1
9     23rd                   o     Group Presentations                                     PRESENTATIONS NEED TO BE
                                                                                           SUBMITTED
        Class 9
        March      M                                          HW IND 5: TikTok             HW IND 3: Backwards Brief
10      30th                 o    Inclusivity within                                       HW IND 4: Storyboard
                                  Advertising
        Class 10             o    Gender
                             o    Multi-Cultural
        April 6th M          o    Innovation and Technology   HW IND 6: Future Brief       HW IND 5: TikTok
11                           o    Group Presentations
        Class 11                  (if needed)
    April          M         o    That Advertising Life
12 13th                      o    Ethics
                             o    Mental Well-Being
       Class 12
         April   M                                                                         ALL PROJECT 2
13      20th                 o    Originality / Passion                                    PRESENTATIONS NEED TO BE
        Class 13                  Projects                                                 SUBMITTED
         April     M                                                                       HW IND 5: Future Brief
14      27th                 o    Recruitment
                             o    Portfolio Sequence                                       ALL PROJECT 2
        Class 14                                                                           PRESENTATIONS HAVE BEEN
                                                                                           GRADED (Peer Review)
                                                                                           Idea Journals Due (31-50)
        May 4th M
15                           o    Recap
       Class 15              o    Project Presentation


Rules and Regulation: Policies
Grading Policy
Grading will be as follow. There will be no curve, so don’t ask.
              Grade                     Range
              A                         93.5%     - 100%
              A-                        89.5%     - 93.49%
              B+                        86.5%     - 89.49%
              B                         83.5%     - 86.49%
              B-                        79.5%     - 83.49%
              C+                        76.5%     - 79.49%
              C                         73.5%     - 76.49%
              C-                        70%       - 73.49%
              D+                        66.5%     - 69.49%
              D                         59.4% - 66.49%
              F                         0 to 59.4
Statement on Learning Success
I want you to succeed in this class. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. The GA’s and I do not bite. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your
needs and the requirements of the course
Late assignment policy; Time-bank options
All assignments are due by the beginning of class. No late assignments. All late assignments will be automatically
docked ½ a letter grade. Each date late is ½ a letter grade docked. All emergency issues should be handled through
Student Emergency Services who will, in turn, contact me.
However, life happens. Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate
any unexpected, unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not have to
utilize this policy, but if you find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to
contact me as soon as possible to notify me that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy
one of two ways (please choose, and let me know):
• You may have a three-day grace period for one assignment, OR
• You may have 3 one-day extensions for three different assignments.


But if you do not communicate and you are late on an assignment – you get that zero. Don’t be late –
communicate.
YOU CAN NOT USE TIME BANK ON ANY GROUP PROJECTS OR PARTNERED ASSIGNMENTS.
Makeup policy:
Unless you have accommodations from the University, and we have worked it out together, there is no make-up
assignments or other special accommodations in general. If you are observing a religious holiday, you are still
responsible to turn any work prior to your holiday observance.
Absence Policy:
We are all adults; so, I anticipate for you to attend class. To assure that you are attending, attendance will be taken
in class (beginning or middle or end) through quick 5 -10 mins creative exercises. If you cannot attend due to other
events, your deadline for an excuse absence is 1 day prior to that corresponding class. You are responsible in
gathering assignments, lessons, changed information and meeting with your teams. Every student has 2 excused
absences if notified early. I get it, we all have a life.
Contest policy:
Students have 3 days (72 hours), regardless of holidays or the weekend, to contest a grade from when it is
announced. 72 hours. When contesting you are asking me to review your work once more and like any client, I
have the right to adjust the grade either way. You may win the account or lose the account, defend your work
wisely.
Academic Integrity Policy:
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you
have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while
you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
UT Policy
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441
TTY.
Title IX Reporting
        Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, s
        exual assault, sexual misconduct,dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
        institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and workingenvironment free from discrimi
        nation in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
             1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.


                    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced har
                    m or have become involved in a Title IXinvestigation.
               3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
         Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
         Reporters,” which means that they arerequired to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinato
         r. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX relatedincidents that are disclosed in wri
         ting, discussion, or one-on-
         one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a TitleIX related incident, be su
         re to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
         remedieswithout making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For m
         ore information about reporting options andresources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Of
         fice at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512- 471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Keep In Mind
UT Creative
The Department of Advertising at The University of Texas at Austin is home to a world-class program for aspiring
copywriters and art directors. Texas Creative graduates can be found working across the nation and around the
globe. The program is a competitive, rigorous, fun, challenging, portfolio-building sequence of classes that can
place you within the epic-center of culture. Near the end of the semester, you’ll be given information on how to
apply. Please note that your idea journal entries are taken into consideration as part of the application process.
Personal Pronouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class
rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name”
with the Gender and Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-
resources/). I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the
official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes early in
the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
This Course Has a Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in
an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial
writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have
the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share
with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your


needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Need a bit of support. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important
part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic
stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist
appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to prevent
high-risk behavior and harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
College of Communication Instructional Media Center: http://communication.utexas.edu/technology/imc/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
