               THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT LOS ANGELES
                 DEVELOPMENT PROCESS OF Film and Television
                                  RTF 348 73489
                       INSTRUCTOR: DIANA KEREW-SHAW
                                Phone: 213-503-1486
                             Email: Dkerew@charter.net
                      UTLA CENTER, BURBANK, CALIFORNIA
                              Semester Credit Hours: 3
                            9:00 AM – 1:15 PM Mondays
               Office Hours: 1:15 – 2:15 PM Mondays, UTLA Center
                            SUMMER SEMESTER 2019
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact Services for Students with Disabilities at
471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
COURSE OVERVIEW. This course is designed for students who seek insight
into the development process of material for film and television. The currency of
Hollywood is ideas. But it’s not enough to have good ideas. Those who succeed
know how to develop their vision, how to communicate it effectively to others,
and how to translate it into a form appropriate for the screen. We will look at the
basics of story structure, how to assess literary material, how to adapt a story,
the process of pitching, how to give script notes to writers, how to write
coverage, the development process at studios, networks and independent
production companies, and how story structure figures in the process of
producing, writing, directing and editing narrative film. In addition to lectures
and in-class analysis of both classic and current movies, there will be guest
speakers who will share their career paths and perspective on these creative
issues. Other topics will include genre conventions, acquisition of rights and how
to write a marketable presentation. Emphasis will be on generating ideas and
concepts. You can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete
substantial writing projects and receive feedback to help you improve your
writing. Developing good writing skills requires learning to edit and rewrite your
work. Therefore you will be asked to choose at least one assignment to revise
and resubmit, after receiving notes. You are free to revise as many assignments
as you wish. You will also have the opportunity to discuss the work of your
peers. A substantial portion of your grade will come from your written work.
                                                                                  1


LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, you will be able to:
    •  Analyze an existing piece of media using structure elements presented in
       class.
    •  Identify a piece of material from another medium that is suitable for
       adaptation and write coverage.
    •  Pitch a vision for a film based on that material.
    •  Create a written presentation describing how to adapt the material.
    •  Create constructive notes on an original screenplay that are designed for
       the eyes of the writer.
PLEASE NOTE: THIS IS NOT A SCREENWRITING COURSE, BUT IT IS A
WRITING COURSE. STUDENTS WILL BE GRADED ON GOOD WRITING
STYLE AND GRAMMAR, AS WELL AS MASTERY OF THE PRINCIPLES OF
DEVELOPMENT.
ASSIGNMENTS. Please do not give me printed material. Do not submit on
Canvas. Email it (double-spaced) to: Dkerew@charter.net. Make sure your
name appears on the title of the document and on the paper itself, as
well as on the covering letter. Please send as a .doc or .docx file.
Extensions of due dates will only be granted for extreme circumstances, such as
a death in the family or your own illness; please contact me via email before the
deadline so that we can discuss the issue.
GUEST SPEAKERS. Periodically guest speakers from the industry will appear to
offer their insights and personal experiences. Owing to their busy lives and
unpredictable schedules, there may be last minute changes in the schedule. You
will be required to research the guest speakers in advance of their appearances.
Each student will submit one question for the guest speaker to the Canvas
discussion board. Students will vote on their favorite questions. The ones with
the most votes will be posed to the speaker. You may also be asked to write a
brief report of the guests’ presentations. As in all writing exercises for this
course, grammar and writing style will count.
ABSENCES /TARDY. If you have a legitimate scheduling problem (this does
NOT include business lunches, family visits and screenings!) please contact me
prior to class via email or phone. An unexcused absence will result in a half-step
down in your class participation grade (e.g. A- becomes B+). Two unapproved
late entries or early exits will have the same effect. Two unexcused absences
will result in a half-step down in the overall course grade.
                                                                                 2


REQUIRED READING.
THE ART OF DRAMATIC WRITING, by Lajos Egri. Preface and Chapter 1,
“Premise.” This book is in the Public Domain and can be downloaded from the
web.
WOE IS I, by Patricia T. O’Connor. Students are required to purchase this book,
which is a modern guide to good grammar. It will become a lifelong reference
source for excellent writing skills.
In addition, there will be a selection of scripts and articles to be read and movies
to be watched.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL READING.
THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE by Strunk and White.                   The gold standard for
professional writers.
ARISTOTLE’S POETICS: the basics of all dramatic structure in Western art.
OTHELLO by William Shakespeare: the first modern villain.
HAMLET by William Shakespeare: the model of dramatic structure.
THE CONVERSATIONS by Michael Ondaatje: an analysis of modern films by
Walter Murch, the renowned film editor.
EASY RIDER, RAGING BULLS by Peter Biskind. The birth of the Hollywood Indie.
ADVANTURES IN THE SCREEN TRADE and WHAT LIES DID I TELL? Further
Adventures in the Screen Trade, by William Goldman: the smartest, wittiest film
writer working today shares his observations.
MONSTER: Living Off the Big Screen by Joan Didion and John Gregory Dunne.
The cautionary tale about the development of BROADCAST NEWS.
FINAL CUT by Steven Bach (the making of HEAVEN’S GATE). The best analysis
ever of how a movie turns into a disaster and brings down a studio.
GRADING OF WRITTEN REPORTS. You will be graded on the following
elements.
    •  Writing style: this includes grammar and syntax; it also looks at whether
       your writing is lively, entertaining and compelling.
                                                                                   3


    •   Creativity: Do you take risks? Are you original in your approach to the
        material, while remaining relevant and cohesive? Are your ideas novel and
        unique?
    •   Ability to understand and follow direction: have you written a paper that
        addresses the parameters of the assignment?
        Each element will count for 1/3 of the grade on each paper. Everyone is
        encouraged to rewrite and revise, in order to improve a grade or simply
        hone their work. Every student is required to revise at least one writing
        assignment over the course of the semester, although you are invited to
        rewrite as many as you wish. Failure to deliver at least one rewrite will
        result in a 10% penalty in your writing grade.
OFFICE HOURS. I will be in my office, at the Center, every Monday from 1:15
PM – 2:15 PM. Please feel free to stop in with your questions, or to schedule a
meeting if you need more time. I am also available at all times via email or
telephone.
The Moody College Writing Support Program. .This excellent resource has
offered to work with UTLA students. To make and appointment, go to:
http://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting. You’ll look for the coaches’
bios, click on the link at the end and book a 30-minute slot. When booking,
remember that there is a two-hour time difference between Austin and Los
Angeles. If none of the times work for you, please email Diana at
diana.dawson@austin.utexas.edu. Diana will be happy to work with you at any
stage of the writing process. If you have a draft, please email it to the coach
with whom you’ve booked the appointment as early as possible so she can
review it before you meet by Skype or FaceTime. Please be on time for the
appointment because they may have someone scheduled after you. If you’d like
to learn more about the resource, visit the web page.
CLASS PARTICIPATION. You will not excel in this course if you don’t
participate. Come with questions, read/screen the assigned material, research
the guest speakers, and do your best to be a contributing member of the class.
Merely showing up and occupying a chair will not translate into a good
grade.
You will be graded on:
    •   Quality of your questions/reports on guest speakers.
    •   Frequency of your participation in class discussion.
    •   Relevance of your comments.
                                                                                4


     •   Completion of all in-class assignments.
LAPTOPS IN CLASS ARE BANNED. So are cell phones, text-messaging, IPods and
all forms of outside communication.
GRADING.
Class Participation:                                                    25%.
         Each element listed above is worth 1/4 of this grade.
Written Assignment #1 (Film Analysis):                                  15%
Written Assignment #2 (Coverage):                                       15%
Oral Pitch:                                                             15%
Final Assignment (“Leave Behind”)                                       30%
Final grades for the course will be expressed in a plus/minus system, according
to the following chart:
A = 4.0
A-= 3.67
B+= 3.33
B = 3.0
B- = 2.67
C+=2.33
C = 2.0
C-= 1.67
D+=1.33
D = 1.0
D-=0.67
F= 0.0
RELIGddIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of an observance of a
religious holy day. If you will miss a class, assignment, test or project due to
observance of such a day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the work
within a reasonable period of time after the absence.
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE: “The core values of the University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility.
Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY. In accordance with these principles, any student
who is found to have cheated on an exam, plagiarized or engaged in other
dishonest course-related activities will be subject to disciplinary action and a
                                                                                                5


limited to: copying another’s work, procuring or purchasing papers on line or
from others and submitting them under one’s own name, paraphrasing another’s
work without attribution, reprinting work found on the internet under one’s own
name.
WEEKLY SCHEDULE (Subject to Change)
WEEK ONE: GETTING ACQUAINTED. PRINCIPLES OF STORY PART I.
(Monday, June 3)
Who are you? What do you expect from this course?
A discussion of personal responsibility and academic honesty.
The role of passion in making movies.
The essence of development: critical thought, writing skills, sales power, editorial
skills, interpersonal skills.
Learning the marketplace.
The development job ladder.
Story Structure: The basics.
What Aristotle Has to Teach Us.
Three Act Structure in Western Drama.
The Hero’s Journey.
Classic 7-step story structure.
Assigned Reading for discussion next week: Lajos Egri, “The Art of
Dramatic Writing:” Preface and Chapter 1, Premise. Available on the internet.
Jane Espenson: “The Secret to Selling Sci Fi.” Available in “Files,” on Canvas.
Viewing for discussion next week: THE GODFATHER, PART I.
Identify the 7 elements of Classic Story Structure. Define the Premise.
WEEK TWO: PRINCIPLES OF STORY STRUCTURE (PART II) (Monday,
June 10)
Discussion of Premise. Application to The Godfather.
Discussion of 7 classic story steps in The Godfather.
                                                                                  6


Expansion from 7 story steps to 22 story elements. Screening of specific scenes
to illustrate these concepts.
Application of structure to television series.
How characters grow: elements of change.
10 Rules for good writing.
Assignment: Pick two films to discuss: one that works for you and one that
doesn’t, and analyze based on the principles we have been discussing for the
past two weeks. DO NOT WRITE A “REVIEW” OF THE MOVIE. THIS
EXERCISE IS ABOUT STORY STRUCTURE AS YOU HAVE COME TO
UNDERSTAND IT. Do not discuss casting, cinematography or direction.
Minimum length: 500 words per film. Total length of paper: 1000 words. Due
Monday, June 17.
Assignment: Research next week’s speaker and develop 1 question for next
week’s presentation. Post questions to Canvas and vote on all questions posted
by your classmates. Questions with the most votes will be posed to the speaker.
This is a graded exercise: failure to post a question = a grade of F for
that week’s class participation.
Questions must be posted no later than Sunday, June 16.
WEEK THREE: GENRE CONVENTIONS. DEVELOPMENT FROM THE
WRITER/DIRECTOR’S POV. (Monday, June 17).
9 AM – 11 AM. A Discussion about genre as it applies to telling stories on film.
Discussion of controversial film devices and their role in the development
process: Narration, Voice Over, Flashback, Addresses to Camera
11:00 AM – 1:10 PM: A writer and director discuss their experiences in the
industry.
Movie analyses due today.
Viewing for discussion next week: ADAPTATION.
Other films under discussion: LA VIE EN ROSE, LAST KING OF SCOTLAND,
CLUELESS.
Assigned Reading for Next Week:
                                                                               7


        “Into the Wild,” discussion of adaptation process.
        “Fresh Story Ideas a Tough Sell in Hollywood”
        “Follow the Money.”
All articles are posted on Canvas in “Files.”
WEEK FOUR : ADAPTATION,                   FINDING       MATERIAL,       COVERAGE.
(Monday, June 24).
The pitfalls and rewards of re-imagining stories for the screen. What makes a
story adaptable? Why do some tales pop up again and again in different
incarnations? How far can you go?
Discussion of availability of material and rights issues. The option and purchase
process. Agents and packaging.
The trajectory of the modern bio pic. The role of the “true story” in the film
world.
The dominance of adaptation in the marketplace. To be screened: scenes from
ADAPTATION, illustrating the problems of successful adaptation.
The function of coverage in the studio/network system.
Assignment: Coverage of a text from another medium. Pick a piece of
published material you would like to adapt, either as a film or a television series.
This will be material you work with through the end of the course. No
screenplays or original ideas, please. Fiction, Biographies, Memoirs, non-fiction,
short stories, graphic novels, comic books, magazine articles and video games
are acceptable. Choose material that you could actually sell: it must be available
to option, marketable, and never have been filmed before. Write traditional
coverage, following studio format. For the remainder of the semester this will be
“your project.” In later weeks, we will discuss how to construct an oral pitch, and
how to depart from the original material in order to write a presentation of the
film/series that you envision. 1,500 words. Due Monday, June 30.
Samples posted on Canvas.
WEEK FIVE: THE ART OF THE PITCH, PART I. (Monday June 30).
We will begin by discussing various methods, styles and lengths of pitches. The
class will then divide into groups to practice pitching the project they have
selected for coverage and for the semester-end project. After the group sessions
are done the entire class will reconvene to discuss what they have discovered
about shaping their pitches.
                                                                                  8


Assignment: Read Article to help prepare for next week: “The Art of Pitching” by
Syd Field. Posted on Canvas.
Coverage due today.
WEEK SIX: THE ART OF THE PITCH, PART II. (Monday, July 8).
Students will be assigned numbers in random order for their presentation.
Length of pitch will be five minutes. There will be a critique and class discussion
regarding each pitch.
Assignment: Read 0riginal screenplay, “Karmically Correct.” Posted on Canvas.
Be prepared to discuss the script in class next week. Each student will be
required to comment CONSTRUCTIVELY on the script, as if speaking with the
writer.
Assignment: Read “Working with Writers,” posted on Canvas.
WEEK SEVEN: WORKING WITH WRITERS:                               HOW      TO    GIVE
CONSTRUCTIVE SCRIPT NOTES. (Monday, July 15).
A class discussion about how to motivate writers and move a project forward
despite significant problems. Includes an in-class writing assignment.
Discussion of notes created for “Karmically Correct.”
In-class writing assignment: Script Notes.
Assignment for discussion next week: Read article on Disney: How Pixar
Changed Disney Animation from Within. Posted on Canvas.
Final Exam Essay: a full written presentation/leave behind, based on the
project you chose in Week Four. THIS IS NOT A REPEAT OF THE SYNOPSIS, BUT
A FULLY REALIZED RESTRUCTURING OF THE MATERIAL AS YOU HAVE
IMAGINED IT FOR THE SCREEN. 2500 words. Due Monday, July 29. Sample
presentations are posted on Canvas.
WEEK EIGHT: STUDIO VISIT (Monday, July 22).
A guided VIP tour of the Disney lot. Details/parking instructions posted on
Canvas.
                                                                                    9


Discussion of reading material relating to Disney.
Assignment: Create a substantive question about Hollywood, the development
business and/or issues that have arisen for you during the semester. Be
prepared to give and receive feedback from the class and the instructor.
WEEK NINE: ROUND TABLE DISCUSSION (Monday, July 29).
Everything you wanted to know about the creative life in Hollywood, but were
afraid to ask, or you felt did not get answered.
Breakfast will be served.
FINAL PAPERS ARE DUE TODAY.
                                                                          10
