                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                                         African Queer Studies
                                       AFR372G & WGS 335-3
                                             30135 & 44770
                                               Fall 2019
Instructor: Dr. Traci-Ann Wint
Course Description:
This course will examine the development of African Queer Studies as the interdisciplinary study
of sexuality on the African continent and its impact on the academic and activist realm. We will
focus on intersectional feminist and queer theory and how these give us the tools to rethink issues
of oppression and domination in relationship to race, nation, sex, gender, and sexuality on the
African continent. Of particular interest will be LGBT Activism and the ways in which queer
Africans engage and shape their sexuality and create forms of belonging to their countries and
their communities.
Course Learning Objectives:
During this course students will learn to:
    1. Identify major themes of African Queer Studies
    2. Understand queer theory and its relationship to African lives and LGBT Activism
    3. Understand how queer theory informs and is informed by the everyday lives and
        experiences of queer African.
Core Required Texts:
Sokari Ekine and Hakina Abbas Queer African Reader
Zethu Matebeni Reclaiming Afrikan: Queer Perspectives on Sexual and Gender Identities
Required Texas will be available for purchase at The University Cooperative Bookstore 2246
Guadalupe St. (512) 476-7211
** All other texts will be available electronically via Canvas unless otherwise noted
Course Requirements:
Attendance and Participation (20% of grade)
Students are expected to attend every class session having completed all readings and assignments
and prepared to engage in discussion. This is a discussion-oriented class and student participation
is not only essential but also mandatory. Students should come to class with a copy of the reading
assignment (whether hard copy or electronic), as well as their notes and questions about the
material to add to the class discussion. In addition to class discussion we will often engage in in-
class activities. Please note well that attendance and participation is worth 20% of your final
grade. Late arrivals are disruptive to class and disrespectful to your classmates. I will not repeat
concepts, assignments, or instructions given during class. If you miss a class or are late, you are


responsible for ensuring that you find out what you missed. Your grade will be affected if you
have more than two absences during the semester.
Active and Respectful Learning Environment.
This is a discussion-based course, while I will do some lecturing, I expect that all students will
come to class having completed the reading assignments and equipped with notes and questions
ready for discussion. Students are required to bring all necessary materials to actively engage in
discussion with them each day. These include, but are not limited to, a hard or electronic copy of
the article/book(s) assigned for the day. In this course we will engage material that deal explicitly
with issues of race, sex, gender, and sexuality. If you agree to take this class, you have agreed to
respect our classroom space as a safe one. Racism, sexism, homophobia, transphobia, xenophobia,
classism, and ableism will not be tolerated. As this is a discussion-oriented class an open
environment of respect is essential. It is my hope that students will feel free to be candid and direct
in sharing their informed and grounded opinions, but I also expect that students will treat each
other with kindness, sensitivity, consideration and respect. My teaching philosophy is one of
active and engaged learning and democratized knowledge, this means that I acknowledge that we
all have something to learn from each other.
Quizzes (20% of grade)
Each week on Thursday, class will begin with a short (15 minute) quiz on the reading assignments
for the week. Unless otherwise noted, these will begin in the 4 th week of class. These quizzes are
designed to test whether or not you have understood the main concepts introduced by the authors.
10 of these quizzes will count toward your final grade.
Group Presentations (20% of grade)
In groups, students will be responsible for a short (15 minute) presentation to the class on a current
issue related to Queer Studies on the African continent (eg. Queer literature or a particular queer
author or artist, LGBT Activism in Uganda, Decriminalization in Mozambique etc.) that deals
with issues relevant to class but not necessarily covered in the readings. This is your opportunity
to share with the class an issue that is of particular interest to you. If you choose an issue covered
in the readings, be careful to ensure that your presentation adds something beyond that which has
been discussed by the authors. Students can consult African Queer websites, the readings, twitter,
Instagram or other online sources for ideas. On Thursdays beginning in the 6th week of class, the
group will present their findings to the class. Feel free to be creative in your presentations.
Paper Proposal (10%) and Final Paper/Project (30%)
The final for this class will be a 10-page research paper designed to assess students accumulated
application of knowledge. Students will develop their final paper/project proposal in consultation
with the professor. Mid-semester, students will submit a paper proposal to the professor for
approval. During the semester, further detail about the structure of this assignment will be posted
on Canvas. The due dates of both the paper proposal and final paper are listed in the syllabus.
Papers must be typed, double-spaced, 12-point Times New Roman font with 1-inch margins. A
hard copy of the final paper is due at the beginning of class on the final class day.
Points to letter grades for final grade:
A = 94-100 pts.         A- = 90-93 pts.          B+ = 87-89 pts


B = 84-86 pts.           B- = 80-83 pts.         C+ = 77-79 pts.
C = 74-76 pts.           C- = 70-73 pts.         D+ = 67-69 pts.
D = 64-66 pts.           D- = 60-63 pts.         F = 0-59 pts.
Course Communication
I will use Canvas announcements and email to be in touch regarding updates to assignments and
readings. Please note that it is the students’ responsibility to ensure that your email address is up to
date in the system.
Code of Academic Conduct
Academic integrity is central to the mission of the university. Each student is expected to turn in
work completed independently, except when assignments specifically authorize collaborative
effort. It is not acceptable to use the words or ideas of another person without proper
acknowledgement of that source. This means that you must use footnotes and quotation marks to
indicate the source of any phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or ideas found in published volumes, on
the Internet, or created by another student. For more information about the university’s
expectations for academic integrity, see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
 Accommodations
Care-givers: All exclusively breastfeeding babies are welcome in class as often as is necessary to
support the breastfeeding relationship. For older children and babies, I understand that minor
illnesses and unforeseen disruptions in childcare can often put parents in the position of having to
choose between missing class to stay home with a child and leaving him or her with someone you
or the child does not feel comfortable with. While this is not meant to be a long-term childcare
solution, it is acceptable to occasionally bring a child to class in order to cover these gaps in care.
In all cases where babies and children come to class, I ask that you sit close to the door in case
your little one needs special attention.
Students with Disabilities: Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
the Office of the Dean of Students at 512-471-6259 or 512-410-6644(video phone) as soon as
possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule please speak with me about possible accommodations.
Other Resources
University Writing Center: I strongly encourage the use of the University Writing Center in the
PCL. The UWC offers free, individualized, cross-disciplinary assistance with writing for any UT
undergraduate student, by appointment or drop-in.
UT Counselling and Mental Health Center: The Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and prevention services that facilitate
students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and well-being. Contact them
at 512-471-3515.


General Course Protocols:
•  Rules for respectful discussion will be followed. These rules will be established and agreed
   upon by everyone early in the semester. If a student violates these rules, that student will be
   counted as absent for the day.
•  Written assignments are due as indicated on the syllabus unless otherwise specified. Late
   assignments will not be accepted unless an acceptable excuse is provided before the due date.
•  The University of Texas rules and regulations regarding plagiarism and intellectual honesty
   will be enforced. For details please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
•  Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
   Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
   512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
                                 Schedule of Topics and Readings
              Schedule and readings may be adjusted by Professor Wint at any time
                                      African Queer Studies
Week 1:
Thu Aug 29     Introductions and logistics, No Reading
               Film: Exploring Queer Identity in South Africa
Week 2: Key Terms and Theoretical Debates
Tues Sept 3 African LGBTI Manifesto, African by Kevin Gaines, Queer Siobhan B.
               Somerville, How to Write About Africa
Thu Sept 5     Modern Chadan Reddy, “Gender” Judith Halberstam, “Sex” Bruce Burgett, African
               Studies/Queer Studies.
Week 3:
Tues Sept 10 Identity Carla Kaplan, The Invention of Homosexuality Jonathan Katz,
               Heterosexual Africa: An Introduction Marc Epprecht
Thu Sept 12 Film: Woubi Cheri
Week 4:
Tues Sept 17 Rethinking Sexualities in Africa: Introduction Signe Arnfred 7-29,
Thurs Sept 19    Quiz 1
                “Confronting the Politics of Non-Conforming Sexualities in Africa” Sylvia Tamale
Week 5:
Tues Sept 24 Foreword, Preface and Introduction to Rethinking Afrikan
               Resurrecting and Celebrating Area Scatter Unoma Azuah in Rethinking Afrikan
Thu Sept 26   Quiz 2
               “In Time and Space”, Queering Queer Africa, and How Not to Write about Queer
               South Africa all in Reclaiming Afrikan


Week 6: The Colonial Construction of Sexuality in Africa
Tues Oct 1    Archive and Method in Queer African Studies Keguro Macharia
              “Homosexuality is not un-African,” Al-Jazeera America, 26 April 2014.
Thus Oct 3    Quiz 3
              Group Presentation 1
              Uganda’s Emblem of Colonial Imported Homosexuality
              Re-righting the sexual body (Nigeria)
Week 7:
Tues Oct 8   Lost and Found in Translation Rudolf Gaudio
              Origins of Senegalese Homophobia Marc Epprecht
              Struggles and Strategies Marc Epprecht
Thurs Oct 10   Quiz 4
              Group Presentation 2
Week 8: Issues of Translation and Terminology
Tues Oct 15 Shifting Boundaries of Sexual Identities in Cape Town Andrew Tucker
Thu Oct 17    Quiz 5
              Group Presentation 3
Week 9: Queer Activism
Tues Oct 22 Queer African Reader Introduction and Ch 2
              Queer Agency in Kenya’s Digital Media
Thu Oct 24   Quiz 6
              Group Presentation 4
              Queer African Reader Ch 3 and 15
Week 10: Black Queer Identities
Tues Oct 29 Paper Proposal Due
              Queer African Reader Ch 6, 13, 20
Thu Oct 31    Quiz 7
              Group Presentation 5
Week 11: Queer Narrative and Pleasure
Tues Nov 5. The Revolutionist in Rethinking Afrikan
              Queer African Reader ch 7, 10, 29
Thu Nov 7     Quiz 8
              Film


Week 12 Queer Narrative
Tues Nov 12 Selections from Queer Africa: New and Collected Fiction
Thu Nov 14   Quiz 9
             Group Presentation 6
              Selections from Queer Africa: New and Collected Fiction
Week 13 Africa, Queerness and Religion
Tues Nov 19 Selections from Hijab: Unveiling Queer Muslim Lives
             Selections from Black Bull, Ancestors and Me: My Life as a Lesbian Sangoma
Thurs Nov 21 Quiz 10
             Group Presentation 7
Week 14
Tues Nov 26 Selections from Hijab: Unveiling Queer Muslim lives
Thu Nov 28 NO CLASS – Thanksgiving Holiday
Week 15
Tues Dec 3  This thing is sweet William Banks
Thurs Dec 5   Quiz 11
             Final Paper Due
