                                  E F328l British Novel in the Nineteenth Century
         Instructor: Christian, G.                                        Areas: F
         Unique #: 80620                                                  Flags: Writing
         Semester: Summer 2019                                            Restrictions:
         Cross-lists:                                                     Computer Instruction: N
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English rhetoric and writing.
Description: What is “British” about the British novel? What does the novel tell us about the way nineteenth-century Britons
perceived themselves and their place in Britain, the British Empire, and the world? Is there a difference between the nineteenth-
century “English” novel and its Scottish and Irish contemporaries? Among many other things, the nineteenth-century British novel
concerned itself with questions of identity: national and imperial, economic and social, religious and gender. People accustomed to
finding their predetermined place in the social order began to see themselves as part of larger groups with common
interests: owners and workers, landlords and tenants, men and women, Whigs and Tories. In this class we will test Disraeli’s famous
characterization of Victorian Britain as “Two Nations,” one wealthy and complacent, the other dispossessed and menacing, will be a
starting point for examining the Victorian novel’s quest to find a stable basis for personal and social identity in the midst of
bewildering change.
Texts: Sir Walter Scott, Guy Mannering; William Thackeray, Vanity Fair; Charles Dickens, Hard Times; Emily Brontë, Wuthering
Heights; George Eliot, The Mill on the Floss; Bram Stoker, Dracula.
Requirements:
     • Weekly reading. Reading assignments for each class are given in the detailed syllabus below. Please come to class
         prepared to discuss the readings assigned for that class period.
     • Regular participation in class discussions. Although there may be a few short lectures to provide relevant historical or
         cultural contexts for the reading, class discussion is the primary method of instruction and will be emphasized and
         encouraged.
     • Oral Presentation. Each student will present a brief 10-minute oral presentation on a selected journal article, book chapter,
         or other secondary source to be assigned.
     • Response Papers. Each student will write a brief (500-word) response essay to be turned in each Friday during the term.
         The paper must discuss an assigned topic from the week’s reading.
     • Essays. Each student will write three essays of approximately 5-7 pages during the term. Essays may be revised for a higher
         grade.
     • Mandatory attendance. Attendance is mandatory. If you must miss a class, please let me know in advance, if
         possible. You will still be responsible for the reading and getting notes from another student on what you missed.
Grading:
     • Class attendance and weekly response essays, 25%
     • Essays, 75% (25% each)
Writing Flag: This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an
academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and
receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more
assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Schedule:
June 6: Introduction


June 7: Walter Scott, Guy Mannering, Introduction-Chap. 12
June 10: Guy Mannering, Chap. 13-33
June 11: Guy Mannering, Chap. 34-44
June 12: Guy Mannering, Chap. 44-end
June 13: William Thackeray, Vanity Fair, Before the Curtain-Chap. 12
June 14: Vanity Fair, Chap. 13-25
June 17: Vanity Fair, Chap. 26-45
June 18: Vanity Fair, Chap. 46-60
June 19: Vanity Fair, Chap. 61-end
June 20: Charles Dickens, Hard Times, Chap. 1-12
June 21: Hard Times, 13-25
June 21: First essay due
June 24, Hard Times, 26-end
June 25: Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights, Chap. 1-14
June 26: Wuthering Heights, Chap. 15-25
June 27: Wuthering Heights, Chap. 25-end
June 28: George Eliot, The Mill on the Floss, Book I
July 1: The Mill on the Floss, Book II
July 1: 2nd Essay Due
July 2: The Mill on the Floss, Book III
July 3: The Mill on the Floss, Book IV
July 5: The Mill on the Floss, Book V
July 8: The Mill on the Floss, Books XI-VII
July 9: Bram Stoker, Dracula, Chap. 1-10
July 10: Dracula, Chap. 11-21
July 11: Dracula, Chap. 22-end
July 12: 3rd essay due
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone), or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.


Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work. For
additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Web Site:
Use of Canvas in Classes
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is created for each course.
(Student enrollments in each course are updated each evening.) Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate
and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys. You will be responsible for
checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. As with all computer systems, there are occasional
scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notiﬁcation of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page.
Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a signiﬁcant period of
time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date.
Canvas is available at canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday 8 am to 6
pm, so plan accordingly.
