                                                         Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
           Race and Inequality in Latin America
                                            (AFR 374E, # 30746)
                                             (LAS 322, # 39177)
                                                  Spring 2020
         Jose Clemente Orozco (Mexico, 1883 - 1949) – Cortez and la Malinche (Cortez and Malinche), 1934-26.
                               UT Art & Collection History Visual Resources Collection.
Flagged as:
    ü Global cultures
Dr. Marcelo Paixão – African and African Diaspora Studies Department (AADS) / Teresa
                             Lozano Long Institute of Latin American Studies (LLILAS)


                                                  Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
Race and Inequality in Latin America
A. Course Instructor and Contacts:
    ü Instructor: Dr. Marcelo Paixão
         E-mail: marcelopaixao@utexas.edu
         .
B. Objectives of the course
In the course “Race and Inequality in Latin America” we will study primordial issues on
ethnic and race relations in modern and contemporary Latin America. As such, the course is
divided in four topics:
    i)      Nation-building, eugenics, mestizaje and racial democracy;
    ii)     Patterns of race relation in Latin America;
    iii)    Coloniality, racial inequality and poverty;
    iv)     Multiculturalism and affirmative action.
The objective of the course is to allow the students to understand the most relevant theoretical
debates about patterns of race relations in Latin America, the similarities and difference across
the region and current topics for the study of the region, for example, multicultural
constitutions and affirmative actions.
Throughout the semester the students will need to upload four individual assignments
summarizing the readings and debates of a range of weeks. The students must upload the
assignments to Canvas on February 21; March 13, April 17, and May 6. Also, from February
3 on, in four different occasions, each student will be part of a group of leading discussants
that every Thursday will systematize and share emerging questions with the colleagues and
Instructor.
C. What are the classroom and university rules?
Classroom conduct. The Professor is committed to creating a class environment framed on
student participation, creativity, critical thinking, respect, and mutual understanding. The
Professor will also attempt to guarantee a respectful and cheerful space of work and
discussion. As such, it is expected that the students - and the Instructor as well - attend the
classes with a high spirit of tolerance, understanding and openness to hear divergent opinions
in the debate. Based on these principles, the Instructor encourages all the students to
participate in the classroom, exposing their ideas and doubts honestly, asking questions, and
expressing their opinions regarding each subject under discussion. Participation and
questioning will be very positively evaluated.
The Professor will not accept any kind of derogatory or inappropriate behavior directed to
classmates. Moreover, all forms of discrimination based on gender, sexual orientation, ethnic,
color, race, nationality, or any other kind of intolerance and mistreatment are strictly


                                                     Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
forbidden. The Instructor also asks the students to avoid napping or dozing off during the
classes.
                                       Delays and Attendance Rules
      At the beginning of each class the Instructor will open a sign-in sheet to be signed by each
      student. This list will be available for the next 10 minutes. If a student needs to leave class
      early, the Instructor must be informed at the beginning of class. If not, student attendance
      will be nullified.
      Attendance is mandatory and the absence must be justified. We consider an excusable
      absence the impossibility to attend the class for legal or health problems followed by
      medical or legal documentation signed by a lawyer of a physician within one week from
      the absence.
      The maximum number of unexcused absences is nine (9) classes. After this, the student will
      have a penalty of 1.5 point per absence in the final grade (see the grading method in section
      D). Students will automatically be failed if they have more than eighteen (16) unexcused
      absences.
      The exams, in-class assignments, and weekly assignment are mandatories. Deadlines and
      exam dates are no-negotiable. All assignments must be written in Times New Roman 12,
      double-spaced with one-inch margins and adhere to Chicago or MLA citation format. Late
      assignments will result in a 5 points deduction per day of delay in the grade.
Use of computer devices. By default, all devices must be placed offline, unless when we need to
access some online resources. It is not allowed to use the electronic devices to surf the web or
for any other purpose not strictly related to class learning and assignments. It is strictly
forbidden the use in the classroom of cell phones, apps, or electronic devices that can produce
noises, divert attention or disturb in any way the lecture. In the case of unauthorized use of
any device, students will be invited to leave the classroom, and their attendance will be
considered as an unexcused absence.
Policy on scholastic dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such fraud harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For
further information, please visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity
website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
Students with disabilities. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
the Services for Students with Disabilities website: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
and/or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to- register-with- ssd/


                                                 Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
Religious holy days. Students who miss a class or examination, due to this reason will be given
an opportunity to complete the missed assignment within a reasonable time after the absence,
provided that they have adequately notified each instructor. Students must inform the
Instructor at least fourteen days prior to the class when they will be absent to observe their
religious duties.
Unauthorized attendance. Except previously and expressed allowed by the Instructor, no one
else but the Instructor, and the enrolled students in the course “Measuring Racial Inequality”
is authorized to stay in the classroom during the classes. In case of any unauthorized presence,
this person will be invited to leave, and if they do not do so, the class immediately will be
suspended.
D. Grade Method
D.1. Assigment Weights
 ü       1st Assignment (20% of the total);
 ü      2nd Assignment (20% of the total);
 ü      3rd Assignment (20% of the total);
 ü      4th Assignment (20% of the total);
 ü      Leading Discussant (20% of the total, score average of four participations).
D.2. Numeric and Correspondent Letter Grading:
Approving:
A = 94-100 / A- = 90-93 / B+ = 87-89 / B = 84-86 / B- = 80-83 / C+ = 77-79 / C = 74-76 / C-                   =
70-73 /
Failing:
D+ = 67-69 / D = 64-66 / D- = 60-63 / F = 00-60
We will also use this numeric grade to score each assignment: In-Class Assignment, Weekly
Assignment, and Exams.
E. Course schedule
(the complete literature of the course will be upload to Canvas by Monday, Jan. 27)
Unit 1. Nation-Building Mestizaje, and Race Democracy
Week 1 – January 22: Professor, course Syllabus, and student’s introduction.
Readings:
    ü Syllabus of the Course (available on Canvas)
Week 2 – January 27 and 29: Eugenics and Whitening in Latin America.
Readings:


                                               Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
   ü Stepan, Nancy. 1991. The Hour of Eugenics: Race, Nation, and Gender in Latin
        America. New York: Cornell University Press, (Chapter 2: Eugenics in Latin America:
        its origin and institutional ecology pp – 35-62);
   ü Skidmore, Thomas, 1974/1998. Black into White: Race and Nationality in Brazilian
        Thought. Durham / London: Duke University Press (Chapter 4: The National Image
        and the Search for Immigrants, pp. 124-144)
Week 3 – February 3 and 5: Cosmic Race and Indigenism.
Readings:
Week 4 – February 10 and 12: Racial Democracy in Brazil.
Readings:
Week 5 – February 17 and 19: Comparative Perspectives in Ethnic-Race Relations in Latin
America.
Readings:
    February 21: 1st Assignment Due
Unit 2. Patterns of Race Relations in Latin America
Week 6 – February 24 and 26: Brazil and Mexico.
Readings:
Week 7 – March 2 and 4: Colombia and Argentina.
Readings:
Week 8 – March 9 and 11: Dominican Republic and Panama.
Readings:
    March 13: 2nd Assignment Due
Week 9 - Spring Break (March 16 and 18 no class)
Unit 3. Ethnic-Race Inequality and Coloniality.
Week 10 – March 23 and 25: Economic Dependence and World System.
Readings:
Week 11 – March 30 and April 1st: Socioeconomic Reality of Indigenous and Afro-descendants.
Readings
Week 12 – April 6 and 8: Coloniality Power and Epistemology.
Readings


                                              Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
Week 13 – April 13 and 15: Race, Ethnicity, and Gender.
Readings
    April 17: 3rd Assignment Due
Unit 3. Multiculturalism and Affirmative Actions.
Week 14 – April 20 and 22: Indigenous and Black Mobilization.
Readings:
Week 15 – April 27 and 29: Multiculturalism and Affirmative Actions.
Readings:
Week 16 – May 4 and 6: Census and Ethnic-Racial Classifications.
Readings:
    May 6: 4th Assignment Due
