                            THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                       DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
                            FIRST YEAR SPANISH — SUMMER 2020
                                     SPN 601D—Unique# 82700
This course will be taught synchronously online via Zoom at the time indicated on the Registrar’s
course schedule. Attendance is required. Please make sure you have access to reliable internet so you
can attend class sessions. Please locate your Zoom room within your Canvas course.
NOTE: This class is part of a 3-semester language sequence designed specifically for non
native and non-heritage speakers of Spanish. If you were exposed to Spanish on a regular
basis while growing up, you should be enrolled in our 2-semester language sequence
(SPN 604 & SPN 612).
  •   This document contains important information and represents an agreement between
      the Department of Spanish and Portuguese and its students.
  •   You are responsible for knowing all of the information contained in this document.
  •   You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
  1. OBJECTIVES OF THE LANGUAGE PROGRAM
  The objective of the Spanish language program addresses the basic tenet of a liberal arts
  education: the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language in
  society. This objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic
  internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.
  The Spanish language program focuses on the development of multilingual literacies through the
  analysis and use of Spanish as a second language. The program focuses on the development of
  three major types of competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):
      1. linguistic competence (Spanish phonetics / phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon,
          discourse, etc.)
      2. communication / interactional competence (sociocultural uses of the language,
          pragmatics, cultural background / perspectives)
      3. metalinguistic competence (language as a conceptual, symbolic system)
  2. COURSE DESCRIPTION AND GOALS
  SPN 601D is the first course in the University of Texas lower-division Spanish Program. The
  course focuses on developing speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in Spanish, while
  building vocabulary, learning basic rules and terminology of Spanish grammar, and gaining a
  better understanding of Hispanic cultures in order to communicate in an accurate, effective, and
  informed manner within a variety of sociocultural situations.
                                                                                                     1


By the end of the semester, you should be able to do the following in Spanish:
a.      Understand the main ideas in a variety of discourse genres (e.g. radio advertisements,
        presentations, newspaper articles).
b.      Use reading strategies to search for specific information in longer texts.
c.      Participate in unrehearsed conversations about familiar topics
d.      Produce written discourse at the paragraph level (e.g. letters, emails, essays), paying
        attention to cohesion, organization and register.
e.      Analyze authentic discourse and hypothesize about unfamiliar grammar and vocabulary.
f.      Recognize basic instances of dialectical/regional variation.
g.      Discuss basic features of Spanish, using appropriate terminology.
3. PLACEMENT / PREREQUISITES
This course is designed for beginning-level students or students who have never studied Spanish.
If you are a heritage speaker of Spanish (if you grew up speaking Spanish with family), consider
enrolling in SPN 604, the first semester in our heritage track. If you have questions regarding
placement, please contact Lia Haisley, the Academic Advising Coordinator, via email at
liah@austin.utexas.edu. Keep in mind grade of C or higher it this course is required in order to
continue to SPN 610D. Students with pass/fail status cannot go to the next level.
4. CONTACT INFORMATION
Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any questions or problems you may have relating
to the class. If you feel that the issue has not been satisfactorily addressed by your instructor, you
may refer the matter to the Director of the Language Program.
  Course Instructor
  Name: Thomas Leslie
  Email: thomas.leslie@utexas.edu
  Office hours: By appointment
  Course TA
  Name: Ryan Morrison
  Email: ryanbmorrison@utexas.edu
  Office hours: TWR 9:00am-10:00
  Program Director
  Name: Dr. Melissa Murphy
  Email: mmurphy@mail.utexas.edu
5. COURSE TEXTBOOK AND RESOURCES
                                                                                                     2


Required Textbook and access code: Conectándonos (Salaberry, Barrette, Fernandez-Garcia
and Nevárez) 3rd edition. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt, 2015 [at the Co-op]
https://he.kendallhunt.com/salaberry
ISBN: 9781524991555
Note: If you are retaking this course, you do not need to purchase a new textbook/access code.
Instead, reach out to the textbook web support for a new, complimentary access code. Your old
access code will be deactivated. If you do NOT deactivate your previous code, you may
experience technical issues with the online activities.
Talk Abroad: TalkAbroad.com is a website that permits you to video chat with native speakers
of Spanish who are trained in helping you to converse. A 30-minute conversation costs $15, and
one of these is required during the summer session.
6. ATTENDANCE POLICY
A. Attendance is required at all classes and is checked daily.
B. All absences count (except religious holidays, documented jury duty, documented military
duty, and university-sponsored activities). Your instructor will take attendance at the beginning
of each 50-minute session (i.e. twice per day). Up to eight 50-minute session absences will not
result in a reduction of your final grade because of the absence itself. However, each absence
during a 50-minute session beyond eight, regardless of the reason for the absence, will carry a
1% penalty toward your final grade. Note: Arriving more than 20 minutes late counts as an
absence. 4 tardies (arriving to class at least 5 minutes late) equal one absence.
7. ZOOM ETIQUETTE
    •    Be respectful and considerate of others, just as you would in an in-person setting.
    •    Keep your microphone muted unless you ask a question, or you are called on to answer a
         question.
    •    Have your video camera on at all times (momentarily turning off your camera is fine,
         though). Having your camera on is necessary to foster a collaborative online environment
         among all of us. It also makes interaction easier during breakout room activities, and this
         will contribute to a better learning experience for you and your classmates. If for
         whatever reason you anticipate not being able to meet this requirement, please
         inform me by email no later than the 3rd class meeting (June 8th), no questions
         asked.
             o Keep your background appropriate. This includes virtual backgrounds.
    •    There are two ways to ask a question during whole class discussions. You can raise your
         virtual hand using the clapping hands reaction or type your question into the chat window
         (Ryan will be the one monitoring the chat window).
    •    Make sure your Zoom profile name matches your actual name.
7. POLICY ON MISSED WORK
                                                                                                    3


 Reason for            Procedures
 absence
 Religious              •   Notify your instructor via email during the first week of class.
 holiday                •   For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will
                            receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
 Jury duty                  instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.
                        •   For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.
 Military duty          •   At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
                            upon return.
 University-
 sponsored
 activity
 Documented             •   Notify your instructor immediately via email.
 illness or             •   No make-ups are permitted.
 emergency              •   Fill out and submit to your instructor a “Request for Grade Averaging
                            Form” (posted on Canvas), along with the appropriate documentation
                            within one week of your return to class. Your instructor will
                            determine whether or not you may receive grade averaging for your
                            missed assessment(s).
8. GRADING SCALE
There is no curve or extra credit available in this course. If your final average is 89.9, your
course grade will be a B+. Do not expect to receive a passing grade simply because you complete
all requirements. To receive an “A”, all or most of your work must be excellent. A “B” indicates
that your work is very good. A “C” means that your work is adequate and you may continue with
the next course. Please keep in mind that a grade of C or higher in this course is required in
order to continue in Spanish. A grade of C- or Pass is not sufficient to go to the next level.
Final letter grades are assigned according to the following scale:
  93-100 A 83-86.9 B             73-76.9 C       63-66.9 D
 90-92.9 A- 80-82.9 B- 70-72.9 C- 60-62.9 D-
 87-89.9 B+ 77-79.9 C+ 67-69.9 D+ 0-59.9 F
9. GRADE DISTRIBUTION AND COURSE ASSESSMENTS
 Homework                                                10%
 At-home online activities                               10%
 In-class work (group activities, participation, etc.)   10%
 Quizzes                                                 10%
 ¡A Hablar! (3, one per unit)                            15%
 Talk Abroad (one toward the end of semester)            15%
 3 Exams (one per unit)                                  30%
 TOTAL                                                   100%
                                                                                                  4


TALK ABROAD: Toward the end of the semester, you will have a 30-minute conversation online
with a native speaker from a Spanish-speaking country. This assessment will consist of a pre-
activity (which will help you prepare), the conversation itself, and an in-depth follow-up activity,
in which you will comment on the content of your conversation, as well as observations you have
made about your language skills.
AT-HOME ONLINE ACTIVITIES: Paralleling the organization of the main text, the online
activities (www.khpcontent.com) will provide meaningful practice and review outside of class.
Your instructor will give you specific directions.
Website information:
Go to the following website to do the at-home online activities www.khpcontent.com
When you are on the website, click on the chapter you are working on in class. Then, click “online
activities.” Access code is required.
In-text audios:
On this website, you will have access to all the audios that are used for the listening activities (from
the textbook) in class.
HOMEWORK: Your instructor will assign homework on a daily basis and will periodically collect
these assignments and/or give a pop-quiz over their content. Your lowest homework score will be
dropped.
IN-CLASS WORK: You will be assessed on a variety of in-class assignments during the semester.
These may take the form of pair/group activities, in-class activities, participation, etc. Your lowest
score in this grading category will be dropped.
¡A HABLAR! This is one of the oral components of the course. Once per unit, you will spend 30
minutes, approximately, speaking in small groups. These discussions will be unrehearsed, and will
relate directly to the chapter themes. Your grade will be based on your ability to express yourself,
maintain a conversation and interact effectively with others. The dates are listed on your course
calendar.
QUIZZES: There will be several quizzes throughout the semester. Each will cover topics of
chapters, focusing on both grammar and vocabulary, as well as reading and listening skills. These
quizzes will help you determine your strengths and weaknesses in order to better prepare for the
exams. Your lowest quiz score will be dropped.
EXAMS: There will be three comprehensive exams throughout the semester. Exam 1 covers
chapters 1-3. Exam 2 covers chapters 4-6. Exam 3 covers chapters 7-8 and 10. The focus of each
                                                                                                         5


exam will be the material from the most recent chapters. However, since learning a second
language is a cumulative process, you should also expect to encounter previous material on exams.
Exam dates are listed on your course calendar.
10. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT ASSESSMENTS
Throughout the semester, you will be acquiring knowledge (e.g. vocabulary, grammar) and you
will be developing skills (e.g. reading strategies, data analysis). Therefore, course assessments are
designed to reflect your progress in both of these areas. Assessments can include material not
explicitly studied, but that is closely related to the course content and tests a student’s ability to
apply acquired information and abilities to unfamiliar situations and contexts.
KNOWLEDGE
Vocabulary: You are responsible for all words and phrases on the vocabulary lists. You should
know the meaning, gender and spelling of these items. Furthermore, you will be expected to use
these words within a context. Therefore, make sure you know not only the English translations for
the words, but also understand how they would be used in Spanish discourse.
Grammar: You are expected to know all grammar structures included in the course syllabus. Make
sure you fully understand all formulas and rules. For verb conjugations, you will be expected to
know how to conjugate not only regular verbs, but also irregular verbs and verbs with spelling and
stem changes.
Terminology: In order to talk effectively about language, you will be expected to know the
appropriate terminology. You should be prepared to answer questions involving technical
linguistic terminology and/or identify these elements both in class and on exams or other
assessments.
Sociocultural: Your instructor will expose you to different interactional contexts and a variety of
dialects and their principal characteristics throughout the semester. You must familiarize yourself
with this material and will be expected to recognize these features on exams and other graded
assignments.
SKILLS
Reading: Of the four skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking), the ability to read is typically
retained for the longest period of time. With this natural tendency in mind, one of the main goals
of our program is to develop strong reading skills that will stay with you for years to come. In this
course, you will be given many opportunities to develop these skills, both in groups and
individually, both at home and in-class. You will develop skills such as skimming, recognizing
cognates, making inferences, etc. It is in your best interest to work pro-actively on developing
these reading skills at home, since you will be tested on your ability to read and comprehend
unfamiliar texts containing unfamiliar vocabulary and to do so with relative speed.
Data analysis: Our department implements a guided inductive approach to language learning. This
means that you will be exposed to language data (written or oral) and will be encouraged to
formulate your own rules and test your own hypotheses regarding language forms and
structures. Since a substantial part of the course will involve this type of data analysis, you should
                                                                                                     6


expect to be tested on this skill via graded assignments and exams. In other words, you will not
only be expected to reproduce language practiced in the classroom, but will also be given new
data, about which you will be asked to draw conclusions.
11. STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
In order to be successful in this course, students must fulfill several responsibilities both in class
and at home and must also be able to demonstrate their progress in course assessments.
Homework: Your instructor will assign homework regularly. Many of these assignments are given
in order to prepare you for the following class day. Therefore, it is imperative that you complete
this work in order to be able to participate in class. Homework is also given to provide you with
ample opportunities to practice the course material and identify potential areas of weakness. As a
result, you will experience an increase in self-awareness, which will enable you to take a proactive
stance in your progress, thus becoming a more effective learner overall.
Studying: You should not limit your work at home only to homework assignments collected by
your instructor for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis,
since attempts to memorize large amounts of material quickly before an exam are not normally
successful. You should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of
any items you may not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions
and resolve issues before a quiz or exam.
Practice: Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as re-reading or staring
at tables and lists of words / rules. This type of traditional studying is not sufficient in a language
course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t develop the
automaticity necessary to successfully complete exams and compositions within a limited time
frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to:
     • practice conjugating verbs
     • practice writing sentences, letters, essays, etc.
     • practice reading newspaper articles, ads, etc.
     • practice speaking with friends and/or classmates
     • practice listening via news broadcasts, television or online videos
Interaction: Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and
rely heavily on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will
be pair work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the
facilitator. All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.
Spanish: In order to improve your oral communication skills, you must practice both listening to
and speaking Spanish! Therefore, your instructor will speak almost exclusively in Spanish, which
will not only help you learn new vocabulary and grammar structures, but will also increase your
comfort level over the course of the semester. In turn, you are expected to speak in Spanish during
all activities and for basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom,
asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.). Don’t be shy! You won’t be graded on the accuracy
of your speech in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.
                                                                                                      7


 12. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
 The University provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students
 with disabilities. Any students with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who require
 academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
 Office of the Dean of Students, 471-6259, as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
 authorized accommodations. Before course accommodations can be made, the letter from SSD
 must be presented to the instructor. Approved accommodations will not change the basic elements
 of the course.
 13. ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
 The University’s honor Code states: “the core values of the University of Texas at Austin are
 learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
 of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
 respect toward peers and community.” Please note that all graded work (e.g. essays, homework)
 done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing that appears to be the work of
 someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or print source) or that appears to
 have been written in English and then translated by an online translation program will not be
 accepted, and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on the particular assignment. Students
 who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
 including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. Since
 dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the university, policies on
 academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, visit the Student Judicial
 Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
 14. STUDENT CONDUCT
 Any student who, acting singly or in concert with others, obstructs, disrupts, or interferes with any
 teaching, educational, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, or other activity or
 public performance authorized to be held or conducted on campus or on property or in a building
 or facility owned or controlled by the U.T. System or institution is subject to discipline. For more
 information, visit http://www.utsystem.edu/bor/rules/50000Series/50101.pdf.
                                    SPN 601D: CALENDARIO
NOTE: This course calendar is a general outline. Any change in assignments or dates will be
 announced accordingly. Please make note of pertinent information in order to be prepared for
 class.
                       Unidad 1: Los estudiantes y la vida estudiantil
                                                                                                     8


•   Communicative functions: providing basic descriptions of people and places, talking about
    yourself, talking about university life
•  Vocabulary: numbers, nationalities, colors, personality, parts of the body, time, days of the
   week, classroom, university, academic subjects & majors
•  Grammar: subject pronouns, demonstrative pronouns, ser & estar, gender & number,
   articles, adjectives, possessive adjectives, present tense (regular, stem- changing and irregular
   verbs), question words, gustar, ir + a + infinitive
•  Pragmatics, sociolinguistic, and culture: giving thanks, apologizing, making requests,
   cognates, loan words, regional variation, expressions & fillers to increase fluency
   June 4      Introducción al curso
               - Presentación del instructor y de los estudiantes
               Chapter 1
               Vocabulario en contexto
               • Saludos y presentaciones (4-5)
               • Interacciones formales e informales (6-7)
   June 5      • Préstamos, cognados, formas de palabras, y       Due today: Vocabulary preparation
               contexto (8-11)                                    Chapter 1*(see pg. 12)
               • Los números desde 0 hasta 30 (12-13)
               • Hay (13)
               • El abecedario (el alfabeto) (14-18)
   June 8      Gramática en contexto
               • Subject Pronouns (19-23)
               • The verb ser (24-29)
   June 9      • Gender and number of nouns (30-32) (74-76)
               • Definite and indefinite articles (33-34)
               • Demonstrative adjectives (34-36)
  June 10      Integración comunicativa
               • Conversación: Common interactions in Spanish class (37-38)
               • Lectura: Skimming a text (40-41)
               Comparaciones culturales
               • Dialectos: Variaciones regionales de vocabulario (50-51)
  June 11      Chapter 2                                           Due today: Vocabulary preparation
               Vocabulario en contexto                             Chapter 2
               • Las nacionalidades (56-58)
               • Los colores (59-60)
               • La personalidad (61-64)
  June 12      • El cuerpo humano (partes básicas) (65-70)
               • Más números: desde 30 hasta un millón (70-73)
               Gramática en contexto
               • Adjectives: agreement with nouns in gender and number (77-80)
               • The verb estar with emotions and common locations (81-85)
  June 15      • Present tense: Regular verbs (86-89)
               • Question words and yes/no questions (90-91)
               • Possessive adjectives (92-93)
                                                                                                     9


   June 16     Integración comunicativa
               • Conversación: Giving thanks, apologizing and making requests (94-97)
               Comparaciones culturales
                • Diferencias dialectales: Préstamos del inglés en español (107)
   June 17     Chapter 3                                           Due today: Vocabulary preparation
               Vocabulario en contexto                            Chapter 3
               • Las universidades, las carreras y las materias
               académicas (112-114)
               • Los días de la semana, la hora y expresiones
               asociadas (115-122)
   June 18    Gramática en contexto
              • The verb gustar (122-129)
              • Stem-changing verbs in the present tense (129-134)
   June 19    • Continuación Stem-changing verbs in the present tense (129-134)
              • Irregular verbs in the present tense (134-139)
   June 22     • Future with ir + a + verb (140-142)
               Integración comunicativa
               • Conversación: Fillers and expressions to develop fluency in conversation (143-145)
   June 23                                              ¡A Hablar! 1
                                                   Review for the exam
   June 24                                             EXAMEN #1
                           Unidad 2: La vida profesional y personal
•   Communicative functions: talking about daily routine and work, talking about obligations
    (things you need to do), talking about family and celebrations
•   Vocabulary: professions, clothing, family, months, dates, holidays, seasons &weather, food
    & meals
•   Grammar: ser/estar/haber, reflexive and reciprocal verbs, impersonal & passive se,
    indefinite and negative expressions, ordinal adjectives, adjectives ending in mente, indirect
    object pronouns, direct object pronouns, personal a
•   Pragmatics, sociolinguistic, and culture: asking for and giving opinions, regional variation,
    inviting & accepting/rejecting invitations, discourse organization
  June 25    Chapter 4                                      Due today: Vocabulary preparation
             Vocabulario en contexto                        Chapter 4
             • Las profesiones y los oficios (162-167)
             • Las obligaciones: tener que (167-169)
             • Verbos saber y conocer (169-172)
                                                                                                     10


  June 26   • La ropa (173-176)
            • Tener ganas de (176)
            Gramática en contexto
            • The verbs ser, estar and haber (hay) (177-181)
  June 29   • Present Progressive: another use of the verb estar (182-187)
            • Reflexive verbs in the present tense (188-192)
  June 30   • Reciprocal verbs (192-196)
            Integración comunicativa
            Comprensión oral: Understanding Interview Routines (205-207)
   July 1   Chapter 5                                      Due today: Vocabulary preparation
            Vocabulario en contexto                        Chapter 5
            • La familia (216-224)
            • Los meses y las fechas (225-228)
   July 2   • Las estaciones y el tiempo (230-232)
            Gramática en contexto
            • Impersonal/Passive se (232-237)
            • Indefinite and negative expressions (237-241)
   July 3   • Indirect object pronouns (246-251)
            Integración comunicativa
            • Conversación: Inviting someone, accepting/turning down invitation (252-253)
   July 6   Chapter 6                                      Due today: Vocabulary preparation
            Vocabulario en contexto                        Chapter 6
            • Categorías de la comida (food) y bebida
            (drink) (278-283)
            • Lugares en donde comer y divertirse
            (284)
            •¿Me trae la carta por favor? (290-291)
   July 7   Gramática en contexto
            • Ordinal adjectives (primero/a al décimo/a) (291-293)
            • Adverbs ending in –mente (296-298)
            • Direct object pronouns (and use of personal a) (299-303)
            Integración comunicativa
            Conversación: Accepting and Refusing Food (310-312)
   July 8
            Comparaciones culturales
            • Diferencias dialectales: El pronombre vosotros (325)
   July 9                                             ¡A Hablar 2!
                                                  Review for the exam
  July 10                                    End of first session – No class
  July 13                                            EXAMEN #2
                           Unidad 3: La cultura y nuestro pasado
•   Communicative functions: talking about past events and describing past situations,
    distinguishing between background and foreground, talking about hobbies & pastimes,
    making comparisons
•   Vocabulary: sports, popular culture, stages of life
                                                                                             11


•   Grammar: regular, stem-changing and irregular verbs in the preterit, regular and irregular
    verbs in the imperfect, comparisons of equality & inequality, superlatives
•   Pragmatics, sociolinguistic, and culture: circumlocution, regional variation, taking turns
  July 14   Chapter 7                                           Due today: Vocabulary preparation
            • Los deportes y las artes (330-339)                Chapter 7
            Gramática en contexto
            • Past tense: Preterit with regular verbs (342-350)
  July 15   • Preterit verbs with spelling changes (351-354)
            • Preterit with irregular verbs (354-360)
  July 16   • Direct and indirect object pronouns together (361-366)
            Comparaciones culturales
            • Diferencias dialectales: El pronombre vos (381)
  July 17   Chapter 8                                             Due today: Vocabulary preparation
            Vocabulario en contexto                               Chapter 8
            • Las relaciones familiares (386-391) Note: Skip
            Activity 8-3
            • Celebraciones y eventos importantes (393-397)
  July 20   Gramática en contexto
            • The Imperfect (398-401)
            • Imperfect & Preterit: Background and Foreground (402-406)
  July 21   Continuación Imperfect & Preterit: Background and Foreground (402-406)
            Integración comunicativa
            • Comprensión oral: Expressions to show understanding and support (421-422)
  July 22   Chapter 10                                          Due today: Vocabulary preparation
            Vocabulario en contexto                             Chapter 10
            • Los grupos alimenticios
  July 23   Gramática en Contexto
            • Comparisons of equality and inequality (507-511)
            • Superlatives (512-513)
  July 24   • Review of Indirect and Direct Object Pronouns Due today: Talk Abroad Activity
            (514-518)
            • Por y para (material for this topic is on Canvas)
  July 27                                              ¡A Hablar! 3
                                                      Review for exam
  July 28                                             EXAMEN #3
                                                                                                    12
