                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                          STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:            SW n393R                Instructor:        Starla Simmons, LCSW,
                                                                      (she/her)
 Unique Number:            87635                   Email:             Starla.simmons@utexas.edu
 Semester:                 Summer 2020             Office:            3.124D
 Meeting Time:             M/W 8:30-11am           Office Phone:      512-232-2703
 & Place:                  Web-Based               Office Hours:      Tuesday, 11:30-1pm
                     Assessment and Treatment of Traumatized Populations
I.      STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
The course is designed as an advanced clinical selective for graduate students in the School of
Social Work who wish to increase knowledge and skills for practice with traumatized
populations. Students will develop a working understanding of traumatized populations from
diverse backgrounds, affirming and respecting their strengths and differences. Although the
assigned readings and focus of class sessions will be on traumatized adults, supplemental
readings will be identified for students aspiring to work with traumatized children or adolescents.
Such students will have the option of focusing their role plays on applying the treatment
modalities covered in this course to work with children or adolescents, based on the
supplemental readings. This course is grounded in the identification, analysis, and
implementation of empirically-based intervention strategies. It will focus on skill building and
will include multiple perspectives in the advanced application of theories, models and skills
utilized in varying treatment modalities, with emphasis placed at the micro and mezzo levels of
practice. The framework of the course is based on social work values and the ethical decision-
making process, as illuminated by the NASW Code of Ethics.
II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
At the end of this course students will:
     1. develop assessment skills for the diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
        as well as the impact of trauma on other disorders;
     2. demonstrate understanding and skills in the core components of the treatment
        of trauma, such as treatment stages, psychoeducation, the therapeutic relationship, and
        safety and arousal reduction techniques;
     3. describe the key features distinguishing alternative evidence-based treatment
        approaches for trauma-related symptoms;
     4. demonstrate skills in at least one trauma treatment modality;
     5. demonstrate evaluation skills by accurately appraising how well others evince skills
        in at least one trauma treatment modality;
     6. identify steps practitioners can take to prevent or ameliorate
        their own vicarious/secondary trauma;
     7. demonstrate the ability to adapt intervention models and strategies to reflect an
        understanding of persons from diverse backgrounds, including (but not limited to)
        race, ethnicity, culture, class, gender, sexual orientation, religion/spirituality,
                                                                                                  1


        physical or mental ability, developmental level, age, and national origin;
     8. demonstrate the ability to tailor and integrate clinical interventions based on the
        context in which they are delivered; and
     9. demonstrate advanced knowledge of social work values and ethical decision-
        making processes as they relate to ethical dilemmas in clinical intervention with
        traumatized
        adults.
III.    TEACHING METHODS
        This class will be taught using a variety of methods with an emphasis on experiential
        learning for the purpose of building skill and confidence. The nature of the course
        content requires a didactic approach as well. Therefore, PowerPoint lectures, role -
        plays, videos, class discussions, small group and dyad exercises, and guest speakers
        will all be utilized. For success in this class, you must be willing to participate, take
        risks and “stretch” out of you comfort zone. You are expected to ask questions to
        clarify expectations, provide me with constructive feedback in a timely manner and
        meet with me individually as needed and/or when requested. All in-class discussions
        related to personal values, beliefs, or life experiences must be kept confidential.
        Use of Canvas for this course: This class uses Canvas – a Web-based course management
        system with password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu - for confidential
        communication such as posting and submitting assignments. Readings that are not in the
        required text, assignment guidelines and assignment grading rubrics are all posted to
        Canvas. Students can access Canvas Help 24/7 by calling 855- 308-2494. Students are
        expected to set notifications in Canvas so they receive announcements updates as soon as
        they are posted. If anything is getting in the way of your learning, let me know as
        soon as possible so we can discuss it and problem solve!
IV.     REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
     •  Van der Kolk, Bessel A., 1943, & Milton H. Erickson Foundation. (2013). The body
        keeps score: Integration of mind, brain, and body in the treatment of trauma. Phoenix,
        AZ: Milton H. Erickson Foundation.
        Additional assigned readings will be uploaded to Canvas.
V.      COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Participation and Attendance:                                                         10pts
        Being present, on-time and engaging in class is very important. I will be keeping track of
        attendance, participation, and timeliness of assignments. A pattern of absences, late
        arrivals or early departures (more than 3), or a pattern of poor preparation or
        participation may result in disciplinary action.
Self-Care & Trauma Stewardship                                                 10 pts
                                                                                                  2


       Understanding the impact of one’s own trauma responses is critical in providing ethical,
       trauma-informed care services. You will complete the Self-Care Assessment &
       Maintenance Sheet created by the University of Buffalo School of Social Work and
       complete short answer questions from the book Trauma-Stewardship. See Canvas for
       worksheet and questions.
Collective Trauma Impact Paper: 8-10 pages, APA format                          20pts
       The purpose of this paper is to take a deep investigation into the historical, cultural and
       generational trauma that marginalized communities have experienced. You will choose
       which marginalized community to focus on; examples will be discussed in class. You
       will identify individual, family, and community experiences and symptoms of the trauma,
       as well as the societal outcomes that have resulted. In addition, you must provide
       examples and discussion of specific evidenced-based & other relevant interventions that
       address community healing at the micro and macro level. Assignment details and rubric
       can be found in Canvas.
Evidence-Based Trauma Intervention:             Student Choice                         30pts.
   1. Online Certification in Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
   There is an online training for $35 called Trauma-Focused Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
   (TF-CBT), available through the website of Medical University of South Carolina. The 10-
   hour course trains you in the basics of using TF-CBT model that is widely accepted in
   therapeutic practice. You can complete the course for 25 points credit. Upload or bring your
   printed Certificate to the class. Link to the training is: https://tfcbt2.musc.edu/en
   2. Create an Evidence-Based/Informed Intervention Guide:
   You choose a specific trauma intervention and create an interactive training guide for social
   work students. The training guide should be an organized package of information that
   includes: a detailed overview of the intervention and theories/frameworks that shape it,
   examples and explanation of specific skills clinicians use and the components of how it
   facilitated; summary of research that show its effectiveness with appropriate populations,
   additional resources (videos, links, published handouts) that offer more, and ethical
   considerations. Additional assignment details are posted in Canvas.
Group Project: Trauma Profile & Clinical Intervention Demonstration:                   30pts.
       The purpose of this project is for students to perform an assessment of a public figure
       (celebrity or fictional character) who has experienced trauma and demonstrate
       appropriate clinical interventions. This project will be completed in small groups of four.
       Students will need to provide a detailed assessment of this person, creating an in-depth
       profile that tells their “story”: a bio-psycho-social-spiritual assessment, history of trauma,
       trauma responses & criteria met for diagnosis. Students will also select clinical
       intervention(s) that address their client’s needs & demonstrate the intervention methods
       to the class. The clinical intervention must be strengths-based, evidenced-informed with
       a research analysis on why this method was chosen with this particular client. See
       detailed assignment requirements and rubric in Canvas.
                 Assignment:                                                  Points
                                                                                                    3


                 Participation & Attendance                            10
                 Self-Care and Trauma Stewardship                      10
                 Collective Trauma Impact Paper                        25
                 Evidence Based Interventions:
                 Complete Online Training or Invention Guide           25
                 Group Project: Trauma Profile & Demonstration         30
                 Total                                                 100 pts.
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and Above             A
        90.0 to 93.999             A-
        87.0 to 89.999             B+
        84.0 to 86.999             B
        80.0 to 83.999             B-
        77.0 to 79.999             C+
        74.0 to 76.999             C
        70.0 to 73.999             C-
        67.0 to 69.999             D+
        64.0 to 66.999             D
        60.0 to 63.999             D-
        Below 60.0                 F
VII.    CLASS POLICIES
Social work students must adhere to the Student Standards for Professional Conduct of the
UT School of Social Work and the NASW Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for
their own conduct.
Find the MSSW Handbook at http://www.utexas.edu/ssw/current/forms/
  A. Professional Conduct in Class: The professor expects students to act as
  professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be
  prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
  opinions. We will not, nor should we, always agree with one another. In this
  environment we should be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometime we
  will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. However, the professor does re quire
  that students engage one another with respect and professionalism.
  B. Student Privacy & Confidentiality: Class discussions or role plays can on
  occasion bring up strong emotions or raise issues of a personal nature. For student
  privacy, it is recommended that students not discuss matters of a highly sensitive
  nature in class. If you need to talk, come see me after class. Your privacy and
  confidentiality will be protected unless the matter must be reviewed by the School of
  Social Work or must be reported by law (please refer to the MSSW Handbook and
  Title IX requirements). I will connect you with resources in the community if your
  personal needs exceed what can be provided by me or by UT services.
  C. Client Privacy & Confidentiality: If class work prompts you to reflect on past or
  current client contact, and sharing information about that contact is necessary for the
                                                                                          4


 learning process, it is your professional obligation to protect the client’s privacy and
 confidentiality as much as possible by sharing judiciously and anonymously (this
 applies to information shared about staff at your field agency as well).
 D. Classroom Civility: A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with
 various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity,
 gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and
 sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere
 of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work deals with complex and
 controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would
 be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include
 potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues.
 Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially
 important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race,
 culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
 nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name.
 I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender
 pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
 appropriate changes to my records.
 E. Unanticipated Distress: Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
 reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
 encouraged to inform the instructor. The instructor can be responsive and supportive
 regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are
 responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is
 needed, students can contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
 Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
 F. Grading Policies
 If you are confused by a grade or the feedback you receive on an assignment, please
 make an appointment to meet with me. I enjoy talking face to face with students about
 how they can improve and may give some credit back on the assignment.
 Assignments are due on the posted date by midnight. (except presentations due by class
 time). Assignments turned in after due date are considered late. Students will lose 5% of
 the assignment point value per calendar day that an assignment remains un-submitted.
 On subsequent days, papers must be submitted to Canvas by noon to avoid the
 additional 5% penalty. If you anticipate a problem turning in an assignment on time,
 please contact me in advance. You have one free late day per semester to be used at
 your discretion, but you must indicate in Canvas that you are using your “pass”
 when you submit the assignment or it the pass will not be applied.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
                                                                                            5


THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
                                                                                                     6


every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
                                                                                                     7


sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    ·       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    ·       If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    ·       In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    ·       Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                                                                    8


  IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
  All readings, assignment guidelines, grading rubrics and other essential information will be on
  the Canvas website. Check Canvas regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
  schedule. Changes to the schedule may be made at Professor Simmons’ discretion and as
  circumstances require. It is your responsibility to note these changes when announced. Professor
  Simmons will make every effort to announce changes with as much advanced notice as possible
  Date                    Topic                 Assignment Due             Readings     Video/Media link
  Mon               Syllabus Review
 June 8          Learning Expectations
June 10             What is Trauma?                                  Van der Kolk, Part    Nadine Burke
                    Types of Trauma                                  I: The Rediscovery  Harris- Ted Talk
                                                                      of Trauma, p1-47
                    Trauma Treatment
                              vs.                                                             HCE by
                 Trauma Informed Care                                                        Ginwright
  Mon             Identifying Trauma               Self-Care &      VDK, Part II: Brain https://www.trau
June 15      Screeners                               Trauma         on Trauma, pgs.     matexas.com/trau
             Assessments                          Stewardship       48-102              ma-screening/
                                                    Reflection
June 17           Trauma Responses:                                  VDK, Part III: The https://www.yout
             Guest Lecturer: Sarah Sloan,                             minds of Children ube.com/watch?v
             LCSW-S: Neurosequential                                      pg103-169     =f-m2YcdMdFw
             Model of Therapeutics
Monday          Collective, Generational,                           VDK, Part IV: The   https://www.yout
June 22           Race-Based Trauma                                 Imprint of Trauma,  ube.com/watch?v
                                                                         pg. 170-201    =vlqx8EYvRbQ
                    Cultural Healing                                                    https://www.yout
                                                                                        ube.com/watch?v
                                                                                        =l1o7ls7JnxA
June 24      Complex Trauma &                                           VDK, Part V:    https://www.yout
             Intervention Planning                                   Chapters 13-15pgs  ube.com/watch?v
                                                                           204-262      =q9Tkb879dsY
                                                                                                  9


  Mon             Secondary Trauma                                VDK, Part V: 16-
June 29        Compassion Fatigue, Self-                           18pgs 263-308
                Care, Countertransference
 July 1                 NO class                Collective               none
                                             Trauma Impact
                                                  Paper
  Mon            Trauma Focused CBT                                 VDK, Part V:
 July 6                                                           Chapters 19,20 pg
                                                                      309-336
 July 8          Somatic Experiencing &                           Epilogue and the     https://www.yout
                       Mindfulness                                    Appendix         ube.com/watch?v
                                                                                       =fmDk4sotWGs
                   Embodied Trauma
Monday           Trust Based Relational                            Readings TBD
July 13                Intervention
               Guest Speaker, Mary Beer,
                          LCSW
July 15                   EMDR              Evidenced Based        Shapiro: EMDR       https://www.yout
                           CBT                 Intervention             Article        ube.com/watch?v
                                                  Paper                                =lOkSm90f2Do
                                               OR TF-CBT
                Guest Speakers: Trauma         Certification
                     Therapist Panel         Completion Due
Monday        Trauma Profile Presentations                           No reading
July 20
July 22       Trauma Profile Presentations  Trauma Profile &         No Reading
                                             Demonstrations
Monday        Trauma Profile Presentations  Trauma Profile &             none
July 27                                      Demonstrations
  IX.     Bibliography
  Badenoch, B. (2008). Being a brain-wise therapist: A practical guide to interpersonal
  neurobiology. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company. [Also has a workbook for therapists.]
  Badnock, B. (2018). The heart of trauma: Healing the embodied brain in the context of
  relationships. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.
                                                                                                10


Bovin, M., Marx, B., & et. al. (2016). Psychometric properties of the PTSD Checklist for
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders–Fifth Edition (PCL-5) in veterans.
Psychological Assessment, 28(11), 1379-1391.
Courtois, C. A., & Ford, J. D. (2009). Treating complex traumatic stress disorders: An evidence-
based guide. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Geller, S., & Porges, S. (2014). Therapeutic Presence: Neurophysiological Mechanisms
Mediating Feeling Safe in Therapeutic Relationships. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration,
24(3), 178–192.
Hanson, R. (2009). Buddha’s brain: The practical neuroscience of happiness, love, & wisdom.
Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications.
MacLaren, C., & Freeman, A. (2006). Cognitive behavior therapy model and techniques. In
Ronen, T., & Freeman, A. (Eds.), Cognitive behavior therapy in clinical social work practice
(pp. 25-44). New York, NY: Springer.
Montgomery, A. (2013). Neurobiology essentials for clinicians: What every therapist needs to
know. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.
Osterman, J. E., & de Jong, J. T. (2014). Cultural issues and trauma. In Friedman, M. J., Keane,
T. M., & Resick, P. A. (Eds.), Handbook of PTSD (pp. 425-446). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Shapiro, F. (2014). Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing: Basic principles, protocols,
and procedures, 2nd edition. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Siegel, D. J. (2010). The mindful therapist: A clinician’s guide to mindsight and neural
integration. New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.
Talkovsky, A., & Lang, A. (2017). Meditation-based approaches in the treatment of PTSD.
PTSD Research Quarterly, 28(2), 1-3.
Tantia, J. F. (2013). Mindfulness and dance/movement therapy for treating trauma. In Rappaport,
L. (ed.), Mindfulness and the arts therapies: Theory and practice. London, UK: Jessica Kingsley
Publishing.
Tervalon, M., & Murray-García, J. (1998). Cultural humility versus cultural competence: A
critical distinction in defining physician training outcomes in multicultural education. Journal of
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 9(2), 117-125.
van der Kolk, B. A. (2014). The body keeps the score: Brain, mind, and body in the healing of
trauma. New York, NY: Viking.
van der kolk, B. A., et. al. (2013). Yoga as an adjunctive treatment for posttraumatic stress
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 75(0), e1-e7.
Online resources about trauma:
                                                                                                 11


    1. National Center for PTSD: www.ptsd.va.gov
        Created by the Veterans Administration (VA). A wealth of information and resources,
        especially for PTSD in vets but applicable to other populations too. Offers continuing
        education, some for free. Listing of evidence-based treatments, although somewhat
        limited. Citations for research papers.
    2. The Professional Consultation Program: (866) 948-7880 or PTSDconsult@va.gov.
        Very helpful program associated with the National Center for PTSD at the VA. Offers
        free phone or email consultations with experts in PTSD for anyone treating any veteran in
        any setting. This service is also extended in some cases of mass trauma such as natural
        disasters and mass shootings. Can ask questions or request a virtual consultation meeting.
    3. National Child Trauma Stress Network: www.nctsn.org
        A trauma-focused non-profit funded by several federal government departments. Good
        source for working with trauma in children. Articles, training, a list of evidenced-
        practices, sections for parents and school personnel, and more.
    4. Other places to find resources include federal agencies such as SAMHSA or the National
        Institute for Mental Health (NIMH), international groups such as the Red Cross and
        World Health Organization (WHO), and specialized groups such as Traumaweb, an
        evidence-based Israeli center for the study of trauma.
    5. For information about specific therapeutic approaches, there are often international or
        national associations that give information specific to that approach. For example, the
        EMDRIA (EMDR International Association) is a good source for information about
        EMDR, and the Somatic Experiencing Trauma Institute has information about SE.
Recommended books about trauma:
Waking the tiger by Peter Levine
In an unspoken voice by Peter Levine
Somatic experiencing by Peter Levine
Trauma-proofing your kids by Peter Levine
The courage to heal (and workbook) by Laura Davis
A terrible thing happened (for children) by Holmes et al
Black & blue by Anna Quindlen
A general theory of love by Lewis, et al
My stroke of insight by Jill Bolte Taylor
Healing trauma by Dan Siegel & Marion Solomon
Mindsight by Dan Siegel
The developing mind by Dan Siegel
Brainstorm by Dan Siegel
The whole-brain child by Dan Siegel
Parenting from the inside out by Dan Siegel
Growing up again: Parenting ourselves, parenting our children by Clarke & Dawson
Wherever you go, there you are by Jonathon Kabat-Zinn
Meditation for beginners by Jack Kornfield
The new people making by Virginia Satir
Feeling good by David Burns
The dance of anger by Harriet Lerner
Daring greatly by Brene Brown
The gifts of imperfection by Brene Brown
                                                                                                12


The power of vulnerability by Brene Brown
Tiny beautiful things: Advice from love and life by Dear Sugar by Cheryl Strayed
Trauma competency: A clinician’s guide by L. A. Curran
The body remembers: The psychophysiology of trauma and trauma treatment by B. Rothschild
                                                                                         13
