Center for Portuguese Culture, Oporto Portugal
Lisbon Cruise Terminal / Carrilho da Graça Arquitectos 2018/ Lisbon, Portugal
9 January, 2019
Rice University                                 Architecture 302: Architecture and Globalism
School of Architecture                          Professor Carlos Jimenez
The University of Texas at Austin ARC 560R/ARC 696, Advanced Design Studio
School of Architecture                          Professor Kevin Alter
“The essence of each city arises from an age-old alchemy, almost inexplicable
and beyond Geography and recorded History, from the weight of its very
materials. Echoes of cross-fertilizations transform cities slowly and
gradually, or suddenly. They collide, they dissolve in the interstices of the
origins, they impress us, we who drag with us other waves.
All cities are my city, to which I always return.
Everything is different then, because I know what is different. My eyes open
to my city, I am once again an astonished stranger, capable of seeing: of
doing.”
                                Alvaro Siza “The City”, Writings on Architecture, 1997


Advanced Design, ARC 560R, ARC 696
Architecture has the capacity to extend both the physical and social
faculties of those who experience it, and as such, it can also be understood
as a mechanism to build the culture of a place. The practice of architecture
within cultural programs is the project of a building, the project of the
institution it hosts, and the project of the city it defines. Here,
architecture plays a fundamental role: it is the device to expand our
collective culture as well as the understanding of the place in which we
live.
Architects are increasingly being asked to address the urgent demands of
global urban expansion and its constituencies with deft, agile designs
supported by insightful research. This advanced studio aims to engage the
pressing architectural and urban questions that constantly affect a global
public. Students are asked to think broadly about the role architects can
play as global practitioners through research and analysis that focuses on
the formulation of a building design project. This spring semester, the
studio centers around a project in Oporto and research trip to Lisboa
(Lisbon) and Oporto (Porto), Portugal. Students will explore the particulars
of a program, a site, a city; and study the persisting urban questions that
underpin any practice in such a charged context. The project entails the
design of a Center for Portuguese Culture in Oporto, in a dense urban setting
overlooking the Duoro River, and in close proximity to the city’s main school
of architecture (FAUP) designed by the renowned architect and native son
Alvaro Siza de Vieira (1933-).
Our trip to Portugal’s two main cities: Lisboa, its capital, and Oporto will
expose students to the rich, multifarious architecture/urbanism of this
intriguing country at the eastern edge of the Iberian Peninsula. The two
cities are blessed by an almost matching confluence of geographical features,
historical circumstances and urban ingenuities. The one-week trip (February
01-February 09) is designed to provide as much immersion in Portuguese urban
and cultural life as possible. We will start with a three-day visit to Lisboa
and then move northward to Oporto where we will spend the remaining four days
of our trip. Students will visit different types of cultural centers as well
as the fabled architecture school at the FAUP. We will also visit relevant
works by such renowned Portuguese architects as Aires Mateus, Gonzalo Byrne,
Joao Luis Carrilho da Graca, Alvaro Siza, and Eduardo Souto de Moura, among
others. One of the many highlights of our trip will be a visit to Matosinhos:
birthplace of Alvaro Siza and location of his earlier and influential works
such as A Pool in the Sea (1966). Other visits are to key works by Souto de
Moura (Casa das Historias Paula Rego), Siza’s astonishing Portuguese Pavilion
for Expo 98, and the just completed Ferry Terminal for Lisboa, where we will
meet its architect Joao Carrilho da Graca for a tour of the premises.
Equally important to our trip is exposure to the life and rituals of these
cosmopolitan cities through a sampling of an array of local experiences
including the food, music and dynamic art scene. In Lisboa, we will have the
opportunity to visit such landmarks as the Castillo de San Jorge, the Alfama
and Chiado neighborhoods, Rossio’s Great Square and Plaza do Comercio, the
Thalia Theater. We will see The Jeronimos Monastery in Belem. Finally, in
Oporto we will visit the iconic Casa da Musica by OMA/Rem Koolhaas, the
intriguing Serralves Foundation Museum and grounds by Siza, and the Casa das
Artes, an exquisite earlier work by Souto de Moura.


Casas das Historias Paula Rego Museum / Eduardo Souto de Moura 2008 / Cascais, Portugal
Studio Brief: The studio project concerns the design of a Center for
Portuguese Culture (C.P.C.) to be located on a corner site overlooking the
Douro River. The C.P.C.’s mission is to promote, study and disseminate the
various contributions of such key Portuguese figures as Fernando Pessoa
(poet), Jose Saramago (writer, 1998 Nobel Prize for Literature), Manoel de
Oliveira (filmmaker), Amalia Rodrigues (singer-songwriter), Paula Rego
(visual artist), Madredeus (singer-songwriters) and Alvaro Siza (architect,
1992 Pritzker Prize Laureate) among several others. The design of the 50,000
square foot building (+/-) provides all necessary administrative and public
spaces for the C.P.C.’s day-to-day operations (lobby, offices, receptions
hall, classrooms, press room, exhibition areas, multipurpose room, 200 seat
cinema/theater, and a combination of indoor / outdoor spaces for reception
and exhibition purposes).
Portugal, though one of Europe’s smaller countries, is nonetheless a cultural
giant in its own right. The peninsular nation, both the geographical
beginning of Europe, and its farthest western edge; is a kingdom that once
ushered intrepid, legendary navigators and explorers across the seven seas,
from Vasco da Gama to Ferdinand Magellan. Portugal is also a land of
indelible artists best rendered by the enigmatic, visionary poet Fernando
Pessoa, a marvelous writer who cast the vast existential realms of the
Portuguese character to the forefront of world literature.


The C.P.C.’s mission can be understood as a multipurpose cultural enterprise,
one that aims to study, promote, educate and expand on the distinct
contributions that Portugal has given and continues to give to the culture of
the world. Thus the C.P.C. constitutes an endeavor with global ambitions, one
that also highlights Lisboa and Oporto as places redolent of past and future
histories, nuances, vectors, intersections, pauses, continuities, references,
and discoveries. In other words: it is a full encounter with the life of the
city and its global reach.
The studio is formatted around three closely interrelated exercises that vary
in scale, length and complexity.
-Exercise One
In the week prior to leaving, students will undertake an investigation of
selected subjects (frames) from a list of four (4) categories all related to
Portugal and the two cities that we will visit. They include:1-Architects, 2-
Urban infrastructure, 3-Cultural Ground and 4-Architecture
The intent is to become broadly familiar with critical issues informing each
city’s local and global context.
-Exercise Two is a comprehensive building site study, documentation and
construction of a site model (this is a collective exercise that begins on
site in Oporto and then completed in the first 10 days after returning to
Austin).
- Exercise Three concerns the design of each individual project: the full
integration of all related design components: site, materiality, structure,
technology, program, etc. Critical to the pedagogical intent of the studio is
the assimilation of these underlying design components as they greatly
determine the quality and character of the architecture. A design’s
achievement is magnified as it can be undermined by the ways its various
parts come together. As an indispensable framework for approaching each
design solution, these design components are not limited but rather open
opportunities for research, transformation and the imagination.


Leça Swimming Pools / Álvaro Siza Vieira 1966 / Leça de Palmeira, Portugal
THE VISITORS
                                SPRING 2019: PORTUGAL with Carlos Jimenez & the Rice School of
                                  Architecture
                                  February 01 – 09, 2019
                                  From Lisbon to Oporto: An Arc of Portuguese Architecture
                                  Mobile number for Kevin (512) 797 6903
FRIDAY          01 FEBRUARY     • Departure for Portugal. Delta Air Lines DL1101 & 272 at 1:49PM
SATURDAY        02 FEBRUARY     • arrive Lisbon 10:45PM (Rice students & faculty arrive 8:10AM)
                                • The Independente Hostel: R. de São Pedro de Alcântara 81, 1250-
                                  238 Lisboa, Portugal +351 21 346 1381.
                                  http://theindependente.pt/hs/
                                  (faculty and students to stay at same lodgings)
                                • bus will pick us up and transport to airport
                                • Check in at Hostel. After lunch, we will take an afternoon walk
                                  with celebrated Lisbon architect Gonzalo Byrne (paterna figure to
                                  young Lisbon architects), a personal tour of the architect’s
                                  favorite spots in the white and red tiled city, such as the
                                  historic neighborhoods of Alfama and Chiado . We will visit
                                  Byrne’s own design for the Thalia Theater. Welcome dinner after
                                  the tour (TBD). Bus will be needed for late afternoon ride to the
                                  Thalia Theater and to the restaurant for dinner.


SUNDAY    03 FEBRUARY • Morning/early afternoon bus use. Morning visit to the Jeronimos
                        Monastery in Belem (just outside the city center-- a must see).
                      • Coffee at the legendary Pasteis de Belem. Walking distance from
                        the Monastery are buildings by the Italian architect Vittorio
                        Gregotti and by the Brazilian 2006 Pritzker laureate Paolo Mendes
                        da Rocha.
                      • Continue on to the seaside town of Cascais (25 km. west of
                        Lisbon), tour Casas das Historias Paula Rego Museum by Eduardo
                        Souto de Moura , and the Lighthouse Museum by Aires Mateus
                        Arquitectos .
                      • Mid-afternoon return to Lisbon. Remainder afternoon free for
                        meandering- without a destination-, trailing from plaza to plaza
                        where somehow you always get back to where you started. Lisbon is
                        a city for walking and discovering its unparalleled beauty, an
                        intimate scale city with lots of public spaces where a coffee
                        stop turns into an unforeseen sight or a song of longing (fado).
                      • Recommendations: Rossio’s Great Square (a must) and Plaza do
                        Comercio (a three-sided plaza with its fourth side opening to the
                        waterfront).
MONDAY    04 FEBRUARY • Morning /afternoon bus use. Visit Castillo San Jorge (best views
                        of Lisbon, the Tagus River and the Atlantic Ocean) renovated by
                        noted Portuguese architect Joao Lluis Carrilho da Graca (author
                        of all recent renovations to the historic castle grounds).
                      • Next, we will visit the 1998 Lisbon Expo grounds (works by Alvaro
                        Siza, Eduardo Souto de Moura, Carrilho da Graca among others). In
                        particular, we will visit Siza’s Portuguese Pavilion for Expo 98
                        and Carrilho da Graca’s Knowledge of the Seas Pavilion, among
                        others. Stop by the EDP Headquarters , recent addition by the
                        brothers Aires Mateus to Lisbon’s urban fabric.
TUESDAY   05 FEBRUARY • Morning bus use. Visit Lisbon Cruise Terminal , Carrilho da
                        Graca’s most recent work in the city.
                      • Bus to take us to Lisbon Oriente Train station (designed by
                        Santiago Calatrava ),
                      • lunch on your own at the train station before boarding early
                        afternoon train ride to Porto (2-1/2-hour trip).
                      • Bus to pick us up at the Oporto train station and take us to The
                        House of Sandeman Hostel and Suites at Largo Miguel Bombarda,
                        4430-175. Check in.
                      • Free evening.
WEDNESDAY 06 FEBRUARY • Morning / afternoon bus use.
                      • Visit the Serralves Foundation Museum , Porto’s main contemporary
                        art museum with recent additions by Alvaro Siza’s , Porto’s
                        renowned master, local hero, and the 1992 Pritzker Prize
                        recipient.
                      • Lunch at the museum’s restaurant.
                      • Afternoon visits to other Siza buildings such as the School of
                        Architecture at the University of Oporto, Ramos Pavilion, and
                        Casa das Artes , an earlier but critical work by Portugal’s
                        another Pritzker Prize laureate (2011) Eduardo Souto da Moura .
                        Possible visit to Souto da Moura’s office (depending on his
                        schedule—not confirmed yet). Tour Casa da Musica , an iconic work
                        at the center of the city by OMA / Rem Koolhaas.
THURSDAY  07 FEBRUARY • Morning / afternoon bus use.
                      • Travel to Oporto’s main port Matoshinos , Siza’s birthplace and
                        where two of his earliest and most influential works are located:
                        The Boa Nova Tea House Restaurant (1956) by the water, and the
                        sea facing Swimming Pools nearby.
                      • While in Matoshinos we will pay a visit to Casa D Arquitectura ,
                        an architecture center founded to honor Alvaro Siza and located
                        in the architect’s parents house, remodeled by Siza and one of
                        his earliest works.
                      • Return to Oporto,
                      • lunch at DOP at the Palacio das Artes.
                      Walking tour of historic Oporto, visit the Baixa neighborhood and
                        the extraordinary Lello bookstore (one of Oporto’s must stops),
                        and the Clerigos Church (an ever-present vertical symbol of the
                        city).


FRIDAY   08 FEBRUARY • Morning /early afternoon bus use.
                     • Travel to Santo Tirso via bus (a 30-minute ride) to visit the
                       municipal museums MIEC (International Museum of Contemporary
                       Sculpture) and MMAP (Municipal Museum Abade Pedrosa), designed by
                       Siza and Souto da Moura as a joint collaboration. The complex
                       includes the beautifully restored 18th. Century monastery of Sao
                       Bento.
                     • Lunch at the Museum Café.
                     • Return to Oporto for a free afternoon / evening.
SATURDAY 09 FEBRUARY • Bus leaves from Hostel early morning for Lisbon’s International
                       Airport. Rice students & faculty take a 10:15 AM flight (United
                       Airlines UA65 and UA1810). Austin students & faculty take 12:15
                       PM flight Lisbon/New York JFK/Austin (Delta Air Lines DL272/273 &
                       DL969 respectively).
                     • Arrive Austin 9:34PM.
                     (Note: Schedule may be subject to change)


ARC 561R/ARC 696 ADVANCED DESIGN STUDIO spring 2018
MWF 1pm-6pm
Kevin Alter
Battle Hall 104
Thursdays 9:30-11AM or by appointment
alter@utexas.edu
512 797 6903 mobile telephone
PREREQUISITES
Undergraduate: ARC 520E (formerly 520L) and ARC 520G (formerly 530T) with a
grade of at least C and satisfactory completion of third-year portfolio
review.
Graduate: Satisfactory completion of Vertical Portfolio Review.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students have been exposed to the following learning objectives in previous
semesters. The level of expectation will continue to grow as students further
develop each competency. Some issues would only be mentioned in passing in
one studio but will be studied in more depth in another.
   •  Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional
      architectural form and space, both exterior and interior; building
      envelope
   •  Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement
      with issues of materiality, structures, construction, and environmental
      system
   •  Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement
      with relevant contextual; environmental and programmatic factors
      underlying the project
   •  Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning
      from precedents; research skills
   •  Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication;
      appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill displayed
   •  Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active
      engagement in all activities of the studio
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model.
Studio learning encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation,
and learning-by-doing. The studio offers an environment where students can
come together to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and
discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-
at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from
faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop
his/her critical thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The
design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project-based
learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and
commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's
fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural
environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students
to extend the design conversations taken place in studios (Lecture Series,
Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc). Students are encouraged to participate


and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS students in studio are
expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (three per semester by lead
practitioners from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions
in studio that follow are important for the holistic education of
intellectually engaged students and participation will have an impact on
students’ grades
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a
significant portion of each grade is derived from broader and more subjective
criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the
semester. Grades are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and
late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is
given roughly equal weight:
Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
   • The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined
      concomitant method of inquiry
   • The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms
      (software, sketch drawing and models, etc.) in the development of the
      design
   • Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is
      asked; go beyond what is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to
      produce the next iteration of the design?
Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of
knowledge introduced in companion courses.
   • A strong and clearly stated design objective
   • Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable
      disposition of programmatic elements – and sectional development
   • Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a
      project as demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of
      materiality, structures and construction, structural and environmental
      system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable
      practices, etc. in support of the design objective
   • Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall
      thickness, floor plates, and assembly
Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence,
completeness, and finesse in the final design presentation.
   • Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of
      media strategy and level of skill displayed through the work presented
      at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership,
collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to
count towards a degree in the School of Architecture and to progress in to
the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements.


GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A- Excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness,
visual language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student
pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class.
Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-     Above Average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts
in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C Average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not
pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more
areas.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or
logic of presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate
the required competence and knowledge base.
F     Fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when students have
excessive unexcused absences.
X     Excused Incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency.
Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning
this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate
Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must
be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student
is enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With
three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will
be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full
letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious
observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a
medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing
work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it
will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the
instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance.
Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences;
Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused
under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be


allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University
policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in
advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must
miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe
a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct
and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and
procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University
Code of Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-
university/#universitycodeofconduct
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for help:
   • In-house CARE counselor (see below)
   • For immediate support
         o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
            M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
         o CMHC Crisis Line:
            24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
   • Free services at CMHC:
         o Brief assessments and referral
            services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
         o Mental health & wellness
            articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
         o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
         o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health
professionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide
better access to mental health support for students who are struggling
emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of
Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or
students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is
unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES


Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a
letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or
471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should
be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for
all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of everyone. All
spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in
the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible
to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your
studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold
yourself and your studio mates accountable for the security of your shared
space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being
mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce material consumption at UTSOA.
Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers
with white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students
to donate materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication
coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the
UTSOA Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to
the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the end of the
semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching
Assistants (TA), or Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If something
doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your
concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
   • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
      required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm
      activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
   • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each
      classroom and building they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit
      door may not be the one used when entering the building.
   • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their
      instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the event of
      an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
   • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the
      following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin
      Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Recommendations
I am happy to write recommendations for students who have received a grade of
B+ or higher, and with at least two weeks’ notice.


