                                  The University of Texas
                            Steve Hicks School of Social Work
 Course No.:       SW n382R                      Instructor:     Rayven Plaza
 Unique No.:       88720                         Email:          rplaza@utexas.edu
 Semester:         Summer 2019                   Office:         SSW 3.130D
 Meeting Time:     1:30pm – 4:00pm Tu./Th.       Office Hours: Tu./Th. 12:30pm – 1:30pm
 Meeting Place:    SSW 2.132                     Other times by appointment (e-mail me at
                                                 least 48 hours in advance
                   SOCIAL POLICY ANALYSIS & SOCIAL PROBLEMS
I.     Course Description
This course critically examines, from both historical and current perspectives, the overall
structure of the American social welfare system with a focus on the disproportionate social,
economic, and political problems of vulnerable populations. The course also considers the
parallel historical development of the profession of social work, including the ways in which
it responded to social problems across key periods of social welfare policy development.
II.    Course Objectives
       Upon completion of this course you will be able to:
           1. Understand the dominant historical themes that have shaped social welfare
               policy in the United States
           2. Understand the economic and political constraints and opportunities in the
               development of social welfare problems and policies
           3. Understand the relationship between the history of the social work profession
               and the development of social welfare policy
           4. Apply social work values to critically analyze social problems
           5. Gain knowledge and skills as a background for analyzing major policies that
               form the foundation of social welfare and analyze organizational, local, state,
               national and international issues in social welfare policy and social service
               delivery
           6. Understand social welfare policy arenas impacting service delivery, social
               work practice, and attainment of individual and social well-being
           7. Understand how social policies differentially affect diverse populations in
               American society
           8. Gain knowledge of the roles and responsibilities of social workers in the policy
               process, including advocacy, leadership, research, and community organizing,
               with the goal of promoting and advocating for social and economic justice
               through both organizational and social change.
III.   Teaching Methods
This course combines lectures/discussions of policy analysis methods and issues, individual
meetings with the instructor, and students’ in-class presentations.
                                                                                             1


IV.     Required Text and Materials
Required readings are available on Canvas or are readily accessible online (links will be
provided). There is one required textbook:
        The New Structural Social Work, 4th edition by Bob Mullaly & Marilyn Dupre
        ISBN: 9780199022946
V.      Course Requirements
Assignments (100% of final grade)
Paradigm Paper: “Defining the Social Problem” (10% of grade, Pass/Fail) is due Session 10,
July 11th. Please bring a paper copy to class (and submit your paper to Canvas)
For this assignment you will develop three versions of a social problem statement, reflecting
three different political paradigms: Populist, Neo-conservative, Liberal (or Neo-liberal),
Social Democratic, Feminist, or Marxist. You may pick the two paradigms that are most
relevant to your social policy but everyone is expected to develop one social problem
statement from an Anti-Racism paradigm. From each social problem paradigm, you will
identify:
    •   What is the definition of the social problem (why is it a problem? This usually involves
        citations of evidence)
    •   For whom is this a social problem? How is society or individuals being impacted? Why
        is intervention warranted?
    •   Why does the social problem exist? What issues need to be addressed or situations
        altered to solve the problem (targets of change)?
    •   To whom falls the responsibility to solve the social problem? What is the role of
        government in facilitating a solution and what might a solution look like?
A concluding paragraph will analyze the problem in the framework in the context of
the NASW Code of Ethics.
This paper should be 2-3 single-spaced typed pages. Please bring a copy to class for
discussion and upload to Canvas. This paper is pass/fail and you will not receive written
feedback.
 “Policy or Research Brief” is due in three parts (Total 70% of your grade/70 points).
Research Briefs: Individuals who do a research brief will structure the analysis around a
(reasonable in scope) research question and analysis. Analytic tools will be discussed
Session 4 and may intersect with methodology stemming from your research electives. You
will be provided a grading rubric separately.
Policy Briefs: Individuals who do a policy brief will structure the analysis around a
comparative matrix table or an original data visualization. These policy tools will be covered
during Session 3 and 5. You will be provided a grading rubric separately.
                                                                                               2


    1) Analysis (20% of your grade, 20 points) is due Session 6, June 20th. This will consist
        of table(s) of results from an original data analysis, a policy matrix, or an original data
        visualization. You will be required to provide references for your sources. Original
        data analyses will require some brief description of data sources and methodological
        approach (can be bulleted). If your grade is below 15 points, you may revise your
        analysis for additional credit (up to 15 points maximum).
    2) Draft Paper (20% of your grade, 20 points) is due Session 11, July 16th. This will be
        a revision of your analysis (based on feedback) and the remainder of your policy or
        research brief. You will be provided a grading rubric, which will be focused primarily
        on substance.
The goal is for each student to produce a polished piece of policy writing that will be an
important product in its own right and also useful for the student as a work sample in
applying for jobs or further study. To further improve the final written product, students
will peer review two papers between weeks 13 and 14 (10% of grade, 10 points for both). A
guideline for peer-review will be provided. Individuals who do not upload their paper for
peer review will still be assigned as reviewers.
    3) Final Policy or Research Brief (30% of your grade, 30 points). The final product for
        this assignment should between 3-5 (1.5 spaced) pages in length, including
        references (format of references will be discussed in class) but not including the
        research tool. This assignment will be uploaded to Canvas.
 “Policy Testimony” is due either Session 13 or 14 or 15, depending on what day you sign-
up to present (10% of grade, or 10 points).
You will produce 3 minutes of written testimony which you will deliver orally in class and
hand in to the instructor. You will be graded on the strength of your written testimony
(substantively sound and well-written) and your preparation for reading this orally
(following time parameters, polished and practiced). You will create (and hand in) a 1 page
Q & A that you produce in advance to prepare you for taking class questions. The class will
be allowed to ask you one or two questions and will be encouraged to provide you feedback
on what points were the most compelling and what points were the most weak. You are
allowed to provide the class with a 1 page hand-out (optional). In summary, this assignment
will produce:
    •   3 minutes worth of written testimony, handed in during class and uploaded to Canvas
    •   1 page of Q & A, produced by the student to prepare for the testimony, handed in
        during class and uploaded to coursework with written testimony.
EXTRA CREDIT: Targeted Tools of Government Analysis (worth a maximum of 5 points)
For this extra credit assignment, you can describe the levels of government that most
prominently intersect with your social problem or topic of interest. For each tool
identified, you will give an example of relevant policy and the stakeholders involved in the
decision. For example, if I study health insurance for the poor in the United States, I might
describe the role of the President Obama and Congress in establishing the Affordable Care
                                                                                                  3


Act (ACA), Congress’ attempts at repeal, state action in legislation and administrative
implementation, and the role of the Supreme Court (judiciary) in giving more power to
states. I would describe the major stakeholders: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS), low-income uninsured individuals, liberal and conservative voters, Republicans and
Democrats, the major health care industry players (insurers, employers, states, physicians,
hospitals, pharma, advocacy groups, etc). The overarching goal of this assignment is to
identify where government or political action takes place with your issue. If your goal is to
solve this social problem, to whom would you appeal?
This extra credit paper should be 1-3 single-spaced typed pages and uploaded to Canvas by
July 25th.
Summary of Assignments
       Assignment           Maximum Points              Date Due              How to Submit
         Analysis                  20                    June 20                  Canvas
    Paradigm Paper                 10                    July 11            In Class & Canvas
      Draft Paper                  20                    July 16                  Canvas
      Peer Review              10 (2 X 5)                July 23                  Canvas
    Policy Testimony               10                July 23, 25, 30        In Class & Canvas
       Final Paper                 30                    July 30                  Canvas
      Extra Credit                  5                    July 25                  Canvas
VI.     Grades
                               94.0 and Above               A
                               90.0 to 93.999               A-
                               87.0 to 89.999               B+
                               84.0 to 86.999               B
                               80.0 to 83.999               B-
                               77.0 to 79.999               C+
                               74.0 to 76.999               C
                               70.0 to 73.999               C-
                               67.0 to 69.999               D+
                               64.0 to 66.999               D
                               60.0 to 63.999               D-
                               Below 60.0                   F
VII. Class Policies
Students are expected to attend each class, prepare for each class by doing the required
reading, and participate in class discussion and activities. In the event that you have to miss
a class due to illness or other excusable reason, please email me and copy the TA. A beginning
of class quiz will be used to monitor attendance.
Late assignments will result in 1 point lost per day, up to 5 points (1 point = 1 percentage
from your total grade). Assignments turned in after the start of class on the day the
assignment is due will be considered late. No assignments will be accepted after 5 pm on
August 6th.
                                                                                              4


VIII. University Policies
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects
students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various
backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex,
physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations,
among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive
engagement and mutual respect. Social Work also deals with complex and controversial
issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to
offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment we will be exposed to
diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by
others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility,
respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive
regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are
responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is
needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users
cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social
work students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted
can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded,
subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional
reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other
forms of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their
communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work
students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be considered
inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this, social work
students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid
posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
image.
                                                                                                5


Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites
and are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks.
Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media,
including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise
client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any
material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as
certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social
work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program
while in the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of
the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any
unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may
result in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of
course materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation
of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could
result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading
class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current
or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
(471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student
should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor
of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy
day. If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to
observe a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete
the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a
                                                                                               6


learning environment that is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty,
field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated
reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking,
interpersonal violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such
incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the
University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Liaison for the SHSSW, Professor
Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to
obtain information. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX,
may also be found at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-
programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the
Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the
educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions
taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located
in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as
an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for
reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail
address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at
minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for
updating their e-mail address at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-
mail-student-notification-policy.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments
that involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments
may present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the
profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and
practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor
regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone who
is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas
Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                                             7


EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember
       that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
       week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
       Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
       office.
IX. Course Schedule
 Class    Date           Topic          Assignment                        Readings
                                            Due
 1       June    Foundations for a                     None!
         6       Career in Policy
                 Practice =
                 Communication
 2       June    Ethics in Policy                      Required: Media Bias, Version 4.0: (ad fonts
         11      Analysis                              media). Available at:
                                                       https://www.adfontesmedia.com/ (this is a
                                                       great example of data visualization as well!)
                                                       Required: The Seven Deadly Sins of
                                                       Statistical Misinterpretation and How to
                                                       Avoid them. (Louis & Chapman). Available
                                                       at: http://theconversation.com/the-seven-
                                                       deadly-sins-of-statistical-misinterpretation-
                                                       and-how-to-avoid-them-74306
                                                       Required: The Parable of Google Flu: Traps
                                                       in Big Data Analysis. (Lazer, Kennedy, King
                                                       & Vespignani). Available at:
                                                       https://gking.harvard.edu/files/gking/files
                                                       /0314policyforumff.pdf
                                                       Required: A Quick Guide to Spotting
                                                       Graphics that Lie. (Esteban). National
                                                       Geographic. Available at:
                                                       https://news.nationalgeographic.com/201
                                                       5/06/150619-data-points-five-ways-to-lie-
                                                       with-charts/
                                                                                                 8


3 June Comparative       Required: Changing Food Industry Practices
  13   Matrix Tables     that Contribute to Diet-Related Chronic
                         Diseases, Policy Brief. (Freudenberg). CUNY
                         Urban Food Policy Institute. September,
                         2018. Available at:
                         https://static1.squarespace.com/static/572
                         d0fcc2b8dde9e10ab59d4/t/5ba1548c0e2e
                         72d7fdf214b8/1537299597099/Policy-
                         Brief-Changing-Food-Industry-Practices-
                         that-Contribute-to-Diet-related-Chronic-
                         Diseases-20180918.pdf
                         Required: How School Privatization Opens
                         the Door for Discrimination, Policy Brief.
                         (Mead & Eckes). National Education Policy
                         Center. December 2018. Available at:
                         https://nepc.colorado.edu/publication/pri
                         vatization
                         Required: We Read Democrats’ 8 Plans for
                         Universal Health Care. Here’s How they
                         Work. (Kliff & Scott). Vox. December 2018.
                         (Pay attention to TABLE). Available at:
                         https://www.vox.com/2018/12/13/18103
                         087/medicare-for-all-single-payer-
                         democrats-sanders-jayapal
4 June Practical Policy  Required: 21st Century SROs: Can Small
  18   Research (Quick & Housing Units Help Meet the Need for
       Dirty)            Affordable Housing in New York City? Policy
                         Brief, NYU Furman Center, January 2018.
                         Available at:
                         http://furmancenter.org/files/NYUFurman
                         Center_SRObrief_14FEB2018.pdf
                         Required: HHS Could Do More to Support
                         States’ Efforts to keep Children in Family-
                         Based Care. Available at:
                         http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-16-85
                         (Read full report and 1 page “highlights”).
                         Required: Opting Out of Medicaid Expansion:
                         The Health and Financial Impacts. Dickman,
                         Himmelstein, McCormick, and Woolhandler
                         (2014). Health Affairs Blog. Available at:
                         https://www.healthaffairs.org/do/10.1377
                         /hblog20140130.036694/full/
                                                                     9


5 June Data Visualization          Required: This is the Best Explanation of
  20   & Skills Lab                Gerrymandering You Will Ever See.
                                   Washington Post (March 1st, 2015).
                                   Available at:
                                   https://www.washingtonpost.com/news
                                   /wonk/wp/2015/03/01/this-is-the-
                                   best-explanation-of-gerrymandering-
                                   you-will-ever-
                                   see/?utm_term=.3d8ab261a30f
                                   Required: Review the NY Times Infographic
                                   “The Federal Budget, Per Person”, available
                                   at:
                                   http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2014
                                   /01/19/us/budget-proposal.html
                                   Required: How Gun Traffickers Get Around
                                   State Gun Laws. NY Times infographic
                                   available at:
                                   http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015
                                   /11/12/us/gun-traffickers-smuggling-
                                   state-gun-laws.html
                                   Required: Data Visualization Checklist by
                                   Stephanie Evergreen and Ann Emery.
                                   Available at:
                                   https://datavizchecklist.stephanieevergree
                                   n.com/assets/DataVizChecklist_Feb2018.p
                                   df
                                   Please come to class with ideas for your
                                   own policy tool or data analysis. We will be
                                   practicing the skills learned the previous
                                   two weeks in small groups.
6 June Populist & Neo-    Analysis Required: The New Structural Social Work,
  25   Conservative       Due via  Chapters 1, 3
       Paradigms          Canvas
                                   Required: Trump, Brexit, and the Rise of
                                   Populism: Economic Have-Nots and Cultural
                                   Backlash. Inglehart & Norris (August 2016).
                                   Faculty Research Working Paper Series.
                                   Available at:
                                   file:///C:/Users/ha2332/Downloads/RWP
                                   16-026_Norris.pdf
                                                                            10


                                         Additional reading about modern Fascism
                                         (optional):
                                         A Normie’s Guide to the “Alt-Right” Version 3.
                                         Available at:
                                         https://katana17.files.wordpress.com/201
                                         6/09/daily-stormer-a-normies-guide-to-
                                         the-alt-right-ver-31.pdf
7  June   Liberal and Social             Required: The New Structural Social Work,
   27     Democratic                     Chapters 2, 4, 5
          Paradigms
8  July 2 Marxist, Feminist &            Required: The New Structural Social Work,
          Anti-Racist                    Chapters 6, 7, 9 (can skip section on
          Paradigms                      Postmodernism)
                                         Required: NASW Code of Ethics. Available
                                         at:
                                         https://www.socialworkers.org/About/Eth
                                         ics/Code-of-Ethics/Code-of-Ethics-English
                                         Recommended: How Racism Has Shaped
                                         Welfare Policy in America Since 1935.
                                         Available at:
                                         http://theconversation.com/how-racism-
                                         has-shaped-welfare-policy-in-america-
                                         since-1935-63574
                                         For fun (optional): Take a political ideology
                                         quiz at
                                         http://www.gotoquiz.com/politics/politica
                                         l-spectrum-quiz.html or
                                         https://www.politicalcompass.org/test
9  July 9 Catch up
          week/Guest
          speaker
10 July   Tools of            Paradigm   Required: How Laws are Made. Wirth &
   11     Government:         Paper Due  Cooper Guasco (2010). Available at:
          Legislative         in Class & http://www.mikewirthart.com/wp-
                              via Canvas content/uploads/2010/06/howlawsmade
                                         WIRTH2.jpg
                                         Required: Play “Lawcraft” Available at:
                                         https://www.icivics.org/games (optional
                                         for those with a strong understanding of the
                                         legislative process)
                                         Required: Undocumented Immigrants and
                                         Higher Education Policy: The Policymaking
                                                                                  11


                                 Environment of New York State. Nienhusser
                                 (2015). The Review of Higher Education,
                                 Volume 38, Number 2, pp 271-303.
                                 Available at:
                                 https://muse.jhu.edu/article/563940/sum
                                 mary (click on access options available, top
                                 right corner).
                                 Required: The Law and Social Science of
                                 Stop and Frisk. Meares (2014). Annual
                                 Review of Law and Social Science, Volume
                                 10, pg. 335-352. Available at:
                                 http://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/1
                                 0.1146/annurev-lawsocsci-102612-134043
11 July Tools of      Draft      Required: Separated Powers in the United
   16   Government:   Paper Due  States: The Ideology of Agencies, Presidents,
        Executive and via Canvas and Congress. (Clinton, et. Al). American
        Judicial                 Journal of Political Science, Volume 56,
                                 Issue 2, pg. 341.345. Available at:
                                 http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.111
                                 1/j.1540-5907.2011.00559.x/full
                                 Required: The Temptation of Executive
                                 Authority: How Increased Polarization and
                                 the Decline in Legislative Capacity Have
                                 Contributed to the Expansion of Presidential
                                 Power. (Carmines & Fowler). Indiana
                                 Journal of Global Legal Studies, Vol. 24,
                                 Issue 2. 2017. Available at:
                                 https://muse.jhu.edu/article/678118#back
                                 (download button is to the right in HTML or
                                 pdf).
                                 Required: Play “Executive Command”.
                                 Available at:
                                 https://www.icivics.org/games
                                 (optional for those with a strong
                                 understanding of executive administration).
                                 Required: Indigenous People, Human Rights,
                                 and Consultation: The Dakota Access
                                 Pipeline (Mengden). American Indian Law
                                 Review 41 (2016-2017). Available at:
                                 http://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=h
                                                                           12


                                      ein.journals/aind41&div=6&g_sent=1&casa
                                      _token=&collection=journals (scroll down
                                      left side to select this article).
                                      Required: Play “Court Quest” and “Supreme
                                      Decision”. Available at:
                                      https://www.icivics.org/games (optional
                                      for those with a strong understanding of
                                      law).
12 July Other Tools of                Required: Take the California Budget
   18   Government:                   Challenge
        Budgets, Global               http://www.budgetchallenge.org/pages/ho
        Organizations,                me and BE PREPARED TO DISCUSS IN
        Religion, Industry,           CLASS.
        Advocates, Think-
        tanks, Taxpayers              Required: Beyond the Hashtags: #Ferguson,
                                      #Blacklivesmatter, and the Online Struggle
                                      for Offline Justice. (Freelon, Mcllwain, &
                                      Clark). Available at:
                                      https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?
                                      abstract_id=2747066 (click on “download
                                      this paper”).
                                      Required: The Evolution of Human Rights in
                                      World Health Organization Policy and the
                                      Future of Human Rights through Global
                                      Health Governance (Meier & Onzivu). Public
                                      Health, Vol. 128, Issue 2, 2014. Available at:
                                      http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/art
                                      icle/pii/S0033350613002758 (click on
                                      “download”).
                                      Recommended: A Herstory of the
                                      #BlackLivesMatter Movement (Garza).
                                      Available at:
                                      http://www.thefeministwire.com/2014/10
                                      /blacklivesmatter-2/
                                      Optional: Play “Activate” on icivics.
13 July Policy Testimony    Policy    Required: Peer Review 2 assigned student
   23                       Testimony papers
                            Due in
                            Class
                                                                                 13


                                     *Peer
                                     Review*
 14      July   Policy Testimony     Policy
         25                          Testimony
                                     Due in
                                     Class
 15      July   Policy Testimony     Policy          Required: The New Structural Social Work,
         30                          Testimony       Chapters 8, 11, 12
                Wrap-Up: Working     Due in
                Within or Against    Class
                the System for
                Change               Final
                                     Paper Due
                                     via Canvas
X. Bibliography
       The New Structural Social Work, 4th edition by Bob Mullaly & Marilyn Dupre
       ISBN: 9780199022946
                                                                                          14
