Professor: Lauren Gutterman                                              TA: Julie Kantor
lgutterman@utexas.edu/ BUR 406                                           juliekantor@gmail.com/
Office hours: 1-2 M-TH and by appointment                                PCL UFCU room
                                                                         Office hours: 12-1 M, W, TH
                     Introduction to American Studies: Closer to Home (79145/81955)
                                         AMS F310 / HIS F315 G
                                        CBA 4.332 / M-F 10-11:30
Course Description:
AMS 310 is designed to provide an introduction to the interdisciplinary field of American Studies, the
study of American history, culture, and politics. Though not a comprehensive U.S. history survey, this
course will cover a broad time period, beginning at the turn of the twentieth century and extending into
the present day. “Home” will serve as our central theme and organizing framework, allowing us to track
changes and ideas in the American past in three major ways. First, we will examine “home” in a literal
sense, as a dwelling place or lack thereof, to help us uncover persistent forms of racial and economic
inequality. Second, we will consider “home” in a metaphorical sense, as a powerful and enduring symbol
of the nation as a whole, drawing our attention to issues of immigration and citizenship. Finally, we will
consider “home” in an ideological sense, as a place where ideas about family, gender roles, and sexuality
cohere. Throughout, this course will examine shifts in what it means to be American, the ways in which
that identity has worked to bring people together and push them apart, to bestow power and privilege on
some while taking them away from others. Hopefully, students will come away from this course with a
firm grounding in the diverse methods of American Studies research, a richer understanding of the
American past, and a deeper sense of the multiple meanings of home in the present.
Goals:
• To introduce you to a range of materials and methods that can be used to analyze American history,
  culture, and politics.
• To gain a better understanding of American history over the course of the 20 th century.
• To learn how to identify and construct arguments.
• To understand the ways in which the domestic sphere is always connected to the broader world.
Major Questions:
• What is American Studies?
• Who does the term “American” include? Who does it exclude?
• How has “home” functioned as a symbol in American political, cultural, and social dialogue?
• What can a focus on the home reveal about transformations in this nation over the past century?
• Where are you most “at home?” How have your homes (in both literal and metaphorical senses)
   impacted you?
Required Reading:
Mae Ngai, The Lucky Ones: One Family and the Extraordinary Invention of Chinese America (2012)
Arthur Miller, Death of a Salesman (1949)
Lorraine Hansberry, A Raisin in the Sun (1959)
Alison Bechdel, Fun Home: A Family Tragicomic (2007)
*All books are available for purchase at the University Co-op and through online vendors. They are also
on reserve at the Perry–Castañeda Library (PCL). You may check them out for a 24-hour period.
(FYI: The co-op’s new copies of The Lucky Ones are expensive. You can get the book much cheaper used
or read it with a Kindle app.)
                                                                                                           1


Evaluation:
Participation/attendance: 10%
Online reading quizzes: 15%
First in-class essay: 20%
Second in-class essay: 25%
Third in-class essay: 30%
Participation: Your participation grade will be based on your attendance and your active involvement in
class discussions and activities. Attending class regularly will be essential to your success in the course.
Attendance will be recorded daily and significant absences will affect your final grade.
Online reading quizzes: There will be one online reading quiz for each of the four central texts in this
course. You will be able to take these quizzes whenever you choose within the section of the course to
which they correspond.
In-class essays: You will have three in-class essay assignments in this course. Each in-class essay will be
open book/notes. You will be given three potential essay questions in advance and you will have a choice
between two of those three essay questions on the day of the exam.
Grading scale:
         100-93 = A                  92-90 = A-                    89-87 = B+                   86-83 = B
         82-80 = B-                 79-77 = C+                      76-73 = C                  72-70 = C-
         69-67 = D+                  66-63 = D                      62-60 = D-                   59-0 = F
Additional Notes:
Cultural diversity flag: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. “The
Cultural Diversity requirement increases your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American
cultural experience. Courses carrying this flag ask you to explore the beliefs, practices, and histories of at
least one cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization. Many of these courses also
encourage you to reflect on your own cultural experiences.”
https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/cultural-diversity
Class conduct: Students are expected to be attentive, respectful, and polite to all classmates and
instructors. Cell phones, laptops, and hand-held electronic devices must be turned off and stowed
during class. Students who engage in disruptive or disrespectful behavior (ex. falling asleep, engaging in
side conversations, using cell phones) may be asked to leave the classroom.
Academic honesty: Students who commit acts of academic dishonesty (ex. plagiarism) will receive a 0
on the assignment and will be referred to the Student Judicial Services and the Office of the Dean of
Students. Please visit the Student Judicial Services website for additional information:
www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/. Plagiarism occurs if you represent as your own work any material that
was obtained from another source, regardless of how or where you acquired it. For examples of
plagiarism, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_plagiarism.php
Students with disabilities: Any student with a documented disability that requires academic
accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) through the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement at: 471-6259 (voice), or 471-4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or
hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
                                                                                                              2


Please submit this official letter to me within the first week of class (by Friday, June 14). For all other
SSD information, please see: http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.
**I reserve the right to make changes to this syllabus if needed.
Weekly Schedule:
Thursday, June 6         Introduction/What is American Studies?/Thinking “Home”
Part I. Home/land: 1880s-1920s
Friday, June 7           Immigration, Americanization, and the “Unassimilable” Asian
                         Read: The Lucky Ones, author’s note, and chapters 1-2
Monday, June 10          Imperialism and Domesticity
                         Read: The Lucky Ones, chapters 3-5
Tuesday, June 11         Industrialization and Urban Inequality
                         Read: The Lucky Ones, chapters 6-8
Wednesday, June 12       American Indians and Forced Assimilation
                         Read: The Lucky Ones, chapters 9-10
Thursday, June 13        Progressivism and the Settlement House Movement
                         Read: The Lucky Ones, chapter 12 and Epilogue
Friday, June 14          Field Trip: Blanton Museum
                         *Special accommodations letters due today.
                         Prep for essay next week.
Monday, June 17          “True Americanism” and the Second KKK
                         Prep for essay tomorrow.
Tuesday, June 18          In-class essay #1
Part II. Homebound: 1945-1960s
Wednesday, June 19       Japanese Internment
                         Read: Death of a Salesman – Act I
Thursday, June 20        The GI Bill and the Boundaries of Citizenship
                         Read: Death of a Salesman – Act II
Friday, June 21          Suburbanization and the Mass Consumption Economy
                         Read: A Raisin in the Sun– Act I
Monday, June 24          Field Trip: Multi-purpose room, Gordon White Building 2.206
                         Civil Rights
                         Read: A Raisin in the Sun– Act I
Tuesday, June 25         Black Power
                         Prep for essay on Friday.
                                                                                                            3


Wednesday, June 26    The Bracero Program
                      Prep for essay on Friday.
Thursday, June 27     Foundations of the Feminist Movement
                      Prep for essay tomorrow.
Friday, June 28       In-class essay #2
Part III. Home Free? 1980s – 2000s
Monday, July 1        The Tax Revolt and the New Right
                      Read: Fun Home, chapters 1-2
Tuesday, July 2       Economic Inequality and the American Dream
                      Read: Fun Home, chapters 3-4
Wednesday, July 3     Family Values and the Culture Wars
                      Read: Fun Home, chapters 5-6
Thursday, July 4      Independence Day Holiday
Friday, July 5        The HIV/AIDS Epidemic
                      Read: Fun Home, chapter 7
Monday, July 8        9/11 and Homeland Security
Tuesday, July 9       Debating the DREAM Act
                      Prep for essay on Thursday.
Wednesday, July 10    Main themes/final review
                      Prep for essay tomorrow.
Thursday, July 11     In-class essay #3
                                                                 4
