                                             Syllabus
                   GER 331L: Advanced Conversation and Composition
                                    1st Summer Term 2020
                                         Unique: 80494
                             M-F 1:00 p.m.-2:30 p.m. (MWF Online)
Instructor: Dr. Vincent VanderHeijden               Email: vdheijden@austin.utexas.edu
Office hours: Tuesday and Thursday 3-4 pm on Zoom or by appointment.
I. Course Description
There are two central goals of this course. The first is to introduce you to several core issues
in contemporary Germany and to familiarize you with the ways in which these topics are
discussed in Germany. This aspect of the course is meant to prepare you to engage in
conversations with Germans on a variety of current and controversial topics. To this end we
will read and/or listen to a wide range of material (film, music, literature, news reports, and
print media) that relate to German society, politics, and culture. These materials are organized
according to several broad thematic units. Your job is to think about the ideas presented in
these materials and formulate responses and your own views regarding them.
The second goal of the course is to improve your written and spoken command of German.
This means that you will expand your active vocabulary, aim for a consistently high level of
grammatical accuracy with basic structures, continually add more advanced grammatical
structures to your active repertoire, and increase the linguistic register at which you can
produce German. You will be expected to use grammatical structures appropriately and
thoughtfully and to add increasingly sophisticated and complex elements first to your written
essays and then to your spoken German. We will practice these elements in interaction
(dialogues, conversations, question-and-answer settings, and debates) before you use them in
the group presentations. The course will be conducted completely in German and carries the


Global Cultures flag (since it is designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside
the United States).
Objectives
By the end of this semester you should be able to:
• compose short written essays in German with a high degree of grammatical accuracy, a
    varied vocabulary, and in a formal register;
• participate in verbal interactions in German with ease and advanced fluency using both
    colloquial phrasing in conversation as well as formal elements in presentations;
• understand and comment on primary German sources about contemporary Germany; and
    demonstrate a solid understanding of several issues central to German society and culture.
Materials
The bulk of our learning materials will be available via Assignments and Modules on Canvas.
You will also use the 6th Edition of Handbuch zur deutschen Grammatik (Rankin) both as a
reference for grammar questions as well as a tool to develop new understandings about aspects
of German grammar via its readings and exercises. I strongly recommend that you “rent” a
digital version of the text from Cengage Publishing; it is a far more economic option than buying
the physical book outright. It is the same book used in GER 328. So you might have access to it
already or might need it in the near future anyway. It is an excellent reference for your
German-using future.
II. Course Requirements
A note about all written work:
Because of the reference resources available to you online, I have some minimum expectations
regarding the mechanics of any written work you submit. The genders of your nouns need to
be correct, even if the cases are not. Spelling must be checked and correct. German diacritics
must be in place. Do not substitute anything for ä, ö, ü or ß. There are myriad resources online
that show how to incorporate these into your typing.
Homework, reading texts:
Regular homework assignments will appear on Canvas as assignments. This work will prepare
you for in-class activities and conversation, as well as essays and tests. As you work through
each assignment take notes (digitally or by hand). Read each text the first time without looking
up any words. Summarize what you understood briefly in writing. Then read the text again, this
time looking up words selectively. Make sure you have these annotations as well as your
running vocabulary at each Zoom session. Find ways to incorporate this work into the class
discussions.
These assignments will regularly require you to submit the work online. Read the instructions
carefully. Sometimes you will submit to the Canvas assignment directly. Other times, you will
                                                                                                   2


need to submit responses to your personal Google doc (under “Collaborations on Canvas). Yet
other times, you will need to contribute to group forum discussions (Canvas “Discussions”).
All homework submissions are due by 12:00 p.m. before class. (or as determined on
the Canvas assignment).
Grammar exercises will be assigned for asynchronous days (Tues. and Thurs.) We have
produced an answer key for most exercises from the Handbuch zur deutschen Grammatik. It will
be your responsibility to check and correct your work before submitting it. You will submit
these exercises on Canvas as a pdf’ed image that shows—in two different colors—your original
work and your corrections.
Since spoken and written language are intended for communication, I encourage you to work
and study and prepare with others from our class. Engage with each other and work
collaboratively with readings and videos outside of class. However, all short writing
assignments (Schriftliche Aufgaben) and essays (Essays), however, must be
completed on your own to demonstrate what you have learned. You will be
completing written work frequently during class to help me develop a base-line sense of your
abilities to compare to future at-home work.
Participation:
Because a central goal of this course is to help you to improve your spoken command of
German and articulate complex arguments coherently, your participation in our regular Zoom
meetings is critical. During these meetings you will have several opportunities to meet in
breakout groups to practice in smaller groups.
Both your T.A. and I will offer weekly 30-minute long “Conversation Labs” on Tuesdays and
Thursdays to increase your speaking time. These “labs” will be highly student driven and much
less structured than our regular class meetings. They are chances for you to practice initiating
and sustaining conversation on topics that you decide. When you sign up for a slot, you will also
suggest a topic to discuss.
Writing assignments and essays:
You will compose several short writing assignments (schriftliche Aufgabe, ca. 150-200 words) to
practice using specific grammatical structures, vocabulary, and collocations. Submit them via
your Google doc with the relevant title in bold.
For each of the thematic units of the course you will write a one page essay (400-500 words)
that critically engages with the topics in that unit. Essays can include material from your shorter
writing assignments, but you are expected to improve your writing, learn from mistakes, and
make a coherent overall argument. Each essay will be in a different genre for you to practice a
variety of writing styles and elements. Essays must be submitted online via canvas by 11.59pm
on the day of the deadline.
                                                                                                   3


Oral presentation:
Each student will take part in one group to make an oral presentation (Gruppenreferat). These
will take place at the end of a unit and will provide you with an opportunity to synthesize the
material from the preceding weeks and to solidify your use of relevant vocabulary and
collocations. No outside research is required; rather this activity should be a thoughtful
reflection on and reaction to readings that will aid everyone in writing their essays. In this
presentation you should demonstrate your ability to handle higher registers of speech in a
formal, structured setting. Students who are not presenting will be asked to comment online via
Canvas discussions on the PPT of the Gruppenreferat group.
Tests:
There will be a written test that includes vocabulary and short-answer questions about the
material from the first half of the course. There will be two oral tests, one in the middle and
one at the end of the semester in which you discuss issues from the course and express your
views in conversation with two or more students. The first counts for 5% and the last one 10%
for a total of 15% of your final course grade.
Grading:
Preparation and homework               15%             3 one-page essays                     30%
Written assignments                    15%             1 Midterm exam                        15%
1 oral presentation                    10%             2 oral tests                          15%
Grading Scale:
The following grading scale will be used to determine your final course grade:
100 - 93%       A                    82 - 80%       B-                  69 - 67%        D+
92 - 90%        A-                   79 - 77%       C+                  66 - 63%        D
87 - 89%        B+                   76 - 73%       C                   62 - 60%        D-
83 - 86 %       B                    72 - 70%       C-                  59 - 0%         F
Religious Holidays and other Absences:
Students who will miss class or due dates because of a religious holiday must notify me ASAP by
email by Wednesday, June 10th. The same applies to official university obligations such as
performances or competitions. A medical absence requires written documentation from a
physician; an absence for a funeral requires documentation as well. In the latter cases,
arrangements must be made within a day of returning home. In all above cases, work must be
completed within one week of the absence. Absences due to planned family or work-related
events must be arranged for by email at least two weeks in advance and assignments must be
turned in on or before their regular due dates.
                                                                                                 4


Students with Disabilities:
If you have a documented disability and anticipate needing accommodations in this course,
please let me know in the first week. For information regarding disability accommodations,
please contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or
1866-329-3986 (video phone), or visit: www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
If you are troubled by someone else's behavior, please note that UT has a Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss your concerns. Call 512-232-5050 or visit www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Academic Integrity:
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: The
core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Language learning is a long-term process and necessarily involves making mistakes. I am here to
help you along the way and I encourage you to work together and with other mentors when
learning new material. However, using help from others (including tutors or other
advanced speakers of German) on graded assignments is not allowed and will be
treated as academic dishonesty. Using online translation packages for any
assignments (such as Google Translator) is not permitted.
Since dishonesty harms the individual, other students in the course, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. The website of the Office
of the Dean of Students explains the standards of conduct and academic integrity expected of
all UT students: <deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct>. Students who do not comply with
University rules on scholastic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Questions?
Please contact me if you have questions about these items, concerns about the course, or need
academic or other advice. I am here to help and I want you to succeed in this course and at
UT!
                                                                                                      5


                         VORÄUFIGER VERLAUFSPLAN
       Diese Tabelle dient als Planungshilfe. Die aktuellen Aufgaben,
       bzw. tägliche, vorbereitende Aufgaben finden Sie auf Canvas.
                   Blau gefärbte Tage = synchrone Zoom-Treffen.
         Beige gefärbte Tage = asynchrone Tage, wie auch Convo-Lab Tage
Datum Thema                               Größere Aufgaben
                      Einheit: Deutschland: eine Einführung
4.6.  Einführung
5.6.  Wer sind die Deutschen?
8.6   der Staat, die Politik Die
      Medienlandschaft
9.6.                                      Schriftliche Aufgabe 1: Was ist Ihrer
                                          Meinung nach drei wichtige Unterschiede
                                          zwischen Deutschland und den USA?
10.6. Der Soziaalstaat und die
      Covidkrise
                             Einheit: Wiedervereinigung
11.6.
12.6. Deutschland 1945
      Der Bau der Berliner Mauer
15.6. Diskussion des Films „Romeo“
      Der Weg zur Wiedervereinigung
16.6                                      Schriftliche Aufgabe 2: Welche Unterschiede
                                          gibt es heute zwischen dem Osten Deutschlands
                                          und dem Westen des Landes?
17.6. Wiedervereinigung, drei
      Jahrzehnte später: ein geeintes
      Deutschland?
18.6.                                     Schriftliche Prüfung online                   Commented [VV1]: Discuss Gruppenreferate
19.6.                                     Erste mündliche Prüfung
                                                                                     6


Datum  Thema                              Größere Aufgaben
                             Einheit: Erinnerungspolitik
22.6.  Erinnerungspolitik: eine           Erster Essay: Ist die Wiedervereinigung nach
       Einführung I und II                30 Jahren gelungen?
23.6.
24.6.  Erinnerungen an den Holocaust
25.6.                                     Schriftliche Aufgabe 3: Begründung eines
                                          neuen Holocaust-Denkmals
26.6.  Das Zentrum für politische
       Schönheit
29.6.  Gruppenreferate
       Erinnerungen an den Holocaust
30.6.                                     Schriftliche Aufgabe 4: Wie finden Sie die
                                          Aktionen des Zentrums für politische
                                          Schönheit?
                     Einheit: Deutschland Einwanderungsland
1.7.   Einwanderungsland Deutschland:
       Eine kurze Geschichte
       Die Gastarbeiter-Zeit
2.7.                                      Zweiter Essay
3.7.   Als Geflüchteter in Deutschland
6.7.   Diskussion des Films: Aus dem
       Nichts
7.7.   Wer ist willkommen?
       Hochqualifizierte Migranten in
       Deutschland
8.7.   Gruppenreferate
       Ist Deutschland ein
       Einwanderungsland?
9.7.   Vorbereitung: mündliche            Dritter Essay: Ist Deutschland ein
       Prüfung                            Einwanderungsland?
       Letzte Stunde
10.7.- Zweite mündliche Prüfung
11.7.
                                                                                       7


8