Introduction to
African American Culture
Fall 2018
AFR 301 30545 | ANT 310L 31630 | AMS 315 31100
Omi Osun Joni L. Jones, Ph.D. | jonijones@austin.utexas.edu |Office: GWB 3.134; Hours: Th 1-4
Beth Colon-Pizzini | bethcolon2020@utexas.edu | Office: GWB 3.128; Hours: Tu 9-10:30; Th 1-2:30
Khyree Davis | khydav@utexas.edu |Office: SAC 1.102A; Hours: Mon 12-1:30; Tu 12:30-2
                       “Where are we and whose country is this anyway?”
                                        June Jordan, 1985
Course Description
This course is an exploration of African American culture that provides students with
analytical tools to critically examine and consciously participate in the ongoing
construction of African American culture, and with social and political skills to actively
build communities committed to social justice. Particular attention is given to key terms
such as race, culture, Blackness, hegemony, aesthetics, social privilege, and politics.
Emphasis is placed on Black agency as demonstrated through the social, political, and
representational choices made by African Americans.
Objectives
Upon completion of this course, students should be able to—
       *apply theories of race and racism to their experiences
       *identify specific political and aesthetic dimensions of Black cultural expressions
       *contribute their ideas in a large group setting
       *practice strategies for community-building
Readings
Painter, Nell. Creating Black Americans: African American History and Its Meanings, 1619 to
the Present. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. Available at the University Coop.
Southern California Library Course Packet
Available 1 October 2018 online
Must be used for Essay III
All other course readings are available on Canvas.


Assignments
Essay I
You will write a self-reflexive essay based on a discussion held during class. You may
use any class discussion that peaks your interest. Your goal is to articulate your own
position regarding the issue being discussed. Your position need not be definitive or
singular; your position may be one of conflict and/or confusion. In discussing your
position, you must reference a concept/theory presented in the course. The essay should
consist of a very brief summary of the discussion from class (no more than one
paragraph), and a detailed examination of the relationship between the class discussion
and the concept/theory you are using as an analytical tool. You will be assessed on the
clarity of your understanding of the concepts you have chosen, and on the quality of your
writing. The essay must be 2-3 double spaced pages. Use footnotes, standard margins, and
be sure to number your pages. The essay must be submitted via Canvas before 11:00 a.m.
on 25 September. Late papers will not be accepted.
Essay II
You will write an analytical essay based on your attendance at an event sponsored by a
Black Studies unit at the University of Texas. A list of available events will be provided.
The essay should consist of a very brief summary of the event (no more than one
paragraph), and a detailed discussion of the relationship between the event and two
concepts/theories presented in the course. You may not use a theory that you have
already explored in Essay I. You will be assessed on the clarity of your understanding of
the concepts you have chosen, and on the quality of your writing. The essay must be 2-3
double-spaced pages. Use footnotes, standard margins, and be sure to number your pages.
Be sure to include evidence of your attendance at the event—a selfie at the event, a
program signed by an organizer of the event, or another item agreed upon prior to your
attendance at the event. This evidence will not be included in your page count. The essay
must be submitted via Canvas before 11:00 a.m. on 6 November. Late papers will not be
accepted.


Essay III
You will write an analytical essay that examines the relationship between an African
American cultural artifact and two concepts/theories from the course. This essay should
demonstrate your ability to consider the relationship between aesthetics/expression and
politics/power. You may choose only one concept that you have already used in your
previous essays. In addition, you must include source material from the Southern
California Library Course Packet. Your African American cultural artifact might be a
poem, a fashion item, a piece of music, an African American celebration or event, a meal, a
dance, a music video, a quilt, a garden or another possibility that is approved by the
instructor. You will be assessed on the clarity of your understanding of the concepts you
have chosen, on the quality of your writing, and your effective incorporation of material
from the Southern California Library archive. The essay must be 2-3 double spaced pages.
If the artifact is visual or textual, you may attach this as an appendix to the essay
which will not be included in the page count. If the artifact is sonic, include a link
that allows the TA to experience the artifact. The essay must be submitted via Canvas
before 11:00 a.m. on 6 December. Late papers will not be accepted.
Quizzes
You will take short quizzes on Canvas that cover the readings for the week. You will
complete each quiz before 10:59 a.m. on the date indicated on the Course Schedule. These
quizzes are designed to ensure that you are completing the required readings.
Participation
Your participation in the course is divided into three areas:
        1.   Attendance at an Additional Black Studies Event
               In addition to attending a Black Studies Event that will be analyzed in Essay
               II, you must attend another Black Studies Event. The goal is to offer you
               ample experiences with African American realities. You must provide
               evidence of your attendance at the event to your TA immediately after the
               event. Evidence of attendance at events will not be accepted more than two
               weeks after the event has occurred.
        2. In-Class Discussion
               Offering your comments in class is a vital way of developing your analytical
               skills. You will be encouraged to actively participate in class so that you build
               your confidence and clarity in expressing yourself with others.
        3. In-Class Collaboration
               A significant aspect of Black Feminist pedagogy and Black Activism requires
               community-building. In addition to developing your analytical skills, this
               course will give you opportunities to strengthen your ability to build


               community across identity markers. You will be assessed on your ability to
               listen, to demonstrate radical empathy, to acknowledge how your privilege
               may be shaping an interaction, and to offer honest commentary with respect
               and humility.
Attendance
You must ensure that your TA knows you are present and arrive on time. If you arrive
more than 10 minutes late to class or leave class early, you will be marked as absent. More
than two unexcused absences will result in lowering your final grade for the course.
Point Values
Essay I        Self-Reflection on In-Class Discussion             20 pts.
Essay II       Analysis of Black Studies Event                    25
Essay III      Analysis of African American Artifact              30
Quizzes        Review of Readings                                 10
Participation
        Attendance at Additional Black Studies Event              5
        In-Class Discussion                                       5
        In-Class Collaboration                                    5
TOTAL                                                             100 pts.
Course Guidelines
Classroom Protocols
*You must display your name card during each class. If you do not have your card, you
must make a new one. If it is not displayed, you will be counted as absent.
*No electronic devices may be used during class time. NONE!
*Students engaged in non-class activities during class time will have a reduction in their
overall grade for the course.
*We will create and observe guidelines for hearty, respectful discussion.
*When asked for a response, you must respond. “I don’t know,” “No,” and “I don’t know
what that means” are not acceptable responses. Appropriate responses might be—“I didn’t
do the reading. Would you like me to still think through a response?,” “I’ll give it a try, but
could you clarify what you mean?” or “Could you come back to me with the next question?”


*When emailing the instructor or the Teaching Assistants, use a salutation to begin the
message such as “Hello Dr. Jones,” or “Dear Beth,” or “Good Morning Khy.” “Hey” is not an
appropriate salutation in professional correspondence.
For Assignments
*Students will observe the University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The
University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
*Students plagiarizing papers will be reported to the Dean of Liberal Arts for academic
sanctions. If you are suspected of plagiarizing, you will not receive a grade for the
questionable paper.
*Late assignments will not be accepted.
*Emergencies and illness that prevent you from attending class or submitting assignments
must be documented.
*Teaching Assistants will strive to grade and return your assignments within two weeks.
*Grade disputes must be initiated within seven calendar days from the receipt of the
grades. After that time, disputes will not be considered.
Course Support
*The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice), or 512-410-6644 (video
phone), or at http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
*Sanger Learning Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
*University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
*Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
*Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
*Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050


NOTE 1
On the Course Schedule, use the following key—
       *Readings listed by last names refer to authors whose work can be found on
       Canvas.
       *Titles in quotation marks indicate chapters which can be found in Creating Black
       Americans.
NOTE 2
The course schedule is a guide to our work this semester. Readings and dates may change
as we allow for spontaneous, rigorous, necessary classroom discussions.


Course Schedule
WEEK 1  FOUNDATION, PROTOCOLS, BLACK FEMINIST PEDAGOGY
Aug  30 Introduction to the Course
WEEK 2  AFRICAN AMERICAN CULTURE?
Sep  4  Discuss Nell Irvin Painter’s Commonwealth Club Conversation
        https://www.c-span.org/video/?190807-1/creating-black-americans
        Read: “Hard Working People;” “Epilogue”
     6  View: Ethnic Notions In Class
WEEK 3  AFRICAN AMERICAN CULTURE?
     11 Read: Begley; Angier; Williams                                  QUIZ I
     13 Read: DuBois; Kelly; hooks; Hurston
WEEK 4  RACE AND PRIVILEGE
     18 Read: McIntosh, Wilkerson
     20 View: Dear White People Season 1, Chapter V In Class
WEEK 5  RACE AND PRIVILEGE
     25 View: Excerpt from Get Out In Class                             ESSAY I DUE
     27 Read: Lipsitz
WEEK 6  CREATING AFRICAN AMERICANS
Oct  2  Read: “Africa and Black Americans;” “Those Who Were Free” QUIZ II
     4  View: Africans in America: Part I, The Terrible Transformation In Class
WEEK 7  CREATING AFRICAN AMERICANS
     9  Read: “Captives Transported”                                    QUIZ III
     11 Read: Holloway; Perry; “A Diasporic People”


WEEK 8  CREATING AFRICAN AMERICANS
     16 View: Daughters of the Dust In Class
     18 View: Daughters of the Dust In Class
WEEK 9  GENDERED AND SEXUALIZED REALITIES
     23 Read: Combahee River Collective; Cohen                         QUIZ IV
     25 View: A Place of Rage
WEEK 10 GENDERED AND SEXUALIZED REALITIES
     30 View: Janelle Monae’s “Django Jane,” and “Pynk” In Class
Nov  1  Read: Gordon
WEEK 11 CLASS AND RESPECTABILITY
     6  View: Scenes from A Raisin in the Sun In Class                 ESSAY II DUE
     8  Read: Brooks; Browne
WEEK 12 AFRICAN AMERICAN CULTURAL ARTIFACTS: MUSIC
     13 Guest Lecture: “The Makings of Black Music”—Dr. Charles Carson
     15 Listening Party: Student Music Contributions
WEEK 13 AFRICAN AMERICAN CULTURAL ARTIFACTS: DANCE
     20 Guest Lecture: “The Makings of Black Dance”—Assoc. Prof. Charles Anderson
     22 NO CLASS      Thanksgiving Break
WEEK 14 THE RETURN?
     27 Read: Commander; Tinsley; Hartman; Ngugi                       QUIZ V
     29 Guest Lecture: “The Makings of Black Art”—Mr. Phillip Townsend
WEEK 15 SUMMATION
     4  Discussion of Student Essays
     6  Review of the Course                                     ESSAY III DUE
