                  ADV378/PR378/PR352 COM 119 SPRING 2020
                    GLOBAL PUBLIC RELATIONS STRATEGIES
W 5:30—7:30 BMC 3.204                   DAVE JUNKER
JAN 22 – MARCH 11                       junker@austin.utexas.edu
                                        OFFICE: BMC 4.372 T 11-1, TH 1-3
COURSE DESCRIPTION
COM 119 is designed to prepare students for the Maymester course in
Amsterdam. Public relations strategies are the approaches that
organizations use to build good relationships with the publics and
audiences they care about most. They are based on asking critical
questions about the mission and values of organizations, what
organizations wants to achieve and why, and the most effective ways of
engaging with stakeholders. In our increasingly global world, having a
global perspective is essential for making good strategy decisions in
the interests of organizations, their stakeholders, the social good,
and the good of the planet. That’s why this faculty-led Maymester
class is studying public relations strategy in the uniquely global
city of Amsterdam. Well known as a European center of culture, and a
global hub of commercial and geo-political activity, Amsterdam is that
rare city that combines old-world authenticity and cosmopolitan
dynamism, the intimacy of a village with the opportunities of a
megalopolis, a reverence for tradition with a reverence for
innovation. Because it has been a central player in the rise of global
capitalism as well as Western liberalism, it is an ideal location for
studying the natural tensions that arise between free-market practices
and various manifestations of the public good.
The class satisfies a major requirement for public relations majors
but can be taken by any student with a deep interest in communication
in a global setting. While our inquiry into public relations strategy
will be rigorous, it will not be too specialized for non-majors to
enjoy and benefit from, and many of the issues and practice-areas we
encounter -- like so much of public relations -- will transcend such
labels and definitions. In pre-departure classes, readings and
discussions, students will learn core concepts of globalization,
inter-cultural communication, and public relations; relevant theories
of public relations and the role of organizations in society; relevant
theories of persuasion and human behavior; the role of traditional and
new media; and trends in public opinion. Building on this foundation,
the class will study strategic practices and specific cases through
instruction and real-world experience in Amsterdam. By visiting top PR
and advertising agencies, multinational businesses and brands,


municipal and international government offices and NGOs, community
organizations, tourist attractions, historic sites, and cultural
events, students will learn a variety of global public relations
strategies in a variety of sectors. Some strategy and practice areas
will include corporate social responsibility, issue advocacy, employee
relations, community relations, global reputation management, digital
strategy, media relations and government affairs.
LEARNING GOALS
    •   To get a rich and rewarding international learning experience
    •   To gain an understanding of public relations in an international
        setting
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    •   To gain exposure to culture, society, government and business in
        AMS and NL
    •   To learn, experience and critically reflect on dimensions of
        inter-cultural communication
    •   To study the unique history and continued importance of AMS as a
        seminal modern, global city
    •   To gain experience researching one or more critical issues in
        public relations, marketing, advertising, public affairs,
        advocacy or related fields
    •   To gain experience in audio storytelling strategies and
        techniques
    •   To learn key definitions, concepts, theories, issues, trends and
        strategies in public relations, public affairs, and
        brand/organizational communication
ASSIGNMENTS AND ASSESMENT
    •   Weekly Reading and Response                     35%
    •   This Week in Dutch News (groups)                35%
    •   Attendance, preparation, participation          30%
LOOKING AHEAD to our Amsterdam Class
*Your grade in COM119 will show in your transcript as a 1-credit class, but because there is a
significant amount of work for it, I will count it for 20% of your grade for
COM370/PR352/PR378/ADV378. So there are no surprises, the assignments for the Amsterdam
class will include a) an individual reflection essay (15%), b) attendance and participation (20%),
and a c) group project (45%) -- The remaining 20% will be based on COM119. Basic directions
for the group assignment appear under files in Canvas.


                     MATERIALS
 Grading Scale
 A      94-100%      Shorto, Russell. Amsterdam: A History of the World’s
 A-     90-93        Most Liberal City. Vintage, 2014. Engaging narrative
 B+     87-89        history of Amsterdam’s unique influence on the
                     ascendance of free-market capitalism and values of
 B      84-86
                     tolerance and freedom. Important context for
 B-     80-83        understanding Amsterdam and global issues in public
 C+     77-79        relations and strategic communication. It’s about $13
 C      74-76        on Amazon.
 C-     70-73
                     Course Reader from Jenn’s Copies for $9. Jenn’s is
 D+     67-69
                     located at 2518 Guadalupe St.
 D      64-66
 D-     60-63        •    Appiah, Kwame Anthony. “The Importance of
                     Elsewhere: In Defense of Cosmopolitanism.” Foreign
       Affairs. March/April 2019.
       https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/2019-02-12/importance-
       elsewhere
    •  “Prologue” (1-7) and “The Jewish Question” (65-88) from How
       Soccer Explains the World: An Unlikley Theory of Globalization by
       Franklin Foer (Harper 2006)
    •  “International Public Relations and Public Diplomacy” (402-426)
       from Introduction to Strategic Public Relations: Digital, Global
       and Socially Responsible Communication by Janis Teruggi Page and
       Lawrence J. Parnell (Sage 2019)
CALENDAR
               Class Activities                      For Next Time
 Jan. 22     Introductions and Overview       Read and answer prompt for
             Discuss AMS Project              “International Public
             Assign Groups for This Week in   Relations and Public
             Dutch News                       Diplomacy” (402-426) from
             PR Lecture                       READER
 Jan. 29     This Week in Dutch News 1        Read and answer prompt for
             Lecture and Disc on Reading      “The Importance of
                                              Elsewhere” from READER
 Feb. 5      This Week in Dutch News 2        Read and answer prompt for
             Discuss the reading              “A Bicycle Trip” and “The
                                              Water Problem” (pg. 1-22)
                                              from Amsterdam: A History of
                                              the World’s Most Liberal
                                              City
 Feb. 12     Orientation Session with Tim     Read and answer prompt for
             Meyers                           “The Company” (89-126) from
             Discuss reading                  the book


 Feb. 19  Special guest Tom Mattia,       Read and answer prompt for
          former global VP of             “The Two Liberalisms” (224-
          Communication for Coca-Cola     261) from the book
          This Week in Dutch News 3
 Feb. 26  This Week in Dutch News 4       Read and answer prompt for
          Discuss reading and interest    “We Inform You of the Action
          groups                          of a Powerful Force” (224-
                                          261) from the book
 March 4  Orientation Session with Tim    Read and discuss prompt for
          Meyers                          prologue and “Jewish
          Arrange interest groups for     Question” from the book
          AMS Project
 March    This Week in Dutch News 5       Finish Amsterdam: A History
 11       Discuss reading                 of the World’s Most Liberal
          Discuss projects                City prior to Maymester
                                          Class
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE: The core values of The University of
Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY: The University defines academic
dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty
also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz,
or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the
instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both
the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands
of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Please read more information
at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an
external site.).
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES: The University of Texas at Austin provides
upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for


Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video
phone).
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS: Notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
timeframe.
COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support: Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor. 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7
| 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson,
LCSW
CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is
unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services
Mental health & wellness articles
- cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
