ARC 479 - ARCH RESEARCH-ITA
ARC 381R DSGN THRY AND VISUAL COMM-ITA
Fall 2018
Instructor: Smilja Milovanovic-Bertram
Description and Format
The visual communication course is linked with design studio work. This course will use the act of drawing as both
exploration and invention as a component in the process of seeing. You will draw what is and what is not there in a
process of uncovering the invisible. This process will include observation, perception, discrimination and communication.
Each day in Italy you will look through a designer’s eyes. Landscapes, spaces, places, objects, and people can be
inspirational and meaningful to you. As we reside in Cortona and travel to other cities, you will assemble a series of
observations and speculations through all types of drawings, diagrams, graphic notations, analytical and gestural
drawings.
The semester will begin with five weekly drawing modules.
      I.   Module - Watercolors
      II.  Module – Perspective
      III. Module – Light
      IV.  Module – Pastels
      V.   Module -- Digital
You will also keep a sketchbook in which you will make at least one visual comment per day. At the end of each week
you should have a minimum of 5 visual notations. These will be reviewed at the beginning of every week.
Japanese sketchbook :
Option 1: ongoing assignment drawing Sections at multiple scales from each city/fieldtrip 4-5 pages per week
Option 2: Per/Corso mapping route, a travel story
Each week will conclude with scanning the work accomplished.
Vis.Com work will be assembled as a studio publication at semester’s end.
Studio Course Grading Guide
grading
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic areas.
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it will be evaluated, a significant portion of each
grade is derived from a broader set of issues.
Grading for studio courses is broken into three equal components for each given mark:
1. grasp            the ideas and understanding of the project at hand, combined with an appropriate process of inquiry.
2. process          the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
3. resolution       the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through representation.
Your work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the semester.
grade descriptions
A/A- : excellent
Drawings surpass expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and
personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class.
B+/B/B- : above average
Drawings are thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed. Student pursues ideas and
suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C/C- : average
Drawings meet the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. (Note: C-
does not meet the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree.)
D+/D/D- : below average


Basic skills of drawings not level appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required drawing skills and knowledge
base.
F : failure
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned with excessive
unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments are not a cause for assigning
this grade. An incomplete is assigned after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices. Incomplete coursework must
be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused absences may be dropped
from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than three unexcused absences is a full letter
drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class.
A student who misses classes or other required activities for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the
instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the time allowed will be
subject to the normal academic penalties.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty har ms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Refer to the Student Judicial Services website for official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
Please refer to The Role of Faculty in Confronting Scholastic Dishonesty brochure published by Student Judicial Services
for information on confronting students who violate scholastic dishonesty policies. For further information, visit the SJS
website at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ or call 471-2841.
DISABILITIES
At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations should notify the
instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most
appropriate accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
security, safety and the studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the
needs of everyone in it. Please see your instructor if there are any problems (music, visual pollution) that you are unable
to resolve on your own. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24
hours a day, 7 days a week. Please be mindful not to admit any uninvited visitors and keep all exterior doors locked after
hours.
