                                                                         Wiebe    ALD 331     Spring 2020
                                     ALD 331: Restorative Practices
                                                  Fall 2020
Instructor: Molly Trinh Wiebe, Ph.D.
Email: mwiebe@utexas.edu
Unique Number: 09555
Class Time and Place: SZB 411, W, 4:00-7:00 pm
Office: SZB 436A
Office Hours: Wednesday, 2:30-3:30 pm, and by appointment as requested
LAND ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We begin this syllabus by recognizing that we stand on the shared lands and waters of the
Comanche and Tonkawa. We express our respect for the three federally-recognized nations:
Alabama-Coushatta, the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, and the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo, within
the state as well as other Indigenous peoples and nations such as the Karankawa, Caddo, Lipan
Apache, Comanche, Wichita, Coahuiltecan, Neches, Comecrudo, and Mission Indians that have
historic ties to these homelands. We also acknowledge the multiple ways the State of Texas and the
residents of this Land have benefitted from the forced and systematic removal of Native peoples
from Texas. Land acknowledgements are a small step toward correcting the stories and
practices that erase Indigenous histories and the ongoing presence of Indigenous peoples
today. As teacher educators and researchers, many of us are complicit in this erasure and it
is imperative that we recognize, support, and advocate for the sovereignty of Native nations
in our work.
ABOUT THE COURSE
“Modern Western societies struggle with a lack of connection and with a failure to recognize their
interrelatedness. On the other hand, many highly communal societies struggle to make space for
different voices and perspectives. In our wonderfully complex, multi-cultural society, those two
worldviews are living side by side and have the opportunity to learn directly from each other. The
circle is a crucible for that learning. In the Circle we can find a healthy balance between individual
and group needs.” – Kay Pranis
This course is devoted to learning about and implementing restorative practices in education. It will
focus on exploring models of education discipline policies and practices (e.g., zero-tolerance policy,
suspension, expulsion), and how it adversely affects students’ social and emotional development and
academic trajectories; and most importantly, how restorative practices could serve as an alternative
model to address discipline in schools. The course will give special attention to the history and
principles of restorative practices as it relates to the school and the larger community; and
particularly, how restorative practices could serve as a way to address discipline by shifting the
emphasis from punishment to one focused on responsibility, accountability, respect, and restoration.
It is expected that in this course students will become familiar with the restorative process and will
come to understand how to facilitate restorative circles to build relationship and trust with students,
parents, peers and the community.
                                                       1


COURSEWORK OVERVIEW
This course is a collaborative teaching model that mirrors the restorative process. Students are
expected to contribute toward building and maintaining a deeply respectful and highly participatory
learning environment. Students can draw on their own life experiences, readings, and classroom and
community experiences to participate and contribute to class activities and discussions. Course
materials will be presented through a combination of restorative circles, class discussions, guest
lecturers, case studies, student presentations and videos.
COURSE OUTLINE
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas
website at https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about
the course schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
receive the changes with as much advance notice as possible).
REQUIRED TEXT:
     • Readings on Canvas provided by the instructor
RECOMMENDED TEXTS
     • Boyes-Watson, C. & Pranis, K. (2015). Circle forward: Building a restorative school community.
REFERENCES
Boyes-Watson, C., & Pranis, K. (2015). Circle forward: Building a restorative school community. St. Paul,
         MN: Living Justice Press.
Curtis, K. (2016). Learning from successes and failures: An administrator’s perspective. In Restorative
         discipline practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas educators (pp. 25-39). Austin,
         TX: Park Place Publications.
Lang et al. (2016). Restorative discipline practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas
         educators. Austin, TX: Park Place Publications.
Martinez, D. (2016). Building and maintaining bridges: A restorative coordinator’s perspective. In
         Restorative discipline practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas educators (pp. 66-
         75). Austin, TX: Park Place Publications.
Montgomery, A. (Producer). (2017, October 18). Episode 1: A year of love and struggle in a new
         high school [Audio podcast]. Retrived from https://www.npr.org/series/557324733/a-
         year-at-ron-brown-high-school.
                                                            2


                                                                        Wiebe       ALD 331         Spring 2020
Montgomery, A. (Producer). (2017, October 25). Episode 2: ‘They can’t just be average’ [Audio
         podcast]. Retrived from https://www.npr.org/series/557324733/a-year-at-ron-brown-high-
         school.
Montgomery, A. (Producer). (2017, November 1). Episode 3: The fierce debate over high
         standards [Audio podcast]. Retrived from https://www.npr.org/series/557324733/a-year-
         at-ron-brown-high-school.
Montgomery, A. (Producer). (2017, November 8). Episode 4: Reflections on a year at Ron Brown
         High [Audio podcast]. Retrived from https://www.npr.org/series/557324733/a-year-at-
         ron-brown-high-school.
Umbreit, M. S., & Armour, M. P. (2010). Restorative justice dialogue: An essential guide for research and
         practice. New York: Springer Pub.
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY FLAG
This course carries the Independent Inquiry Flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent
investigation and presentation of your own work.
4-HOUR FIELD COMPONENT
This course includes a 4-hour field component: lesson planning, teaching, post-lesson reflection,
and class presentation. The field component is designed to provide you with an opportunity to
engage with restorative practices. This opportunity will allow you to teach a lesson using the circle
process in your practicum classroom, after-school program, student-based organizations, community
spaces, to name a few.
CANVAS
Canvas is the primary platform through which I will communicate with you during the semester.
Please make sure you are receiving Canvas alerts and submit all assignments electronically on
Canvas. If you have any difficulty using Canvas, call 855-308-2494 or live chat with Canvas Support
on-line.
                                                  3


ATTENDANCE POLICY
You are expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing,
and to participate in all in-class activities and discussions.
The course instructor will take attendance at every class:
    •    There are no unexcused absences.
    •    You are allowed one excused absence for the semester (see below).
    •    Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor.
    •    Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of ¾ letter grade in your final grade.
    •    More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing grade for the
         class.
    •    A pattern of tardiness or early departures will affect your grade.
    •    Excessive tardies or early departures (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused absence.
If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you should contact your
instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let her know.
Excused Absence: You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who
misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day should inform the instructor, in writing, well in advance of the absence, so that alternative
arrangements can be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this
reason, provide your instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University
specifies very few other excused absences (e.g., jury duty). Documented illnesses will be considered
on an individual basis. Please do not make medical or other appointments on class days.
When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from a classmate
or meeting with the instructor to make arrangements to make up work.
PERSONAL PRONOUN USE (SHE / HE / THEY / ZE / ETC)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender
variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name,
unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/.
I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the
official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any
changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
                                                       4


                                                                                   Wiebe        ALD 331        Spring 2020
POLICY ON CHILDREN IN CLASS
I fully support parents and guardians attending school. As the university does not have a formal
policy on children in the classroom, the policy described here is a reflection of my own beliefs and
commitments (and with all due credit to Dr. Melissa Cheyney at Oregon State University who
circulated her own policy through social media). All exclusively breastfeeding babies are welcome in
class as often as is necessary to support the breastfeeding relationship. You and your nursing baby
are welcome in class anytime. For older children and babies, I understand that minor illnesses and
unforeseen disruptions in childcare often put parents in the position of having to choose between
missing class to stay home with a child or finding childcare, which can be a burden in many ways.
While this is not meant to be a long-term childcare solution, occasionally bringing a child to class in
order to cover gaps in care is perfectly acceptable. In all cases where babies and children come to
class, I ask that you sit close to the door so that if you little one needs special attention and is
disrupting learning for other students, you may step outside until their need to has been met. Non-
parents in the class, please reserve seats near the door for your parenting classmates. Finally, I am
open to talking about needed accommodations with deadlines as the semester progresses.
WRITING AND PROPER CITATION
All assignments should be written in APA 6 style, meaning 1-inch margins all around, double-
spaced, using Times New Roman 12 point font. You should carefully and thoroughly cite any
information you use from published materials. Failure to do so could have serious consequences,
including failing an assignment, failing the course, or suspension from the University. Policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Here is a web site with information on plagiarism.
Please review thoroughly: http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/writing/plagiarism.pdf
All formal written assignments will be graded according to the following criteria:
     • The degree to which the assignment has been completed thoroughly.
     • The degree to which the assignment has been polished and edited carefully.
     • The degree to which the assignment shows insight/thoughtfulness with respect to the topic,
          other course readings, and other classroom/teaching or reading experiences.
Writing Resources
The Sanger Learning Center – http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.
University Writing Center - http://uwc.utexas.edu/
The UWC is now located in the Perry Castañeda Library’s (PCL) Learning Commons space, and have excellent
online resources as well as trained consultants available to assist you with your writing, free of cost. You can bring any
kind of writing to the UWC, not just academic writing.
Purdue Online Writing Guide (OWL): https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/
One of the best comprehensive tools to tell you everything you need to know about academic citation in various styles of
writing.
     • APA Citation Guide: https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/section/2/10/
     • MLA Citation Guide: https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/747/01/
                                                             5


COMPUTER USAGE
Computers will be used at times for class activities. Otherwise, they should be kept closed unless
you are taking notes. As a professional, it is imperative that you are present mentally,
physically, and emotionally for all parts of class. I expect to see your active participation
throughout the class.
DATA MANAGEMENT
Back up your data! Computers, phones, and all electronic devices with processors, will break or
malfunction. It is your responsibility to manage the data that is important to you, including your
work for this class. You have many options to do so quickly and affordably, from cloud storage
with your UTexas Box account, as well as external hard drives or flash drives.
                                     UNIVERSITY INFORMATION
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS CORE VALUES AND HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Each student in this course is expected to abide by The University of Texas Honor Code. Any work
submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student’s own work.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University. So, take care to read and understand the
Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php. If you have
any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the assignment.
                                                       6


                                                                        Wiebe    ALD 331    Spring 2020
INCOMPLETE, OR X, GRADES
X | Temporary delay of final course grade. The symbol X is not issued for student or faculty
convenience; it may be issued for one of the following reasons only in the case of compelling,
nonacademic circumstances beyond the student’s control: (1) missing the final examination; (2)
incomplete classroom assignments; or (3) reexamination petition.
A request for an Incomplete, or X Grade may be issued based on the following criteria:
     • Missing the final examination. The student is unable to take a final examination because
         of illness or for another nonacademic reason. A physican’s statement or other satisfactory
         verification is required.
     • Incomplete classroom assignment. The student has not been able to complete the
         required class or laboratory assignments for a reason other than lack of adequate effort. A
         request for an Incomplete, or X Grade can be assigned only if the student has a passing
         average (at least a C-) on the course work or laboratory work already completed and has
         taken and passed the final examination.
     • Reexamination petition. Only a student who has a grade average of at least a C- on all
         course work and laboratory work submitted before the final examination may request a
         temporary delay of the final course grade because the student failed the final examination,
         which is the examination given during the final examination period as defined in the official
         examination schedule.
Information regarding the University of Texas at Austin, Evaluation (Grades and Symbols) Policy,
can be found at:
https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-
procedures/evaluation/index.html#symbolstext
Q DROP POLICY
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you will need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.texas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at The University of Texas at Austin, and your instructor
will use this medium to communicate class information. You are therefore required to notify the
University of your preferred email account and to check it daily. All students may claim an email
address at no cost by going to http://www.utexas.edu/its/utmail/.
                                                     7


TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
university can:
     • Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     • Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
         have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     • Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making
an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about
reporting options and resources, visit www.titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
ACCESSIBLE/COMPLIANT STATEMENT
If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need accommodations
please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). You may refer to SSD’s website for
contact and more information: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
If you are already registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as
possible in the semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations.
ACCESSIBLE, INCLUSIVE, AND COMPLIANT STATEMENT
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment consistent
with university policy and federal state law. Please let me know if you experience any barriers to
learning so I can work with you to ensure you have equal opportunity to participate fully in this
course. If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need
accommodations please contact Services for Students with Disability. Please refer to SSD’s website
for contact and more information: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
If you are already registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as
possible in the semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations.
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS AND ACCOMMODATIONS
By The University of Texas at Austin policy, you must notify the course instructors of your pending
absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                     8


                                                                                Wiebe      ALD 331        Spring 2020
ABSENCE FOR MILITARY SERVICE
In accordance with sections 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code, a student is excused from
attending classes or engaging in other required activities, including exams, if he or she is called to
active military service of a reasonably brief duration. The maximum time for which the student may
be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board as “no more than
25 percent of the total number of class meetings or the contact hour equivalent (not including the
final examination period) for the specific course or courses in which the student is currently enrolled
at the beginning of the period of active military service.” The student will be allowed a reasonable
time after the absence to complete assignments and take exams.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Evacuation Guidelines
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Weather Situations
In the case of inclement weather conditions, check the updated UT weather advisory at
https://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/weather/.
Other University emergency information can be found at
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/.
MENTAL HEALTH RESOURCES
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. Your call can be anonymous. If you
have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL. Your
call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and
share your concerns.
University Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Self-care is a critical part of academic success. The CMHC has confidential counseling and support services, as well as
a de-stress area called the MindBody Lab to help you unplug or refocus.
Counselors in Academic Residence Program (CARE)
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center that was created in
collaboration with the Office of the Provost. CARE’s primary mission is to provide access to
mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. The
College of Education CARE counselor, Danie White, has regular office hours 1:00-2:00 pm,
Tuesday and Friday, in SZB 212E. You may reach out to her at: 512.232.6862 or
dlwhite@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                          9


Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, getting enough
sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are may helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask
for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
The University of Texas at Austin has a wide variety of support services available for emotional,
psychological and academic aspects of campus life. You have access to all of these as a Longhorn.
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Information Technology Services: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin, all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help build a culture of
care on campus, go to: www.wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal/.
Campus Climate Response Team (CCRT) – http://diversity.utexas.edu/ccrt/
If you have concerns about a campus incident, you should contact the Campus Climate Response
Team. Examples of incidents that might be reported to the CCRT include, but are not limited to:
    • You hear about a student organization hosting a party with a racist theme.
    • You see derogatory graffiti on bathroom walls and buildings regarding sexual orientation or
        gender identity and expression.
    • You overhear malicious threats intended to intimidate another person because of their
        religion.
    • You are worried that somebody has created a hostile or offensive classroom environment.
    • You have concerns about a campus climate incident but you are not sure what to do.
UTOutpost – http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php
UT Austin launched a food pantry and clothing closet. UTOutpost will help battle hunger and food
insecurities of our students, as well as giving students access to professional attire for job and
internship interviews. The service is located in the UA9 Building (2609 University Avenue) which is
behind the Student Services Building (SSB).
                                                    10


                                                                     Wiebe     ALD 331     Spring 2020
Center for Students in Recovery (CSR) – https://recovery.utexas.edu/index.html
The Center for Students in Recovery (CSR) is located in BEL 222 and provides a safe space and
supportive community for students in recovery or seeking recovery from addition. Participation at
CSR is completely voluntary and there is not barrier to entry. Students at any stage of recovery and
at any point in their academic journeys are welcome.
Grading Scale, Policies, and Criteria
Grades will be calculated according to the total of points earned (minus points deducted) divided by
the total points possible:
 A:         93-100%                               C+:      77-79.9%
 A-:        90-92.9%                              C:       73-76.9%
 B+:        87-89.9%                              C-:      70-72.9%
 B:         83-86.9%                              D:       60-69.9%
 B-:        80-82.9%                              F:       Below 60
*Grades will NOT be rounded
Expectations for all assignments will be graded based on thorough completion. This includes
thoughtfulness with respect to the topic, course readings, and experiences and a polished final draft.
Assignments are required to be turned in on time. Grades will be lowered 5% (0.05) for each day
assignments are late. Please communicate immediately if you need more time to complete an
assignment. I will make arrangements with you.
                 Assignments                          Due Date          Percentage      Points
 1. Attendance, Participation and                  Jan 23rd-May 6th          10%           30
 Professionalism
 2. Reading Responses                             Weekly Wednesday,          25%           75
                                                       12:00pm
 3.  Restorative Practice Research                 Jan 23rd-May 6th          10%           30
 4.  Restorative Circle #1                         Jan 23rd-May 6th          10%           30
 5.  Restorative Circle #2                         Jan 23rd-May 6th          20%           60
 6.  Final Reflective Essay                           Friday, 15th           25%           75
                                                      Total Possible:       100%          300
                                                  11


                                    COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
1. Attendance, Participation, and Professionalism – 30 points (10%)
Professionalism includes being on time, prepared for class, and participating actively in whole class
and small group discussions and activities. Computers will be used at times for class activities.
Otherwise, they should be kept closed unless you are taking notes. These expectations will be the
basis for your grade:
    • Actively listening and participating (talking) during whole class and small class activities;
    • Being involved and engaged during the entire class time;
    • Being prepared for class, having read ALL readings and done all assignments/homework;
    • Talking to the instructor about any concerns you have with the class;
    • NOT engaging in activities not related to class (e.g., emailing, texting, social media,
        shopping, work for other classes).
2. Reading Response – 75 points (25%)
(due on the Wednesday before class by 12:00 pm)
The purpose of this assignment is to give you an opportunity to read and learn about restorative
practices in education. You are responsible for reading all course readings and writing a response to
share your thinking/questions/experiences with regards to restorative practices. Please post your
reading response to Canvas/Discussion. You must bring your textbook and other readings to class
each week.
As you interact with the readings, reflect on your personal lived-experiences (e.g., education, work),
respond to ideas you find especially compelling, elaborate on your thinking by making connections
to other readings or your experiences, and outline your puzzles and/or questions. It is “essential
that you attend to your felt reactions, and attempt to sort out what those reactions tell you …
[think] about [your] expectations and assumptions” (Zeichner & Liston, 2010). Read the
assignments through the eyes of an individual striving to positively work with youths and the
community. Think about how you can use this knowledge to extend or challenge what you already
know about students, teaching and learning, building relationships, community, and trust.
Instructions for writing your reading responses:
        • Please do not summarize the readings.
        • Your reading response should include one insight (Aha!) and one question (Huh?).
             Your Aha! and Huh? only need to be a sentence in length, but under each you will
             provide a brief explanation (100-300 words) as to how you arrived at your insight
             and why you are asking your question.
             *Note: If an Aha! does not resonate with you, consider using one of the following:
             Hmm…; N-uhh; No; Maybe; Yes; Yay!; But, what about…?; This reminds me of
             …; This quote resonated with me because...; This connects with my personal
             experience; Text-to-Text Connections; Text-to-Self Connections; Text-to-World
             Connections.
                                                   12


                                                                               Wiebe      ALD 331      Spring 2020
3. Restorative Practice Research – 30 points (10%)
Throughout the course, you will have an opportunity to conduct research related to restorative
practices where you will engage in relevant educational activities in relation to school discipline
policies and practices and restorative practices to reflect on your emotional and intellectual growth.
There are six parts associated with completinng your research:
 Part A      Personal Schooling Experiences related to Education Discipline Policies and Practices
             Presentation (6) (due February 21, 4pm)
 Part B      Artifact Data Collection, 1-page double-spaced Reflection, (6 points) (due February 26, 4pm)
 Part C      Interview #1: Cooperating Teacher, 1-page double-spaced Reflection, (6 points) (due March 11,
             4pm)
 Part D      Interview #2: Student, 1-page double-spaced Reflection, (6 points) (due April 1, 4pm)
 Part E      Interview #3: Student, 1-page double-spaced Reflection (6 points) (due April 15, 4pm)
 Part F      Interview #4: Administrator or Student Support Team Leaders, 1-page double-spaced
             Reflection (6 points) (due April 29, 4pm)
4. Independent Inquiry – 90 points (30%)
Part A : Restorative Circle #1 & Reflection (RC#1) – 30 points (10%)
You will facilitate a community building circle in class. This assignment provides you with the
opportunity to practice planning and writing a lesson plan and facilitating a community building
circle with the following restorative elements: (a) Mindfulness Moment, (b) Values Round, (c) Opening,
(d) Round 1 (Prompt), and (e) Closing. Afterwards, you will write a guided reflection discussing your
facilitation experience. This initial experience aims to prepare you to facilitate a Restorative Circle in
your classroom, after-school program, student-based organizations, community spaces, etc. *Note:
Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
Part B : Restorative Circle #2 & Presentation (RC#2) – 60 points (20%)
You will facilitate a restorative circle (e.g., Community Building or Academic) in a context of your
choice as part of the course’s 4-hour field requirement and Independent Inquiry Flag. You will write
a lesson plan, facilitate your circle, video record your circle and create a PowerPoint presentation to
share your experience. Your Restorative Circle should have at least 6-10 participants. You may
facilitate your Restorative Circle in any context such as your practicum classroom, after-school
program, student-based organizations, community spaces, etc. *Note: There will be NO Credit for
the course if your Restorative Circle #2 is incomplete. *Note: Your success on this assignment
depends on your thoughtful, careful reflections (not on how well the lesson went). *Note: Refer
to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
                                                        13


5. Final Reflective Essay – 75 points (25%)
You will reference course readings (8-16 references) and write a final reflective essay (8-16 pages) to
reflect on what you have learned during the course and how it has affirmed, challenged, and/or
extended your thinking about teaching and learning in relation to:
    • how might you define or describe restorative justice/practices;
    • restorative framework;
    • restorative v. traditional discipline policies and practices;
    • your teaching and learning philosophy;
    • your positionality with regards to implementing restorative practices;
    • restorative practices in other contexts;
    • educational commitments;
    • building relationships;
    • classroom community;
    • student-teacher relationships;
    • classroom participation structures;
    • language-culture-identity;
    • academic and social emotional development;
    • power dynamics;
    • trust;
    • critiques of restorative practices; etc.
*Note: You are not required to discuss all of the above topics; however, I have no objections if
that is what you would like to do. Choose the topics that resonated with you the most to discuss in
your essay. *Note: Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
                                                           14


                                                                         Wiebe     ALD 331     Spring 2020
                  ALD 331: Restorative Practices: Tentative Schedule
              Please see Canvas for the most recent schedule of readings and assignments
   Class
  Meeting Class Topic and Activities             Out of Class Assignments                Assignments Due
1 01/22   Introductions                        • Introductions
                                               • Review course syllabus
          Review course syllabus
          Respect Agreement
2 01/29   Restorative Circle Origins           • Boyes-Watson & Pranis                 -Reading Response #1
                                                  (2015), Theoretical Essay on
                                                  Why Circles are Important in
                                                  Schools, pp. 395-416 (21)
3 02/05   Circle Process and Essential         • Boyes-Watson & Pranis                 -Reading Response #2
          Elements                                (2015), pp. 6-8; 17-26; 27-41
                                                  (28)
          Community Building Circle                                                    -RC Facilitator #1
          Lesson Plan
4 02/12   Zero-Tolerance Policies              • González (2012), pp. 281-             -Reading Response #3
                                                  303: PDF 1-24 (22)
          School-to-Prison Pipeline                                                    -RP Research Part A
                                               • Fabelo et al., (2011) (7)
                                               • González (2012); Skim pp.             -RC Facilitator #2
                                                  303-321: PDF 24-42 (18)
5 02/19   Theoretical Foundations of           • Winn (2018), Ch. 1-2 (32)             -Reading Response #4
          Restorative Practices
          Academic Circle Lesson Plan                                                  -RC Facilitator #3
6 02/26   Restorative Justice                  • Ryan & Ruddy (2015) (10)              -Reading Response #5
          Restorative Practice
                                               • Tsui (2014), pp. 641-666              -RP Research Part B
          Part C Interview Questions              (26)
                                                                                      -RC Facilitator #4
7 03/04   The Facilitator’s Role in            • Umbreit & Armour (2011),              -Reading Response #6
          Restorative Practices                   Chapter 9 (14)
          Restorative Chat                     • Raye (2004) (13)                      -RC Facilitator #5
8 03/11   Critical Issues in Restorative       • Cunneen (2004) (10)                   -Reading Response #7
          Practices
                                               • Lohmeyer (2017) (16)                  -RP Research Part C
          Part D/E Interview
          Question                                                                     -RC Facilitator #6
9 03/18         SPRING BREAK                           SPRING BREAK                       SPRING BREAK
                                                  15


10 03/25  Classroom Discourse          • Cadzen (2001) (28)           -Reading Response #8
          Family Group Conference      • Family Group Conference
                                         videos                       -RC Facilitator #7
11 04/01  Restorative Practices in     • Worthy (2014) (23)           -Reading Response #9
          Action: Re-story Framework
                                                                      -RP Research Part D
          Part F Interview Questions
                                                                      -RC#2 Lesson Plan
                                                                      -RC Facilitator #8
12 04/08  Restorative Practices in     • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 4-5 -Reading Response #10
          Action: Administrator,         (14)
          Teacher, Student
          Perspectives                 • Schumacher (2014) (13)       -RC Facilitator #9
          Circle of Accountability and
          Support
13 04/15  Restorative Practices in     • Fine (2018) (23)             -Reading Response #11
          Action: Critical Restorative
          Practice                                                    -RP Research Part E
                                                                      -RC Facilitator #10
14 04/22  Whole-school Restorative     • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 9 & -Reading Response #12
          Practices                      Appendix
          Peer-led Circle              • González (2012), pp. 321-    -RC Facilitator #11
                                         335: PDF 42-56 (14)
15 04/29  Whole-school Restorative     • Code Switch (2017) Podcast   -Reading Response #13
          Practices                      Chapters: 1 – 4
                                                                      -RP Research Part F
          Course Evaluation
                                                                      -RC Facilitator #12
16 05/06  Transformative Education     • Giroux (1985)                -Reading Response #14
   Friday
          RC Presentations             • Freire (1987)                -RC#2 Presentation
                                                                      -RC Facilitator #13
17 05/13              No Class                    No Class            Please post your Final
   Friday  Final Reflective Essay Due    Final Reflective Paper Due   Reflective Paper to
                                                                      Canvas by Friday, May
                                                                      15th, 11:59 pm
                                         16
