                         MAS s374-82570+LAS s322-82255+SOC s321K-83840
                            Latino Migration/Human Trafficking
              Department of Mexican American + Latina/o Studies ǀ University of Texas at Austin
                                      Summer Semester 2019 ǀ 3 Credit Hours
                             MTWTHF ǀ 1:00pm-2:30pm ǀ BIO, Room 301
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION
Instructor ǀ Antonio Vásquez, Ph.D.                              Teaching Assistant ǀ TBA
Email | antonio.vasquez@utexas.edu                               Email | TBA
Telephone | 512-471-4557 (MALS office)                           Telephone | TBA
Fax | 512-471-9639 (MALS office)                                 Fax | TBA
Office | GWB 2.334                                               Office | TBA
Hours | TBA                                                      Hours | TBA
COURSE INFORMATION
DESCRIPTION + FORMAT
Welcome to Latino Migration/Human Trafficking!
In this undergraduate seminar, we will collaboratively and critically examine the complexity and
intersectionality of Latino migration and human trafficking from varied perspectives at the global, regional,
and local level. This includes developing a critical assessment of dominant representations related to
human trafficking and Latinos in U.S. public discourse; interpretations and distinctions of human trafficking;
U.S. economic and military pursuits in the Americas and Latino migration in historical and contemporary
contexts; globalization and human trafficking; immigration policy and human trafficking at the U.S.-Mexico
border; preventative legislation, protocols, and strategies and related limitations by governmental
institutions in Mexico, United States, and United Nations; measures to counter human trafficking by
individuals and community-based organizations at the local level. Approximately two (2) required
textbooks will be utilized for this purpose, to be available for purchase at the University Co-op. In addition,
we will be relying upon a selection of digital material to be accessed through our Canvas course page.
To demonstrate your knowledge of the course material, you will also be asked to complete five (5)
randomized quizzes, three (3) online discussion activities, two (2) examinations, and five (5) steps related
to your research project. Consistent with the Writing Flag objective, writing will be integral to the success of
this course and related exercises will be integrated throughout. These include in-class writing and review,
online discussion, essay-based examinations, and the completion of an original research project. The
specific topic for the latter will be determined in collaboration with your instructor and the project will
involve a series of benchmark activities to be completed throughout the semester. To accomplish these
tasks, our class format will consist of in-class lectures and discussion as well online activities. When
possible, class time will be used to completion of your research project.
All submissions for this class will be made through Canvas, which is available at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Please note that all our submitted work for this class will also be
screened for academic misconduct.


To be successful in this class, do your absolute best to be present and prepared for every scheduled class
activity. Feel free to also contact and visit with your instructor should you have any questions related to the
course. My preference is that you communicate with me directly through Canvas email first, and,
secondarily, our contact information provided.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
underrepresentation. This course also carries the Writing Flag. The Writing Flag requirement helps
students improve their critical thinking skills, understanding of course content, ability to formulate ideas in
writing, and ability to write in the style of a particular discipline.
Welcome again to the class!
COURSE OBJECTIVES ǀ LATINO MIGRATION/HUMAN TRAFFICKING
    §   HUMAN TRAFFICKING: Developed comparative understanding of varied social/cultural, economic,
        and political effects of Latino migration and human trafficking
    §   MEXICAN AMERICAN + LATINA/O STUDIES: Increased interdisciplinary knowledge and analyses of
        subject matter in relation to Mexican American and Latina/o Studies
    §   CRITICAL ANALYSIS: Enhanced critical thinking skills in reading, writing, listening, and speaking in
        relation to course content
    §   RESEARCH: Strengthened skills in conducting research in relation to the course content
TEXTBOOKS + SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
TEXTBOOKS
The following two books are REQUIRED for this course. They are available for purchase at the University
Co-op Bookstore. When available, the books can also be accessed electronically.
    §   Bales, Kevin, and Ron Soodalter. The Slave Next Door: Human Trafficking and Slavery in America
        Today. University of California Press, 2010. (Electronic Resource Available via UT Libraries)
    §   Sanchez, Gabriella E. Human Smuggling and Border Crossings. Routledge Press, 2016. (Electronic
        Resource Available via UT Libraries)
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
    §   In addition, supplementary digital course material will be utilized in conjunction with our selected
        textbooks. These will be accessible through our course Canvas site at
        https://utexas.instructure.com.
GRADING + ASSESSMENT
There are four (4) components that will make-up your overall grade for the semester. These include in-class
quizzes (5%), online discussion (15%), examination (30%), and a research paper (50%). Each of these are
identified and described below.
                                                                Latino Migration/Human Trafficking | Vásquez | Spring 2019


GRADING DESCRIPTIONS
     Grading Components + Scale          Percentage          Grade      Percentage       Grade        Percentage
     I.     Quizzes                           5%                A        94-100%+           C            74-76%
     II.     Online Discussion               15%               A-         90-93%            C-           70-73%
     III.    Examination                     30%               B+         87-89%            D+           67-69%
     IV.     Research Paper                  50%                B         84-86%            D            64-66%
                               Total        100%               B-         80-83%            D-           60-63%
                                                               C+         77-79%            F             0-59%
I. Quizzes (5%)
In lieu of attendance, we will have five (5) quizzes to be conducted randomly throughout the semester. The
quizzes are worth 5% of your total grade, or 1% each. The best way to maximize your points is to come to
every scheduled class activity.
II. Online Discussion (15%)
Another way to demonstrate knowledge of the course content is to engage in three (3) online discussion
activities. Discussion 01 will take place on Friday, July 19; Discussion 02 will take place on Friday, August
02; and Discussion 03 will take place on Friday, August 9. Each is worth 5% of your grade, or 15% total.
III. Examination (30%)
We will have two (2) examination this semester, worth 30% of the total grade or 15% each. The
examinations will take place on Friday, July 26, and Friday, August 16. The content for the examination will
be based on all class lectures + reading material. More information for each will be discussed beforehand.
Please note that our examination will be conducted online through our course Canvas site at
https://utexas.instructure.com. In other words, your will need access to the internet and Canvas to
successfully complete our exam. For Canvas technical support during our examination, please call 855-308-
2494.
As your instructor, I am fully committed to respecting and welcoming students of all backgrounds, identities,
and abilities. In the event that you require specific arrangements as part of our examination in collaboration
with UT Services for Students with Disabilities, I kindly ask that you let me know in the very beginning of the
semester. Please do not wait until the very day of your examination to do so.
IV. Research (50%)
Approximately 50% of your total course grade will involve the completion of an original research project.
This project will be conducted through five (5) steps of assignments scheduled throughout the semester.
More information for each will be discussed extensively in-class and in our Canvas course site.
                           Material submitted for this class is subject
                             for screening for academic misconduct.
Extra Credit? When possible, extra credit assignments will be offered during the semester. Come to class
every day to stay informed on possible extra credit opportunities.
GUIDELINES + EXPECTATIONS
Statement on Learning Success
                                                            Latino Migration/Human Trafficking | Vásquez | Summer 2019


Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let us
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Several are
listed in this syllabus, and I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact UT Services for Students with
Disabilities ( http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability ) at (512) 471-6259 (voice), 1 (800) 329-3986 (video
phone), or email at sssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Title IX
Title IX, a segment of the Education Amendments of 1972, protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking
at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community,
the University can:
1.Intevene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating;
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
involved in a Title IX investigation;
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the University’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title
IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you or someone you know
has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources at
https://www.utexas.edu/student-affairs/policies/title-ix.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
Absences
Just to be clear, it is expected that you are present and prepared for every class during the semester. If you
are absent, you are responsible for any work missed if applicable. It is also expected that you communicate
with me and/or your teaching assistant in writing prior to the class.
The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays, University commitments, or
extenuating emergency circumstances. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday or
University commitment, please let your teaching assistant and/or instructor know in advance. If you miss
due to an emergency, be prepared to provide formal documentation. You will not be penalized for excused
absences, although you will still be responsible for any work missed on that day if applicable.
                                                              Latino Migration/Human Trafficking | Vásquez | Summer 2019


In the event that class may need to be cancelled for any unexpected emergency, we will do our absolute best
to let you know as soon as possible.
Grading
It is expected that all assignments will be completed on-time. Grades and individual feedback, if any, should
be posted no later than two (2) weeks after each assignment deadline. Should you any follow-up questions
regarding a specific assignment grade, you should contact your teaching assistant and/or instructor directly
no later than two-weeks after being posted in Canvas for full consideration. Do not wait until the end of the
semester.
TurnItIn
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an
archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to
determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the
faculty member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
Email Communication
When sending an email to your teaching assistant and/or instructor, always include your name and course
in the subject line. In this way, we can best respond and address your inquiry. Remember as well that any
email related to this class should be considered formal communication. Your email is not a text.
It is expected that your teaching assistant and/or instructor will respond to any email requests once
received. If you do not receive an email response after two-weeks, send another follow-up email and let us
know in-person.
Discussion Communication
When applicable, you will be asked to share your own thoughts and/or respond to other posts in Canvas
Discussion. Kindly remember that we should always be respectful of other’s ideas. Do not make insulting,
derogatory, or inflammatory statements to other members of the discussion group. Do your best to be
thoughtful, positive, and constructive in your posts, comments, and/or suggestions.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc.). Please advise our teaching assistant and/or your
instructor of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the teaching team of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Integrity
This course adheres with all expectations regarding academic integrity, including the principles of honesty,
trust, fairness, respect, and responsibility. Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. If you use words or
ideas that aren’t your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty (including cheating on tests, plagiarism on written
                                                              Latino Migration/Human Trafficking | Vásquez | Summer 2019


assignments, etc.) are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course. It is
each and every student’s responsibility to be familiar with UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor
Code which can be found at the following: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php.
The University of Texas Honor Code reads as follows: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Long live Longhorn nation!
R-E-S-P-E-C-T
It is expected that mutual respect is applied in everything that we do in this course. This means that we
refrain from any behavior that could disrupt our learning environment, such as calling, texting, smoking,
yelling, and the like. Be sure to turn off or put on vibrate mode your cell phone before the class begins. Use
of laptops are acceptable when taking notes during lectures only and should be put away during other class
activities. In addition, you are not allowed to use any video or audio recording devices during class.
In other words, respect is respect, is respect.
STUDENT RESOURCES
University Writing Center
The University Writing Center provides a relaxed, yet professional atmosphere in which writers from
across the curriculum can become more comfortable with processes of writing at all levels. Appointments
are available for all UT students at http://uwc.utexas.edu/appointments or by calling the UWC Front
Desk at 512-471-6222.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Services are available here at UT, and treatment
does work. The UT Counseling and Mental Health Center ( http://chmc.utexas.edu/ ) provides
counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals
and enhance their personal growth and well-being. The CMHC crisis line is available 24/7/365 at 512-471-
2255.
Copyright Information
More information about copyright law can be accessed at The TEACH Act or directly at
https://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/teachact.html.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call (512) 471-3614 (JES A332).
                                                             Latino Migration/Human Trafficking | Vásquez | Summer 2019


Libraries
For more information about The University of Texas Libraries, visit http://lib.utexas.edu or call 512-495-
4250.
IT Services
Walk-up services for any computer and IT help is available on the first-floor lobby of the Flawn Academic
Center (FAC), open Monday through Friday except during University Holidays. You can also contact IT
Services at http://it.utexas.edu or call 512-475-9400. For particular questions about Canvas, technical
support is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the semester at 855-308-2494.
BeVocal Syllabus Statement
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce
harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, please visit
http://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
Emergency Evacuation
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
        that the nearest exit door may be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
        week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
        building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
        at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
        found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
For more information regarding emergency evacuation, contact the Office of Campus Safety and Security at
512-471-5767 or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/.
COURSE CHANGES
The professor reserves the right to change and/or alter any component of this
course, with notice to students.
                                                           Latino Migration/Human Trafficking | Vásquez | Summer 2019


COURSE OUTLINE + READINGS + ASSIGNMENTS
           Summer 2019     Latino Migration/Human Trafficking
       Week 01 | Jul 15-19 *Readings | Canvas 01
                         M Introductions + Syllabus
                         T Research Project Step 01 Due In-Class
                        W  Lecture + Discussion
                       TH  Lecture + Discussion
                         F Online Discussion 01 Due
                      SUN  Research Step 02 Due
       Week 02 | Jul 22-26 *Readings | Canvas 02
                         M Lecture + Discussion
                         T Lecture + Discussion
                        W  Lecture + Discussion
                       TH  Lecture + Discussion
                         F Examination 01 Due
                      SUN  Research Step 03 Due
    Week 03 | Jul 29-Aug 2 *Readings | Canvas 03 + 04 + 05
                                       Slave Next Door, Chapter 1
                         M Lecture + Discussion
                         T Lecture + Discussion
                        W Lecture + Discussion
                       TH Lecture + Discussion
                         F Online Discussion 02 Due
        Week 04 | Aug 5-9 *Readings | Human Smuggling, Intro + Chapters 1-6 + Conclusion
                                       Slave Next Door, Chapter 2
                                       Canvas 06 + 07
                         M Lecture + Discussion
                         T Lecture + Discussion
                        W Lecture + Discussion
                       TH Lecture + Discussion
                         F Online Discussion 03 Due
                      SUN Research Step 04 Due
      Week 05 | Aug 12-16 *Readings | Canvas 08
                                       Slave Next Door, Chapter 03
                         M Lecture + Discussion
                         T Lecture + Discussion
                        W Lecture + Discussion
                       TH Preparation + Review
                         F Examination 02 Due
      Week 06 | Aug 19-23
                         M Research Step 05 Due
                                                    Latino Migration/Human Trafficking | Vásquez | Summer 2019
