324L Ethnographic Writing (31644) F 9-12 WCP 5.118
Katie Stewart (kstewart@mail.utexas.edu)
Office CLA 4.408 office hours M 2-3, F 12-1
Ethnography, meaning writing difference, describes ways of living and being in a complex
assemblage of forms, forces, bodies, practices, media, materialities, sensibilities and structures. It
can focus on any or all of these elements of a world. By participating and observing, it
experiments with conveying experiences, encounters, scenes, characters, events, aesthetics,
political constraints and possibilities.
As a method of writing, ethnography composes with what’s already composed. It can forms of
social science, art, science, creative nonfiction, auto-ethnography and more. It loves the details.
It hones in on angles, possibilities, and problematics – what might happen, what things in process
might become, what something might be related to, a pattern. In writing culture, we are learning
to describe with precision how a range of things impact lives.
This course is a writing workshop. We will build conceptual skills through writing; here, thought
does not precede writing but takes place in working with words. As writers, we’re trying to build
our voice, or the ability to develop thoughts by writing with conviction and self-confidence. We
are aiming for writing that is clear, direct, descriptive, creative, and actively approaching its
object.
Over the course of the semester, the students will write five 500-word descriptive, analytical,
artful papers. Each piece should be written in four drafts, using Peter Elbow’s method in Writing
Without Teachers: 45 minutes of fast writing followed by 15 minutes of hard editing to eliminate
all but the sentences or sentence fragments you think are true (or that really express your
thought, or have real potential). Write for an audience – your classmates and perhaps also the
people you are writing about (what would they think/say about what you’ve written? Would they
recognize themselves in it or be interested in the thoughts you’ve had?). Read your drafts aloud
to yourself.
In seminar, each person will read their work aloud while the others listen compositionally, taking
notes to offer creative concepts that spin off something that came up in one of the pieces of even
a concept or method that cuts across some of all the pieces. After four readings, we will discuss
the four pieces together. Learning to be good readers or listeners is part of the process of learning
to be good writers. A writer with skill thinks of her readership and writes to communicate and
have an influence.
Writing well begins with reading. There will be reading each week and prompts to link the
reading to your writing for the week.
Students will keep daily writing journals for the first seven weeks. This is fast, associative
writing about a scene or encounter. I will check, once a week, that it’s been done every day.
                                                    1


A final essay will be fashioned out of 3 of your short pieces and edited, edited, edited. This
should be 5-7 pages, double-spaced. Don’t try to come up with a single thesis to subsume the
separate pieces but, instead, hold your focus on the particularity of each piece and then look for
resonances between them. They can remain separate, even divided by an asterisk. Or you may
find a writing line that allows you to link the three pieces, editing them together.
There will be workshops on ethnography, auto-ethnography, editing, voice, descriptive writing,
and describing a world. There will also be many experiments an weekly writing prompts.
Requirements and Structure of the class
Everyone starts with 100 points. Points will be subtracted if you fail to complete assignments or
show inadequate development in your written essays.
1. Regular attendance and participation. 14% of the grade (one point off for every unexcused
absence)
2. Free-writing journals turned in each week. 14% of the grade. (one point off each week you
miss)
3. Five 500-word pieces to be turned in and read aloud in workshop. 50% of the grade.
4. Final essay. 22% of the grade.
If you are absent for a good reason, talk to me. You can make up the work with additional
writing.
Readings
Books:
Kathleen Stewart. Ordinary Affects.
Peter Elbow, Writing Without Teachers. (on canvas)
Jason Pine. The Alchemy of Meth: A Decomposition.
Ta-Nehisi Coates. Between the World and Me.
Susan Harding. The Book of Jerry Falwell.
Articles (on canvas):
Joey Russo. Severity.
Bilger, Burkhard. “The Egg Men.” The New Yorker, Sept. 5, 2005.
Orlean, Susan. “Little Wing: when homing pigeons leave home” Feb 13 & 20, 2006. The New
Yorker.
Greg Bottoms. Lowest White Boy (excerpts).
Henry Louis Gates. “In the Kitchen.”
January 24.
ethnographic research workshop
writing exercise
January 31.
Read: Elbow. Writing Without Teachers, chapters 1-3
                                                   2


Sensory ethnography writing experiment.
Workshop on descriptive writing.
Turn in daily free-writing journal (the prompt: write for ten minutes each day focused on
describing sensory details).
February 7.
Read: Elbow. Writing Without Teachers, chapters 4 – appendix essay
Read your 1st 500-word piece focused on developing your voice. Bring all four drafts.
Workshop on voice.
Turn in daily free-writing journal (the prompt – write ten minutes a day focused on your voice.
Experiment – write in the voice of someone you encounter, describe the same scene in two
pieces with different attitudes, can you try a loud-voiced writing, a quiet tone…)
February 14 (no class)
Read: Kathleen Stewart. Ordinary Affects.
Do your daily writing in the mode of Ordinary Affects – write scenes and encounters (one every
day). Hand in next week and be prepared to read at least one of them.
February 21.
Read: Orlean, Susan. “Little Wing: when homing pigeons leave home” Feb 13 & 20, 2006. The
New Yorker.
Bilger, Burkhard. “The Egg Men.” The New Yorker, Sept. 5, 2005.
Ethnographic experiment and workshop on worlding.
Turn in daily free-writing journal (Prompt – imagine some worlds in what you encounter – that
guy’s world, the world of advertising, the dog park world, the world of the gym, etc).
February 28
Read:
Read your 2cd 500-word piece describing or evoking a world. Bring all four drafts
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
March 6
Read:
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
March 13
Read: Greg Bottoms. American Apartheid (excerpt).
        Henry Louis Gates. “In the Kitchen.”
        Joey Russo. Severity.
Read your 3rd 500-word piece on the learning/performance/creation/contagion of collective
sensibilities. Bring all four drafts.
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
March 20. Spring Break
                                                  3


March 27
Read: Susan Harding. The Book of Jerry Falwell.1st half
Ethnographic experiment on relations between worlds and the multifaceted composition of a
world.
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
April 3
Read: Susan Harding. The Book of Jerry Falwell. 2cd half
Read your 4th 500-word piece on relations between worlds and the multifaceted composition of a
world. Bring all four drafts.
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
April 10
Read: Jason Pine. The Alchemy of Meth: A Decomposition. 1st half.
Ethnographic experiment on power, assemblage, decomposition.
Turn in daily free-writing journal (prompt: try to write like Pine– in a voice you invent from
reading him, or on topics he addresses, etc).
April 17
Read: Jason Pine. The Alchemy of Meth: A Decomposition. 2cd half.
Read your 5th 500-word piece on power, assemblage, and decomposition. Bring all four drafts.
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt: continue writing in tune with Pin).e
April 24
Select and carefully edit together 3-5 of your 500-word pieces. You may include new pieces if
you like. Look for, and create, links, resonances, parallels between them if that works but don’t
lose the singularities you’ve developed in each piece. DON’T now impose a single theme in an
effort to pull them all together but experiment with developing the thoughts in each piece. Part of
that experiment is putting them beside each other and experimenting with their relations. Rewrite
at least 5 times.
Small group workshops.
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
May 1
1st half of the class reads their final papers
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
May 8
2cd half of the class reads their final papers
Turn in free-writing journal. (prompt:
                                                 4


                                                  *****
Rubric for the five 500-word pieces (50% of the grade)
Your piece should be written in four drafts, using the elbow method (from our first reading, Peter
Elbow’s Writing Without Teachers) which is 45 minutes of fairly fast writing followed by 15
minutes of hard editing on what you just wrote to eliminating all but the sentences or sentence
fragments you think are true (really express your thought, or start to develop it). Print or write
out each draft. Bring all four drafts with you to class. Please label your final draft.
The writing should be descriptive and ethnographic. It should be about some aspects of a some
world which could be a conversation, a political economic structure, a moment in your life
entangled in forms, objects, and sensibilities. The style can be as creative or social scientific as
you like.
Remember you are not just reporting dead facts but composing an account of already composed
of ways of living and being. You can include descriptions of people, language, places, situations,
bodies, events, or objects in your writing. Work with the details (what did that character say,
what color was the water in the ocean that day). Your paper may assemble different kinds of
significance (explicit meanings, unspoken but visceral bodily feelings, collective sensibilities,
differences, infrastructures, etc).
So be a composer. Actively produce a picture of what you’re trying to describe. Be creative. Be
precise. Be clear (don’t use jargon and try eliminating all the words you don’t need). Try writing
in very short sentences. You can later add some longer sentences into the mix to create a rhythm
to the writing as a whole. Be direct. Try to approach your object of description from several
different angles (its materiality, its history, its status as an icon, etc) or describe multiple
possibilities of what could happen, or how it might affect other things.
Write for an audience – your classmates, an ideal reader, the people you are writing about (what
would they think/say about what you’ve written? Would they recognize themselves in it or be
interested in the thoughts you’ve had?). Try to hear your words, your voice. Try reading your
piece aloud.
Rubric for the final essay
The final essay should be written by editing together 3-5 of the short weekly essays. 5-7 double-
spaced pages in 12 point. 30% of the grade. Don’t try to come up with a single thesis to subsume
the separate pieces but, instead, hold your focus on the particularity of each piece and then look
for resonances between them as you select the pieces to piece together. They can remain separate
rather than be pulled into a single argument, even separated by an asterisk. Or you may find a
writing line that allows you to link the three pieces, editing them together. It’s up to you.
                                                      5


6