                               CULTURES IN CONTACT
                          ANT 326L (31185)/LAS 324L (38805)
                                           Fall 2019
                        Class Meeting: SAC 4.174, T/Th 11-12:15
Professor R. Alan Covey
Email: r.alan.covey@austin.utexas.edu Tel.: 512-232-2084
Office: RLP 4.406 Office Hours: T/Th 9:30-10:30 am (schedule through Canvas), and
by appt
Teaching Assistant
Nikki Payntar
Email: npayntar@utexas.edu
Office: RLP 4.418 Office Hours: By appointment (Nikki will be organizing periodic
writing workshops as a way to help students with written work.)
Table of Contents
 I. Rationale……….1                   VI. Course Requirements….5           IX. Other University
 II. Course Aims and                     • Attendance and              Notices and Policies………9
 Objectives…2                       participation                           • Use of e-mail
       • Aims                            • Religious Holy Days              • Documented Disability
       • Specific Learning               • Readings/Materials                  Statement
 Objectives                              • Assignments and                 • Behavior Concerns
 III. Format and                    Assessment                         Advice
 Procedures………2                          • Use of Canvas and                   Line (BCAL)
 IV. Tentative Course               Squarecap                               • Q-drop Policy
 Schedule.....2                     VII. Grading
 V. My Assumptions…..5              Procedures………..8
                                    VIII. Academic
                                    Integrity…….….8
                                          • UT Honor Code
I. Rationale: America’s cultural diversity was already well along in the process of
formation in 1776, and it is important to understand how culture contacts and European
colonization after 1492 continue to influence our society in the 21st century. This course
is designed to provide a large-scale context for thinking about the roots of American
diversity and how they shape modern inequality. We will begin by looking at Europe and
the Americas before 1492, and then will trace patterns of European colonization,
indigenous responses, experiences of the African diaspora, and the treatment of new
immigrant populations over time. The course will also consider how American policies
toward Native Americans have changed since the time of independence.
                                               1


Cultural Diversity Flag: This course carries the Cultural Diversity flag. By definition
“[t]he Cultural Diversity requirement increases your familiarity with the variety and
richness of the American cultural experience. Courses carrying this flag ask you to
explore the beliefs, practices, and histories of at least one cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization. Many of these courses also encourage you to
reflect on your own cultural experiences.”
II. Course Aims and Objectives:
Aims: Required readings, lecture slides, and class activities are designed to work
together to achieve several core aims. These include the consideration of the broader
historical context of European colonization in the Americas, discussion of colonization
strategies and responses by marginalized groups, and consideration of how the early
centuries of European expansions have shaped cultural diversity in the US today.
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
        •   develop skills in information access and management by working with class
            readings, lecture slides, and internet sources to answer important questions
            during class activities.
        •   demonstrate mastery of the key facts of culture contact and colonization in the
            Americas through several short reaction papers.
        •   establish and communicate in writing critical stances about important issues in
            American cultural diversity, reflected a short policy paper.
Real Life Skills: This course is designed to build important “soft skills” that employers
look for when hiring. These include basic professionalism, teamwork, problem solving,
and communication with diverse groups of people. The “flipped” course format
emphasizes consistent self-motivation, and class activities are designed to develop
information management and oral communication skills.
III. Format and Procedures: There are three important parts of this course. The first is
individual review of class readings and PowerPoint lectures prior to the class
meeting. Each student is expected to come to class having already read the required
reading for that day and reviewed class materials posted on Canvas. The second is active
participation in class activities. Rather than repeat the material from slides and required
readings, we will build on that foundation through different activities, including class
discussions, collaborative conversations to answer reading questions, and work to
develop skills in accessing and assessing web-based information. The third is timely
completion of graded work. Attendance is required, and graded work includes several
papers. Consulting Canvas in advance and using the resources there will aid in the
successful completion of work.
                                               2


IV. Tentative Course Schedule: * Required article **This syllabus represents my
current plans and objectives. As we go through the semester, those plans may need to
change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes, communicated
clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
                     WEEK 1: Inconvenient Self-Evident Truths
Thursday, 8/29: Unalienable Rights and Present-Day Inequities
                       WEEK 2: Stirrings of European Empire
Tuesday, 9/3: Power in Europe from AD 1000-1500
        Readings: A Wikipedia Tour of Medieval Europe
Thursday, 9/5: Intolerance, Inequality, and Fear in Early Modern Empires
        Readings: Rubiés 2011
        DUE: Reaction Paper
                WEEK 3: Native American Societies and First Contact
Tuesday, 9/10: Native North America before Contact
        Readings: Wesson 2016, and ONE of the following: Bauer 2016; Brooks 2016;
Doerfler and Redix 2016; Fisher 2016; Ostler 2016; Shannon 2016; Smoak 2016; Snyder
2016; Worl 2016;
Thursday, 9/12: Early Voyages and Coastal Conquests
        Readings: Reséndez, Introduction and Chapter 1
                    WEEK 4: Spanish Colonial Political Economy
Tuesday, 9/17: Spanish Interior Expeditions and Challenges to Spanish Claims
        Readings: Schwartz 2011; Skim “Ship of Fools,” “Utopia,” “Four Elements,”
“Durer,” and “Fortunate Isles” in Primary Sources folder on Canvas
Thursday, 9/19: Spanish Expansion and Colonial Policy
        Readings: Reséndez, Chapter 2-3
                 WEEK 5: Colonial Impacts and Indigenous Strategies
Tuesday, 9/24: Slave Trading and the Spanish Colonial Economy
        Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 4-5
Thursday, 9/26: Native Responses to Spanish Encroachment
        Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 6-7
               WEEK 6: European Responses to American Discoveries
Tuesday, 10/1: Contact and Expansion in Texas and the US Southwest (Guest: Brad
Jones, Texas Historical Commission)
        Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 8-9
        DUE: Response Paper 1
Thursday, 10/3: FILM: “After the Mayflower”
        Readings: Salisbury 2016
                                            3


                 WEEK 7: Settler Colonization in North America
Tuesday, 10/8: European Colonization in North America
       Readings: Ethridge 2016; “Mingled Like Fish at Sea,”
Thursday, 10/10: Indigenous Responses to Contact and Colonization
       Readings: DuVal 2016
                  WEEK 8: American Displacement and Removal
Tuesday, 10/15: FILM: “Tecumseh’s Vision”
       Readings: Saunt 2016
Thursday, 10/17: The Indian Removal Act and the Trail of Tears
       Readings: Calloway 2016; Smith 2016
       DUE: Rough Draft of Policy Paper
                          WEEK 9: The African Diaspora
Tuesday, 10/22: Slavery, African Resistance, and White Race-Making
       Readings: Diouf 2003; McCusker and Menard 2010
Thursday, 10/24: Archaeology and the African-American Experience (Guest: Dr. Maria
                 Franklin, UT)
       Readings: Ferguson 1992; Franklin 1997
        WEEK 10: Diversity and Inequality in the Early Nineteenth Century
Tuesday, 10/29: American Diversity at the Time of the Civil War
      Readings: Parrillo 1994
Thursday, 10/31: Peer Review Session
       DUE: Response Paper 2
Saturday, 11/2: Austin Powwow (Extra Credit)
                          WEEK 11: American Exclusion
Tuesday, 11/5: Westward Expansion and American Diversity
       Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 10-12
Thursday, 11/7: The Closing Frontier and the New Intolerance
       Readings: Bowes 2016
                         WEEK 12: Representing “Indians”
Tuesday, 11/12: FILM: “Geronimo”
       Readings: Scott 2003
Thursday, 11/14: Native Americans in Anthropology and Popular Culture
       Readings: Stevens 2016, pp. 1-12
                WEEK 13: From Self-Representation to Civil Rights
Tuesday, 11/19: U.S. Indian Policy after the Closing of the Frontier
       Readings: Rosier 2016
Thursday, 11/21: The Native American Rights Movement
       Readings: Warrior 2016
       DUE: Response Paper 3
                                            4


                                  WEEK 14: Radical Steps
Tuesday, 11/26: FILM: “Wounded Knee”
         Readings: Thrush 2016
Thursday, 11/28: NO CLASS (THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY)
                     WEEK 15: Ethnic Pluralism in the United States
Tuesday, 12/3: Diversity and Representation in 21st-century America
         Readings: DeMain 2016; Stevens 2016, pp. 13-to end; Warren and Twine 1997
Thursday, 12/5: Student Panels
         DUE: Policy Paper
THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM FOR THIS COURSE
V. My Assumptions
         I approach this class with the assumption that most students have learned the
basics of European and American political and military history, although they may be
fuzzy at this point in the academic career. I assume that most students have not formally
studied the history of European colonization of the Americas or the development of the
United States with a primary focus on the impacts on marginalized groups. Some of the
facts that will be presented in this course might be difficult for some students to accept
and process, and I welcome all students to come and talk to me about difficult material. I
plan to spend class time answering questions that the readings and materials bring up, and
doing activities that will help to reinforce the central concept of the course: that diversity
is the great strength of the United States, but something that Americans have wrestled
with for centuries. Some of today’s biggest cultural challenges are legacies of the earliest
cultural contacts between the New World and the Old.
VI. Course Requirements:
         1.   Classroom Policies: Although attendance is not a graded component of the
course, the Monte Carlo quizzes and in-class activities are designed to encourage regular,
on-time class attendance and active participation. We will use class meetings to build on
the ideas presented in required readings and slides, answer unresolved questions about
the week’s content, and carry out activities to reinforce learning. Respect is a central
expectation for this class. This course studies a broad range of human culture over time,
and the principle of respect extends to every individual in our class, and to all human
societies that we will learn about. Respect also extends to the appropriate use of
technology, and refraining from distracting or disruptive behavior. Laptops and tablets
are only permitted in the classroom for accessing class notes, and for some class
activities. Please limit your device use to class activities. Mobile phones should be
switched off or into airplane mode and should not be used in the classroom, except as a
backup device during technology-oriented activities.
Religious Holy Days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence
at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
                                               5


religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to make up any missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Excused Absences: Students participating in an officially sanctioned, scheduled
University extracurricular activity will be given the opportunity to make up class
assignments or other graded assignments missed as a result of their participation.
Emergency Absences: Students who experience an emergency that prevents them to
attend class need to provide reasonable documentation within a week of returning to class
in order to have the absence excused so that they can make up a missed quiz or activity.
Personal information (e.g., SSN, medical diagnosis) can be redacted from that
documentation to protect student privacy.
        2.   Course Readings/Materials: Most class readings will be articles posted on
Canvas, but we also have one required book, which should be available from the Co-op:
Andrés Reséndez (2016) The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian
    Enslavement in America. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
In addition to the required book, the following articles are required readings for the
course. Many of these are freely available through UT’s electronic journals
subscriptions. If possible, a pdf file of each reading will be placed on Canvas prior to the
class meeting. Students are responsible for accessing these readings.
Bauer, Jr., William J. “California.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Bowes, John. “US Expansion and Its Consequences, 1815-1890.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.),
    The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Brooks, James. “The Southwest.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Calloway, Colin G. “Treaties and Treaty-Making.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford
    Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
DeMain, Paul. “Contemporary History: Native America in the Twenty-First Century.” In
    Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford
    University Press.
Diouf, Sylviane A. “Introduction.” In Sylviane A. Diouf (ed.), Fighting the Slave Trade: West
    African Strategies (2003) Ohio University Press.
Doerfler, Jill, and Erik Redix. “The Great Lakes.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford
    Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
DuVal, Kathleen. “Living in a Reordered World, 1680-1763.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The
    Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Ethridge, Robbie. “European Invasions and Early Settlement, 1500-1680.” In Frederick E.
    Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University
    Press.
Fisher, Andrew. “The Pacific Northwest.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Franklin, Maria. "Why are there so few black American archaeologists?" Antiquity 71, no. 274
    (1997): 799-801.
                                                 6


McCusker, John J., and Russell R. Menard. “The Origins of Slavery in the Americas.” In Mark
    M. Smith and Robert L. Paquette (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Slavery in the Americas
    (2010). Oxford University Press.
Ostler, Jeffrey. “The Plains.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American
    Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Parrillo, Vincent N. “Diversity in America: A Sociohistorical Analysis.” Sociological Forum
    9(4):523-545.
Rosier, Paul C. “Surviving the Twentieth Century, 1890-1960.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The
    Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Rubiés, Juan Pau. “The Worlds of Europeans, Africans, and Americans, c. 1490.” In Frederick E.
    Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University
    Press.
Salisbury, Neal. “The Atlantic Northeast.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Saunt, Claudio. “The Age of Imperial Expansion, 1763-1821.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The
    Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Schwartz, Stuart B. “The Iberian Atlantic to 1650.” In Nicholas Canny and Philip Morgan
    (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the Atlantic World: 1450-1850 (2011). Oxford University
    Press.
Scott, Douglas D. “Oral Tradition and Archaeology: Conflict an Concordance Examples from
    Two Indian War Sites.” Historical Archaeology 37(3):55-65.
Shannon, Timothy. “Iroquoia.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American
    Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Smith, Troy. “Indian Territory and Oklahoma.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford
    Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Smoak, Gregory E. “The Great Basin.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Snyder, Christina. “The South.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American
    Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Stevens, Scott Manning. “Collectors and Museums: From Cabinets of Curiosities to Indigenous
    Cultural Centers.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian
    History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Thrush, Coll. “Urban Native Histories.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Warren, Jonathan W., and France Winddance Twine. "White Americans, the new minority?:
    Non-blacks and the ever-expanding boundaries of whiteness." Journal of Black Studies 28,
    no. 2 (1997): 200-218.
Warrior, Robert. “The Indian Renaissance, 1960-2000: Stumbling to Victory, or Anecdotes of
    Persistence?” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History
    (2016). Oxford University Press.
Wesson, Cameron. “America in 1492.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Worl, Rosita Kaaháni. “Alaska.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
         3.      Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
Late Assignments: Assignments that are not submitted by their deadline will be
considered late, and will have 10% of their total value deducted per 24-hour period,
including weekends. Late assignments will not be accepted more than one week after the
deadline.
                                                7


Grade Issues: If you feel that your work has been evaluated inaccurately or unfairly, it is
your responsibility to bring this to the attention of the TA who graded it within one week
after your graded work is returned to you or posted on Canvas. Please review your
graded work when it is returned or posted, and let us know if you feel that there are any
problems.
         4.      Use of Canvas in class: This class uses Canvas for Web-based course
management functions. Canvas can be accessed at http://canvas.utexas.edu/. The
university provides support and tutorials for interested students. It is your responsibility
to learn and access the site in order to prepare for classes, labs, and exams. For this
course, Canvas will be used primarily as a place to post the course syllabus, slides from
lectures, review sheets, required journal articles, and assignments.
         .
VII. Grading Policies: Final grades will be based on:
         (a) Monte Carlo Quizzes and Class Activities (25% of final grade). At the start
of each class, a die will be rolled to determine whether a quiz will be given, testing
students on questions given in advance for the required readings. Some class activities
might include work to be submitted for a grade.
         (b) Response Papers (45% of final grade). Each student will prepare three
response papers (15% each) in response to prompts related to required readings and class
activities.
         (c) Policy Paper (30% total). Students will produce a short reaction paper (5%
of final grade) early in the semester, identifying an area of policy related to marginalized
groups in the US. They will develop a specific policy position, submitting a rough draft
(5%) for peer review. Each student will submit a final policy paper (15%), and students
will work together in groups to present their perspectives in student panels (5%).
Grade Scale:
A: 93.0+                                            C-: 70.00-72.99
A-: 90.00-92.99                                     D+: 67.00-69.99
B+: 87.00-89.99                                     D: 63.00-66.99
B: 83.00-86.99                                      D-: 60.00-62.99
B-: 80.00-82.99                                     F: Below 60.00
C+: 77.00-79.99                                     Note: Grades will not be rounded
C: 73.00-76.99
VIII. Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code: Each student in the course is expected to abide by the
University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” This
means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work,
unless it is assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment
whether collaboration is encouraged or not.
                                                8


Study and Review: Students are encouraged to work in small study groups to prepare for
class meetings and to discuss course materials prior to lectures. Students should prepare
their own notes, and may NOT use materials prepared by others. Notes may NOT be
circulated (via social media or other means) without prior permission from the professor.
Copying the notes or review materials produced by another student will be considered a
violation of the Honor Code by both students.
Assignments: Students are solely responsible for completing their own assignments.
Always cite relevant sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you
have used in previous class), you must make that clear or you will be guilty of plagiarism
and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy, posted at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
IX. Other University Notices and Policies
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students: All students should become
familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily,
but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for
updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
•       Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
•       Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
        accessible
•       Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors,
call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be
anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and
share your concerns.
Q drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
                                              9


law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Emergency Evacuation Policy
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official
representative.
•        Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building.
•        Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.
•        In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
•        Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                              10
