Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                            SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
course:             LAR 381R / ARC 380C Drawing Entanglements: Thinking and Making Landscape
unique number: 01644 / 00954
type of course:     workshop
credits:            3
instructor:         Phoebe Lickwar
schedule:           Thursdays 9:30 – 11am SUT 4.118
                    Fridays 9am – Noon WMB 5.112 or Laguna Gloria
semester:           Fall 2019
Catalog Description
Advanced topics in media and interpretation, such as freehand drawing, measured drawings, aspects of computer
graphics, geographic information systems, and photography.
Course Description
Drawing Entanglements: Thinking and Making Landscape is an exploration of drawing as a form of inquiry and as a
vehicle for generating design concepts. Drawing in this course is understood as an interactive process of discovery,
facilitating ideation and imagination, rather than as a tool for communicating something that is already known. The
course problematizes the dominant use of digital drawing in architectural design as a seamless and placeless
illustrative technique and proposes alternative approaches that are site specific and generative.
Students will engage an expanded field of drawing practices through a variety of media, including traditional drawing
materials, alternative photographic processes, and digital investigations. The 14-acre landscape of Laguna Gloria,
along the shores of Lake Austin, will serve as the topic of a semester-long investigation. Students will develop
techniques that activate existing site materials to create analytical and observational drawings. These entanglements
will form the basis for an experimental practice of mark making that is relational and contingent. Translation of these
drawings into serial compositions and digital iterations will immerse students in process based work that facilitates
the production of unique, site specific concepts and forms.
Learning Objectives
•     Employ drawing as a means of observation, analysis, and ideation
•     Learn techniques activating the materials of the site to make generative physical inscriptions
•     Develop an iterative process of visual thinking using analog and digital techniques
•     Create composite drawings that juxtapose varying temporalities, scales, and drawing types
Course Structure
Thursday Pinup and Discussion 9:30-11:00am
The Thursday class meeting will be devoted to lectures, pinups, and discussions of readings drawn from the fields of
art and architectural design. Please come to class prepared to pin-up your work each week.
Friday Workshops 9am – Noon
Class meetings on Fridays prioritize work in the field. These workshops are intended to help you develop a suite of
methods and approaches through on site drawing exercises. The final weeks of the semester will be devoted to the
completion of a final project that emerges out of earlier experiments.


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                               SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Attendance
With the exception of faculty exemption or an excused absence, class attendance is mandatory. Students with three
[3] unexcused absences may be dropped from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than
three [3] unexcused absences is a full letter drop in the final grade for the course. Students should contact the
instructor prior to class if they expect to be absent or late.
Absences based on religious observances must be arranged fourteen [14] days in advance. Any work missed during
that time must be turned in within one week [7 days] of the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work
within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Attendance is expected for all lectures, field trips, studio sessions, and discussions. If a class meeting has to be
rescheduled, it will be done in a timely manner, with the intention of accommodating the majority of the course
participants' schedules.
Grade Percentages
Class Participation                    20%
Drawing Exercises                      40%
Final Project                          40%
Grade Evaluation
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic areas.
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of each
grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of issues. Work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over
the semester.
Each student will be assessed according to the effort expended in the following primary areas [each weighted .33]:
          Intent: project has clear conceptual intent [idea] that addresses the assignment’s stated objectives
          Development: project rigorously examines, tests, and refines conceptual intent
          Resolution: project is complete conceptually and technically, as demonstrated through the verbal and
          graphic presentation.
Assignments are to be completed in the time allowed. With the exception of a medical or personal emergency, late
work will be reduced by one letter grade per each 24 hour period after the stated assignment deadline.
Grade Scale
Final grades will be computed in accordance with School of Architecture and University Academic Policies as
follows:
            grade    quality         performance level                                               points
            A        excellent       Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness,       4.0
                                     appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor,
                                     craft, and personal development. Student pursues
                                     concepts and techniques above and beyond what is
                                     discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
                                                                                                                     Page 2


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                              SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
           A-                                                                                       3.67
           B+                                                                                       3.33
           B         good           Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued,       3.0
                                    and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and
                                    suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
                                    required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
                                    demonstrates potential for excellence.
           B-                                                                                       2.67
           C+                                                                                       2.33
           C         required       Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions             2.0
                                    made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor.
                                    Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
           C-                                                                                       1.67
           D         poor           Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills,   1.0
                                    model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation
                                    are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate
                                    the required design skill and knowledge base.
           D-                                                                                       .67
           F         unacceptable Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met.            0.0
                                    Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will
                                    be assigned when you have excessive unexcused
                                    absences.
           X         excused        Issued only in the case of compelling, nonacademic
                     incomplete     circumstances beyond the student's control. Simply not
                                    completing work on time is an inadequate cause for
                                    assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
                                    consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an
                                    agreement as to a new completion date. According to
                                    School of Architecture policy, studio work must be
                                    completed before the second week of the next design
                                    semester in which the student is enrolling.
All grades are subject to deductions for absences, late work, and late arrivals.
Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the grade to be
reduced, remain unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an individual basis, not as a comparison
with other students' grades.
Coursework Submission
Course material submitted for evaluation will be retained by the Program for professional accreditation. Material that
is not necessary for accreditation will be returned to the student within one academic semester.
At the semester’s end, all final work must be submitted as digital files utilizing a UTBOX or another cloud based
service. Individual vector based files should be submitted as high quality pdfs; individual raster based images should
                                                                                                                  Page 3


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
be submitted as 300 dpi tiffs. Complete boards should be submitted as high quality pdfs. File names should conform
to the following nomenclature: 19_LAR_381R Drawing_lastname_assignment_title
Examples: 19_LAR_381R Drawing_Brusson_Cyanotype_Image01.tiff
A student’s Final Grade will be withheld until documentation has been submitted.
Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honest, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Plagiarism or violations of academic integrity in any form will be handled according to measures as outlined by the
General Information catalog and the University. All course related work submitted for evaluation is to be original and
prepared without unauthorized assistance. Work that is supplemented from ideas not originating from the student
should clearly cite the parent source.
Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action, including the receipt of
a failing grade for the course, and possible dismissal from the University. Since such infractions harm the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
Faculty: Phoebe Lickwar
Office Location:
Office Hours: email for appointment
Primary Contact: plickwar@utexas.edu
Office hours will be maintained by appointment only, in order to discuss issues related to the schedule, evaluation,
coursework, etc. Please do not hesitate to notify the instructor of impending schedule conflicts with other classes.
E-mail Correspondence
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading
their email for university and course-related information and announcements. Students must keep the university
informed about changes to their e-mail address (see http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php). Students
should check e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
can be time critical.
When composing email, include “LAR 381R” in the subject line along with the topic of your inquiry. Emails should
address the instructor and be professional in tone. The instructor will endeavor to reply in a timely manner or will
address your question in class.
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512.471.6259 or
512.471.4641. See also https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                                                                                                   Page 4


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                             SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
Contact the BCAL to discuss your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512.232.5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Course Materials
Required Reading
All required reading materials will be on reserve in the Architecture and Planning Library or distributed digitally
through Canvas. Weekly reading assignments are listed in the course schedule. The following texts are
recommended for purchase:
Distance & Engagement: Walking, Thinking and Making Landscape, Alice Foxley, 2010
Composite Landscapes, Charles Waldheim and Andrea Hansen, 2014
Apparitions: Frottages and Rubbings from 1860 to Now, Allegra Pesenti, 2015
Cyanotype: The Blueprint in Contemporary Practice, Christina Z. Anderson, 2019
Drawing Materials
The following materials can be sourced locally at Jerry's Artarama or Asel Art, or online at Blick Art Materials.
(http://www.dickblick.com).
Drawing Board 18”x24” minimum
Charcoal: General’s Compressed Sticks or other
Drawing Pad 18” x 24”
Kneaded Eraser
Graphite Sticks: Lyra Graphit-Kreide (graphite crayons), General's Compressed Graphite Sticks, or other
Sketch Pad 9”x12” 100 sheets minimum
Cyanotype Materials
The following materials will be needed for our work in cyanotype (refer to course schedule for dates). These
materials can be obtained from Bostick and Sullivan, Asel Art, Jerry’s Artarama or Blick.
*Please wait to buy these supplies until after our first class meeting.
Cyanotype Printing Kit - 250 ml
Cyanotype Toning Kit - 500 ml (optional)
Japanese Hake Brush (stitch tied, no metal ferrule), 2” or 3” wide
Paper: 10 sheets 22” x 30” or 60 sheet 9”x 12” pad, or equivalent: Arches Aquarelle 140lb Hot Press Watercolor
Paper, Arches Platine Watercolor Paper, Heavy Kozo Paper, or Lana Aquarelle 140 lb Hot Press
Photographers' Formulary 8x10" Contact Print Frame (optional, available at B&H)
                                                                                                                    Page 5
