                AFS 321L SYLLABUS
             Unique Numbers 30445
  Air Force Leadership Studies I
Course Syllabus AY 19-20 (Fall Semester)
                 AFROTC Detachment 825
             The University of Texas at Austin
      Major Hien V. Nguyen, Associate Professor
                Office Phone: (512) 232-2372
        Office: RLP 5.726A Hours by Appointment


                                                                                      Fall 2019
MEMORANDUM FOR AS300 STUDENTS
FROM: Major Hien V. Nguyen
SUBJECT: Welcome to AS300 / Air Force Leadership Studies I
1. Welcome to the first semester of the course, “Air Force Leadership Studies I.” This course is
designed to build on the leadership fundamentals taught in AS200.
2. The classroom is a non-attribution environment where academic freedom is fully supported.
You are encouraged to express your views in a respectful manner. Your academics is priority
and I expect all of you to be prepared and ready for the challenges of this semester.
3. As newly minted POCs, I expect all of you to lead by example. What type of leader do you
want to be for the GMCs looking up to you? Remember, I have sat in your seat as a UT Cadet so
I know what you all are going through. Give maximum effort, never give up, and leave a legacy
as you embark on your final few years as the newest leaders of Det 825.
                  Integrity First—Service before Self—Excellence in All We Do!
                                                                 // signed //
                                                      HIEN V. NGUYEN, Major, USAF
                                                      Associate Professor, Air Force Science
                                                                                                2


                                        Course Syllabus AY 19-20
                      AFROTC Detachment 825, The University of Texas at Austin
Course Location and Hours: (31025) Tues, Thurs 0800-0930, RLP 5.404
                                  (31030) Tues, Thurs 0930-1100, RLP 5.404
Office Location and Hours:                RLP 5.722 – hours by appointment
                                          Office: 512-232-2371
                                          E-mail: hien.nguyen@austin.utexas.edu
Course Objectives:
You will have the opportunity to utilize your skills as you begin more of a leadership role in the
detachment. The goal is for you to have a more in-depth understanding of how to effectively lead people,
and we will provide you with the tools to use throughout the detachment leadership roles. Secondly, you
will hone your writing and briefing skills. Many of you will be uncomfortable with public speaking, and
this semester is designed to get used to briefing. The course continues into advanced skills and ethics
training that will prepare you to become an officer and a supervisor.
                                             Attendance Policy
AFROTC Attendance Policy (AFROTCI 36-2011, 9.10.1): Cadets must achieve a minimum of
80 percent attendance over the course of the term to receive a passing final grade. Treat class as
a military appointment. If you will be late or unable to attend, make every effort to coordinate
this with the instructor before class. Examples of excusable absences are: Family emergency,
conflicting appointments (i.e. - Air Force physical), and events beyond your control. Examples
of unexcused absences are: studying for a test, sleeping in, etc. Make-up work may be allowed
for excused absence at the discretion of the instructor.
When you must miss class for valid, unavoidable reasons, notify your instructor as soon as
possible but no later than before class start time. In case of unexpected circumstances (i.e.,
emergencies), you should notify me no later than 24 hours after class session. Alternate
requirements or makeup activities will be arranged for the valid, unavoidable criteria listed
below:
             •   Participation in an approved field trip or other official University activity (e.g.,
                 athletics, debate, music, theater arts, AFROTC physical). Note: Fraternity and/or
                 sorority functions are not official University activities; or
             •   Sickness or medical confinement…must provide documentation (missing class
                 because you have a headache from studying late the night before is an unexcused
                 absence); or
             •   An emergency (e.g., death in the family, automobile accident).
         ****Administrative Requirement: Regardless of circumstance, if you miss class, email
         course instructor within 24 hours about the absence (with ABSENT as your subject line).
                                                                                                        3


        Any unexcused absence will result in a 2% reduction of your overall class grade.
Academic only (non-cadet) students are also required to meet the 80 percent requirement.
                                 Student Responsibilities and Guidelines
   •    When a ranking officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to attention
        until told to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the classroom, the
        students must again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer leaves the classroom.
        Class members will select a class monitor and alternate who will make these announcements for
        all class sessions. Rotate these duties to different individuals for each class.
   •    Students are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class discussions, but
        you must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address the instructor as
        sir/ma’am or by rank (e.g., Captain, Major, and Colonel) and address NCOs as sergeant.
   •    No smoking, or use of other tobacco products while in class (tobacco use of any kind is
        prohibited on the UT campus). Drinks are allowed; however, containers must have a lid.
   •    Cell phones will be put away and turned off during class.
   •    Use of laptops/tablets is only permitted for note taking, unless additional use authorized by
        instructor to support class objectives.
Cadet Standards: Cadets must be aware of membership requirements (refer to AFROTCI 36-2011).
Here’s a recap of your requirements (these are not all-inclusive):
   •    Report all negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72 hours. If
        the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets may wait to report
        the involvement NLT 72 hours after their return to classes following the break.
   •    Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours (exceptions for final semester) and term
        and cumulative GPA of 2.00 or greater. You must also pass all AS courses with a C or better
        and no F or incomplete grades in any of your classes. Correspondence courses must have prior
        approval to be considered in your full-time status. For scholarship cadets, maintain term and
        cumulative GPA of 2.50 or greater. Additionally, should a contract cadet’s cumulative GPA
        drop below 2.50, a Conditional Event will be issued. We will also investigate for disenrollment,
        except for first term HSSP scholarship winners whose scholarship will be suspended.
   •    Remain in good standing at your institution.
   •    Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with your course instructor in advance.
   •    Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
   •    Meet medical standards and advise us of any changes in your status.
   •    Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
   •    Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all military
        officers outside, and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all ranking cadet
        officers, of all military services, when in uniform. Unless told to enter at ease, you must use
        proper reporting procedures when entering the office of a commissioned officer.
   •    Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming and
        weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and appearance
        standards are followed on- and off-duty.
                                                                                                        4


    •    Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008, cadets will wear their
         uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and for
         Practical Military Training (PMT). If not in military uniform, all cadets will wear appropriate
         civilian attire to their AS class. At all times, appropriate uniform or civilian clothes will be worn
         in RLP. NO hats will be worn in the buildings at any time.
    •    Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with
         military order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of or inflict cruelty on
         subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or privilege to which
         they are legally entitled. Be honorable, be respectful.
    •    Drugs & Alcohol: No drugs, period. No drinking alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be
         responsible—do not abuse alcohol and never drive while or after drinking.
                                                Administration
Timeliness: Be on time; treat class as a military appointment.
Course Materials: Leading People/Effective Communication – AS300 Student Study Guide, The
Tongue and Quill (AFH 33-337). AS300 Textbooks will be available online on Canvas and on the Holm
Center Curriculum website.
Instruction: Academic classes are conducted as a combination of lecture and guided discussion. Be
prepared for class by reading assignments in advance. Be able to share your knowledge and personal
views in class. Classes may be supplemented with films or videos.
Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011 and detachment policy, each cadet will
meet with me for an academic plan review and term counseling interview. We will have at least one per
term, with the first one occurring within the first few weeks of each semester. Plan on 30 – 45 minutes
for your appointment and be on time. Don’t forget your WINGS login information.
         Fall Term: All cadets must have their academic plan reevaluated and recertified by their
         university academic advisor every term. The academic advisor will sign/date in the “remarks”
         section of the plan.
Office Hours: If you need my assistance or wish to discuss the course, the Air Force, or anything else,
please do not hesitate to schedule an appointment.
Academic Integrity: Integrity is an Air Force core value. Plagiarism and cheating are just a couple
examples of behavior that show a lack of integrity. These and other examples will not be tolerated.
Academic integrity means honesty and responsibility in scholarship. Professors have to obey rules of
honest scholarship, and so do students. Additionally, the core values of the University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community. For further information on academic dishonesty, please visit
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/.
Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                                                                                             5


Accommodations for Religious Holy days: By UT Policy, a student who misses classes or other
required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the
instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an
assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow
students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call
can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share
your concerns.
                              Course Requirements and Grading Policy
Class Participation: Class participation is worth 10 points (10% of your grade). I expect
active participation from all students during every class period. Active participation is essential
to your individual development as a student…and specifically in this course that is preparing you
for your transition into the active Air Force. Prior preparation and attentiveness during class are
keys to maximizing your participation credit.
Examinations: You will have two exams – a midterm and a final – each worth 25 points (25%
of your grade). The material for the exam will be taken from class lectures/slides, readings, and
video/film presentations.
Briefing Assignment: Deliver a prepared briefing in accordance with AFH 33-337, The Tongue
and Quill, from the instructor supplied topic list. PowerPoint slides are required. You will cover
the same topic as you talking paper.
I will grade your briefing using Holms Center Form 6 - Informative Briefing Grading Sheet.
This form will be posted on UT Canvas for your reference/review. If your briefing is over or
under the exact timeframe, points will be deducted from your grade.
The briefing is worth 20 points (20% of your grade).
Writing Assignment: Write a 1-page talking paper in accordance with AFH 33-337, The
Tongue and Quill, from the instructor supplied topic list.
The paper is worth 20 points (20% of your grade). Your grade will be reduced one letter grade
for each day late. Even if late, you will be required to complete the position paper to pass the
course.
Grading Computation: Your grade is computed using the following formula. Note that the
total score possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter grade/4-point GPA scale
used by UT-Austin.
                                                                                                        6


                  Area                     Points               Number         Letter Grade/
                                                                 Grade          GPA Points
             Participation                    10               93 to 100           A/4.0
          Exam 1 (Midterm)                    25                90 to 92          A-/3.67
            Exam 2 (Final)                    25                 87-89            B+/3.33
            Talking Paper                     20                 83-86             B/3.0
                Briefing                      20                 80-82            B-/2.67
                  Total                      100                 77-79            C+/2.33
                                                                 73-76             C/2.0
                                                                 70-72            C-/1.67
                                                                 67-69            D+/1.33
                                                                 63-66             D/1.0
                                                                 60-62            D-/0.67
                                                                  0-59             F/0.0
Course critique requirement: Your feedback on the course and course instructor is critically
important for two reasons. First, the feedback helps ensure the course is meeting its objective.
Second, your input helps improve the course and instructor for future students.
        1. Every semester, all students must complete the university Course Instructor Survey
        before the last day of class https://ctl.utexas.edu/services/CIS/students/take_eCIS.
        2. At the end of each spring semester, all Cadets must complete AFROTC end-of-term
        survey on line (URL to be provided by instructor).
              AFS 321L COURSE OUTLINE – Fall 2019
    Date      Lsn#                    Subject                    Assignments(complete before class)
  29 Aug        1     Introduction to AS300
   3 Sep        2     Critical Thinking                        Cadet Reader, Cadet Handout
   5 Sep        3     Air Force Leader Development             Cadet Reader
  10 Sep        4     Change Management                        Cadet Reader
  12 Sep        5     Air Force Writing                        Cadet Reader
  17 Sep        6     Informative Briefing Requirements        Cadet Reader
  19 Sep        7     Effective Supervision                    Cadet Reader, Cadet Notetaker
  24 Sep        8     The Enlisted Force                       Cadet Reader
  26 Sep        9     Officers/Enlisted Differences            Cadet Reader
   1 Oct       10     Bullet Statements                        Cadet Reader
   3 Oct       11     Bullet Practicum Writing                 Cadet Reader
   8 Oct              Exam Review
  10 Oct              Midterm
  15 Oct       12     Bias                                     Cadet Reader, Cadet Handout
  22 Oct       13     Managing in a Diverse World              Cadet Reader
  24 Oct       14     Cross Cultural Competence                Cadet Reader
  29 Oct       15     Cultural Vest                            Cadet Reader
  31 Oct       16     Your Financial Future                    Cadet Reader
   5 Nov       17     Managing Competing Priorities            Cadet Reader
   7 Nov       18     Airmanship                               Cadet Reader
  12 Nov       19     Code of Conduct                          Cadet Reader
                                                                                                    7


  14 Nov           20     Ethical Decision Making                         Cadet Reader
  19 Nov           21     Joint Ethics                                    Cadet Reader
  21 Nov           22     Heritage Series
  26 Nov                  Exam Review
   3 Dec                  Final Exam
   5 Dec                  Briefings                                       Talking Paper
 Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
    1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
         a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
    2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
         nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
         class.
    4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at Austin
         Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/.
                               This syllabus is subject to changes.
                                                                                                                     8
