                                 Advertising 369/PR 369/ADV 391K
                                             Social Media
                                               Fall 2018
Professor: Gary B. Wilcox (Burl@mail.utexas.edu)
Live Class time: WED 1:00
Office: BMC 4.334
Office Hours: MW 2-3:00
Office phone: 512-471-0917
Course Description: In a few short years, social media has profoundly changed online commu-
nications. With the advent of new tools and platforms, more and more people are publishing and
participating in conversations online. Mass adoption of social computing technologies has led to
new types of mediated interaction as people maintain more relationships than any time prior.
As members of the audience become the creators of content, corporations and media organiza-
tions lose control of their marketing message and individuals face new challenges in terms of pri-
vacy, identity, and the maintenance of virtual relationships. This course explores implications,
opportunities and challenges for the advertising/marketing communication professional. By
nature the course is grounded in practice, and you will be required to proactively participate in
social networks. Class discussions, presentations by students, readings, and invited speakers, will
highlight new effective strategies and applications of these platforms.
Structure of the course: The class is highly participatory both offline and online. Between the
weekly scheduled class meetings, this course’s discussion continues in a variety of online and vir-
tual environments. Often referred to as a flipped classroom approach, the course intentionally
shifts instruction to a learner-centered model in which class time covers issues in greater depth
and creates important educational events, while individual and group learning is facilitated with
daily interaction with technology and other students. It is essential to excel in this environment
that the student develop personal responsibility and the initiation of innovative ideas or projects
that contribute to the overall objectives of the class.
Those who complete this course will understand how to use social media productively, have a
framework for interpreting and evaluating new tools and platforms, and be able to successfully
compete in today’s marketplace by proactively engaging in their environment.
This course is designed as an applied practice of social media for the Texas TAPR brand. Through
emerging new technologies, we will create a social media plan, track metrics, garner followers and gain
insight into our audience. While exploring these tools and developing insight, we will build the Texas
TAPR social media presence and help maximize their branded scale of reach.
Method of Evaluation
         Overall letter grades are based on your participation with the social media team. There will be
three measures of your performance in the class – 1. Weekly team activity reports that will detail daily
activity and include tasks accomplished, project status, and initiatives undertaken. Your reports are due in
Canvas every Wednesday at 9:00am. 2. At the end of the semester you will be required to summarize
your performance activity with an end of semester final report that captures your efforts during the
semester. 3. Completion of two Google Analytics courses – Google Analytics for Beginners and
Advanced Google Analytics. These activities will be important parts of your final grade in the course.


Weekly Meetings
           The social media team will meet once a week in person in addition to online activities.
This course is devoted to the understanding and measurement of new communication channels
that evolved with the rise of information technology and digital connectivity. These new tools
develop new practices, ethics and power relations. Projects will be executed both in groups and
individually and will be using an assortment of collaborative web tools to conduct and document
the research online.
Management teams
           The class is structured into three interactive teams – original content, community
management, and listening/analytics. The content team produces original content for the school’s
website – advertising.utexas.edu—. The community management team strategically schedules
messaging in the social properties to push traffic to both the website and the social properties.
The analytics/listening team monitors and reports metrics using Spredfast, Google Analytics and
NUVI. Content strategy and social property management are adjusted based on the analytic
outcomes.
Copyright Notice: All materials presented in lectures in this class are copyrighted by Dr. Gary B. Wilcox. No materials may be
directly or indirectly published, posted to Internet and intranet distribution channels, broadcast, rewritten for broadcast or
publication or redistribution in any medium. Neither these materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer except
for personal and non-commercial use. Further, only University of Texas students who are officially registered for ADV 318J this
semester may use these materials.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or
an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses
without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to
them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-
career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please
visit the Student Judicial Services Web site at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/.
Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
