MEDIA DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY IV
Media Creation for Live Experiences Spring Semester 2019
TD 388J #26195
AET 348G #20970
  PROFESSOR: Sven Ortel
                                                   OFFICE HOURS: By appointment
  EMAIL: svenortel@austin.utexas.com               COURSE LOCATION: PAC 3.204
COURSE TIME:
M    02:00 pm - 5:00 pm class
W    11:00 am - 12:00 pm forum (for graduate section)
M    05:00 pm - 08:00 pm lab hours (TBD)
Overview
This class is part of the ongoing Integrated Media curriculum. Its goal is to deepen the knowledge in the
areas of projection design processes, media creation, projection system technologies and visual storytelling.
The class will require at least ten hours a week or more spent on class-related work. We will also continue
our ongoing discussions and investigation into the integration of media into live performance and seek to
refine our definition of “live design experience” further.
This semester the focus is on projection surfaces and locations that are not dedicated screen materials and
do not exist in conventional theater spaces:
Project assignment overview
There is one main project this semester that is divided up into to two parts:
Part A is exploring new and established media creation tools and technologies for live events, part B is a
location-based design that allows for the application of those skills in a real-world scenario. Significantly,
both parts inform each other:
Project 1 part A: Explore tools and techniques for the creation of real-time generated media and traditional
rendered digital content in the context for live events.


Technologies covered include Notch and After Effects/ Photoshop in tandem with Vector.
Project 1 part B: "Liminality" - A location based design for the Fusebox Hubspace - a collaboration with
Fusebox Festival ATX (Links to an external site.)
The hub space architecture at East 4th street provides an exciting three-dimensional canvas for location
based experiences. We will explore the theme of multiverse by activating the entrance and gate to the
space for every visitor. This new work will utilize conventional 3D projection mapping techniques, real-time
generated media and sensors to turn the location into rich, interactive portal. will provide later "UTim ATX is
a group of graduate students from the Integrated Media MFA program and undergraduates from the
College of Fine Arts at UT Austin.
Design challenges include:
    •   the design of a bespoke playback system, based on vertex
    •   project specific content delivery workflow
    •   creation of custom 3d models and mapping
    •   design of an engaging user experience that support the narrative and is cohesive with the world of
        Fusebox Hubspace
Class Goals
    •   To further develop a media design aesthetic as designers
    •   To continue to work with new soft and hardware solutions specific to this field of work.
    •   To produce a visualization and concept art for a potential collaboration with athletics
    •   To analyze media as it applies in collaboration in live production environments.
    •   To investigate new modes of communication and self-expression
    •   To deepen skills and understanding of design skills relevant to experience design
Class Format
Most classes will be split into three parts. We will begin with a discussion of the current class topic and
analyze research and suitable approaches for the current tasks.       The second part of the class will be
reviewing work that has been done by students. We will critique models, drafting, design, media, etc.       In
the last part we focus on the skills and tasks that inform and further future design goals.


Learning activities
    •   Using Photoshop, Aftereffects, Notch and other creative applications to realize ideas and solve
        challenges particular to the field of projection design.
    •   Learn to program a bespoke media server
    •   Learn the meaning and practical application of UV mapping.
    •   Creating original artwork for projects
    •   Using sensors to generate visual content.
    •   Creating design renderings, drawings, and models
    •   Developing, schedules and workflow documents appropriate to projection design.
    •   Projecting media for location-based event
    •   Prototyping and testing techniques and tools of the trade in the IM lab classroom.
    •   Collaborate as a design team
    •   Manage and realize a large non-theater event as a group.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
    •   Participation (10%): Students should come to class each day prepared to contribute to the day’s
        conversation.
    •   Project 1 - part a (40%): Explore tools and techniques for the creation of real-time generated media
        and traditional rendered digital content in the context for live events.
        Content is created with a variety of tools and ultimately developed with a view to meet specific
        design goals informed by part b (liminality design).
        Students will need to make judicious use the techniques and tools they learn or refine. This project
        illustrates the student’s understanding of the entire media design process from research to design
        and then to delivery. All media is created with a view to public and human interaction.
    •   Project 1 - part b (40%): "Liminality" - A location based design for the Fusebox Hubspace - a
        collaboration with Fusebox Festival ATX (Links to an external site.)
        Complete design process with supporting technical paperwork as per student’s role in the design
        team. Examples include the drafting of projection design (a complete projection plot, projection
        section, system diagram, surface diagram, equipment list) or projection programmer paperwork.
        This project illustrates the student’s understanding of the technical requirements for a successfully
        implemented projection design as part of a team that works for a client.
    •   Attendance (10%): Attendance is taken during every class.
Class schedule:


     schedule is subject to small changes, based on discoveries and learning opportunities
week Week     liminal Monday         goal Monday       detail                Teacher assignment
     c/o      design (lab hours)
     date
   1 1/28/19 X        meet Fusebox        introduction introduction to class SO      R&D
                      AAD                              structure, projects           Site survey
                                                       introduction.                 Observation
                                                       Liminal project goals         intro to notch
                                                       and challenges,
                                                       schedule
   2   2/3/20 X                           explore                            SO      notch study
                                          Notch                                      modules
   3 2/10/20 X        notch/ vs           explore                            SO      notch study
                      adobe               Notch                                      modules
                      Creative suite
   4 2/17/20 X        notch/ vs           explore                            SO      Set architecture
                      adobe               Notch,                                     Previs Mockup 1
                      Creative suite      divide into
                                          groups
   5 2/24/20 X        vertex              notch/                             SO      Visuals Previs in
                                          vertex                                     Architecture:
                                          workflow                                   Mockup 2
   6   3/2/20 X       Prep real-time                                         SO      Final design:
                      system, vertex                                                 incl AE template,
                                                                                     media spec, detail
                                                                                     drawing
   7   3/9/20 X       test prototype      Review
                                          Design
   8 3/16/20 X        spring break                                           SO
   9 3/23/20 X        present Design                                         SO
  10 3/30/20 X        refine design                                          SO      tbc
                      strategy/
                      revalue roles
  11   4/6/20 X       content/ show       review                             SO      tbc
                      control tbc         progress
                                          and
                                          continue
                                          production
      4/13/20         content/ show
                      control tbc
  12 4/20/20 X        content/ show       review                             SO      tbc
                      control tbc         progress
                                          and
                                          continue
                                          production
  13 4/27/20 X        realization                                            SO      tbc
  14   5/4/20 X       evaluate and                                           SO      tbc
                      asses


CLASS POLICIES
PREREQUISITES
This course also relies on research, daily preparation, and homework. You will need to use the extensive UT
library system, the internet, and any departmental or citywide resources available.
It will be necessary to have a working knowledge of Microsoft Word, Excel (or some other spreadsheet
program and word processor) as well as basic technical drawing skills (AutoCAD or Vectorworks).
Familiarize yourself with the pdf format and the techniques that allow you to convert your documents into
pdf files as many assignments have to be submitted in that format.
You will need to have access to a computer, a scanner, a copier, and a printer. You will need an external
hard drive or USB stick to transfer your work and files between computers for assignments
Faulty equipment is not an excuse. Practice good e-habits and save, back-up or store your work, so a quick
transfer to another piece of equipment after a system failure is possible.
ATTENDANCE
Attendance is critical in the professional world, and this class as our goal is to prepare for a successful
professional career after you graduate.
    •    ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY- Tardiness and absence for this course will cause your total grade to
         fall. Design/Technology is an art form of collaboration and participation with fellow artists. Your
         inability to attend and participate will be viewed as a failure to complete an important facet of this
         course. Attendance will be taken at each class. EACH UNEXCUSED ABSENCE WILL DROP YOUR
         SEMESTER GRADE A WHOLE LETTER. THREE UNEXCUSED ABSENCES WILL RESULT IN A FAILING
         GRADE.
    •    Excused absences include:
              1.  Absences documented in advance in writing with my prior approval (no third party
                  advocates)
              2. Illness excused with a note from the doctor or infirmary
              3. Death, yours, mine or a close relative (funeral notice required)
THREE TARDIES = ONE UNEXCUSED ABSENCE (i.e., ONE LETTER GRADE DROP)
    •    All reading, research, and homework assignments must be completed before the beginning of each
         class period. Follow the class schedule for these due
         dates. Failure to prepare or complete work as assigned will cause your otherwise stellar grade to
         plummet drastically.
    •    Neatness, scholarship, and presentation all count towards your final grade.
    •    You are responsible for making up missed work for excused absences. It
         is your responsibility to obtain assignment and lecture notes from one of your classmates.
This course relies heavily on research, daily preparation, and homework. You will need to use the extensive
UT library system, the internet, and any departmental or city-wide resources available (such as museums,
galleries, historical collections). It will be necessary to have a working knowledge of Word, Excel (or some


other spreadsheet program) and Outlook (or some other calendar program). It will be necessary to have
access to a computer, a scanner, a copier, and a printer for duplicating research and sketches. Faulty
equipment is not an excuse. Practice good e-habits and save or store your work so a quick transfer to
another piece of equipment after system failure will not be traumatic.
Course Communication
The syllabus and assignments will be posted on the course Canvas site. All communication outside class
hours is via canvas.
There are many students in this course, and it will help everyone if you post questions in the discussions
area whenever possible. If you send me a private message via canvas, I will attempt to respond to messages
within 24 hours on weekdays. I will skim posts in the Discussions myself, and comment when I think you are
covering something that needs to be discussed in class.
I will check my email two times a day: at noon and in the evening.
It is your responsibility to
1. Make yourself familiar with the canvas learning system. Start here.
2. Make sure you can receive announcements and get notified about messages, assignment updates,
announcements, etc. More info in canvas help.
Pay attention to the canvas notification preferences.
3. Ask questions. Do not make assumptions.
Assignments
• Assignments are explained in class and are available to view in Canvas. The big assignments are given in
week one and eight of the semester and are described in class and on canvas. Smaller assignments may be
made throughout the semester as the need arises. Often it becomes necessary to demonstrate a point or
clarify an element of the process to assign a small homework exercise on a particular topic or skill. When
this occurs, these assignments become a part of your overall grade for class participation and collaboration.
• You are responsible for making up missed work for excused absences. It is your responsibility to obtain
assignments and lecture notes from one of your classmates.
• It is your responsibility to ask and inquire if you are not clear about what is required or when.
Assignment Deadlines
It is vital that you do not fall behind in this class as all work builds upon previous work.
As a general rule, all projects, reading, research, and homework assignments must be completed before the
beginning of each class period. However, many class assignments have a due date and time in the evening
before class. That allows me to review your work and provide feedback as well as prepare for a discussion
based on the submitted work during the next lesson. If you submit your assignment late, it will not be
reviewed in class.
All work is due as specified in the assignment listed on canvas. Work not completed before the canvas
deadline will be considered late.
Any work turned in late, regardless of the excuse, will result in a grade reduction of one full letter for each
calendar date it is late (an A would become a B and so on).
In summary:


Every assignment has a due date and time.
I do accept work after that. However, assignments automatically lose one full grade for every day they are
submitted late, and they will not be reviewed in class.
Any work turned in more than four calendar days late will receive an automatic F. If you are having
difficulty completing your work on time, please speak to me privately so that I can work out an
arrangement with you.
Evaluation and grading
Neatness, scholarship, and presentation will all count towards your final grade. Communicating clearly by
visual means is a part of the process.
YOU WILL BE GRADED ON:
     •   Participation (10%): Students should come to class each day prepared to contribute to the day’s
         conversation.
     •   Project 1 - part a (40%).
     •   Project 1 - part b (40%)
     •   Attendance (10%): Attendance is taken during every class.
This course does not have a final exam.
Grading Scheme
A - Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work must be completed on
time and with a very high quality of demonstrated skill and technique. There is evidence of significant
development across all dimensions of learning. The result at this level demonstrates activity that
goes significantly beyond the required course work in one or more areas.
B - Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work must be completed on time
with consistently high quality in course work. There is evidence of marked development across all
dimensions of learning.
C - Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with generally good
quality in course work. There is evidence of some development across all dimensions of learning.
D - Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work completed, with
inconsistent quality in course work. The evidence of development across all dimensions of learning is
unclear.
F - Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned work completed, or
very low quality in course work. Development evidence is not available.
Please Note: If you are concerned about your grade – check in with us regularly so that we can determine
where you’re at, and what might need to be done to correct any problems. Do not wait until the end of the
semester!
Canvas does show you your grades on any assignment that has been graded.
Privacy


What we say about each other’s work during this class should remain in the classroom. It will not be
published in a blog or on any other personal websites, tweeted or posted on social networks.
About services for students with disabilities:
The University of Texas provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more info, contact the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY
TEXTS
Mobile devices
Mobile devices of any kind need to be silenced and put away. I do not want to hear any notifications
(including vibrations) or sounds coming from them.
Texting and other cell phone-related activity is never appropriate during class
Books required (none)
references online:
www.projctn.com
www.projectorcentral.com
UTiM wiki: https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/UTIM/UT+Integrated+Media+Home
Vertex by ioversal: https://www.ioversal.com/
Notch by notch.one: https://www.notch.one/
Resources and equipment
You may need to check out cameras and camera support from UTIM, the COFA library, or The Foundry. You
will be responsible for their return in good shape.
You will need access to computers with movie and picture editing software.
These can be found in the TADL (WIN 1.138) on the ground floor outside the Brocket Theatre
(15 iMACs with Adobe CC), The Foundry at the Fine Arts and the PLAIlab (10 iMacs with Adobe CC)
Be sure to back your work up to personal drives!


University Policies
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project
in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student
has dropped at another institution of higher education unless the student shows good cause for dropping
more than that number.”
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services
for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are
not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to
Faculty: Details of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a
student’s condition or diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.)
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
• Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone) or
reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),
the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-
232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal (Links to an external site.)
Evacuation Information
The following are the recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/


Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings whe
n an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside
unless told otherwise by an official representative.
Familiarize yourself with all the exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you
used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter
a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
     “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
     and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests, and exams is all your own work unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a
previous class), you must make that
clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure
of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the following
web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]


University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning, use
these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing.
The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-
reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and
prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and
well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
