                         UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
                           ANT 325L; JS 364; AMS 321
                          T/TH 12:30-2:00; SAC 4.120
                                    FALL 2018
Suzanne Seriff, Ph.D
Office: SAC 4.126
Office Hours: 10:00-11:00 T TH
Phone: 512 471-0816
sseriff@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description:
This year marks the 50th anniversary of a pivotal moment on college
campuses and civil rights activism around the nation and across the globe.
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era asks the question: What role did Longhorn
Jews play in the social changes of the 1960s and early 70s—both on campus
and beyond?
Revolution was in the air on college campuses in the 1960s and early 70s –
UT included. De-segregation sit-ins, free love, anti-war protests, feminism,
flower power, counter-culture were the (dis)order of the day. Were UT
Jews allies or activists? Greeks or geeks? Feminists or Princesses?
Students will learn the art of oral history and digital storytelling to uncover
the untold tales of UT’s Jewish students in the Age of Aquarius.
The seminar-style course will make extensive use of archival resources at
world class research institutions such as the Dolph Briscoe Center of
American History, the Austin History Center, as well as archives that can be
accessed online. Students will also learn one of the most important tools of
the public historian’s trade—oral history. Each student will conduct and
transcribe an oral history with a former UT student, faculty or staff
member, either in person or by skype. Students begin by examining
theories of memory and commemoration—how memory is constructed
and forgotten—followed by preparing for and conducting oral interviews,
and finally resulting in the production of a series of digital audio stories
ready for radio production. Moving between archival collections, oral
historical data, and original artifacts, the course will take up contemporary


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                 2
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
methods of curation and documentation as it explores activist approaches
to archiving, knowledge production, exhibitions, representation, and
community engagement. The semester of independent research,
documentation and representation will culminate in a public symposium,
listening event, and pop up exhibition on December 2, 2018.
This course is open to students of all backgrounds
Course Objectives
    • Deepen and expand understanding of the Civil Rights Era in American
        history both locally and nationally, through original oral historical and
        archival research and comparative explorations of issues of race,
        class, gender, religion, and national identity
    • Acquire basic research and information evaluation skills of a number
        of interdisciplinary media—from academic texts to primary
        documents to oral history to visual arts and material culture.
    • Become proficient in conducting original research using techniques of
        visual documentation, oral historical audio interviewing, primary
        document analysis, and archival research.
    • Improve critical thinking, reading, analyzing and writing skills through
        interdisciplinary explorations of published academic texts, first person
        oral histories, primary archival documents, exhibitions, and film.
    • Develop competency in a range of oral communication skills including
        individual presentations, group presentations and facilitated dialogue.
        Learn to identify, document and analyze distinct kinds of Jewish
        museums and exhibitions, and the stories they tell through their
        modes and methods of display.
    • Formulate and present original research in interpretive, analytical
        essays and multimedia projects, as well as in oral presentations.
Cultural Diversity in the U.S. Flag: By virtue of focusing on the inclusion
and exclusion of the minority and historically marginalized population of
Jewish, African American, Hispanic, female and gay students, faculty, and
staff at UT in the 1960s, this course fulfills the Cultural Diversity in the U.S.
flag. We will further aim to explore how issues of inclusion and exclusion
on UT’s campus intersect with questions of race, class, region, nation,
gender, and religion as well as discussing and developing skills and
strategies for living in a culture of multiple differences that often organize


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                    3
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
social hierarchies and relations of power. In keeping with this larger vision,
one of the aims of the course will be to explore how the collection,
circulation, and distribution of archives, material culture and oral histories
of underrepresented peoples and histories can foster new forms of
knowledge and public culture.
Independent Inquiry Flag: The course will focus on independent archival,
material cultural, and oral historical research and each student will produce
a final project including a 3-5 minute digital audio story for radio
production, as well as an oral historical audio recording and transcription
for archivization, and contribute to a public symposium and exhibition. We
will explore collections in the Dolph Briscoe Center archives, as well as the
Austin History Center in downtown Austin. The course pivots around each
student’s completion of an in-depth oral history with one former UT
student, faculty member or staff member from the 1960s. Students will
have the opportunity to use that research to investigate a particular
question, problem or project related to the larger theme of campus
activism in the civil rights era of the United States. The culminating activity
of the semester will be a public city-wide symposium on Sunday, December
2nd, in which students will present their own, original research through a
pop up exhibition, a digital storytelling listening event, and a facilitated
dialogue with community participants from the civil rights era.
Required Readings
Each week we will read a number of short articles, essays, and excerpts from
anthologies and ethnographies, or digital materials. You will find these
uploaded to the MASTER Canvas website for our class, or listed by URL in the
syllabus.
The following required books are available for purchase at the University
Coop on the Drag (Guadalupe Street):
    •   Thorne Dreyer, Alice Embree and Richard Croxdale, eds. Celebrating
        the Rag: Austin's Iconic Underground Newspaper. Austin, Texas. New
        Journalism Project, 2016 (This text is designed to be a general resource for
        all weeks and as background material to prepare for your interviews)
    • Michael E. Staub, ed. The Jewish 1960s: An American Sourcebook.
        Brandeis University Press. 2004.


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                    4
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
     • Dwonna Goldstone. Integrating the 40 Acres: The 50-Year Struggle
        for Racial Equality at the University of Texas. University of Georgia
        Press. 2006.
     • Gregory J. Vincent, Virginia A. Cumberbatch, Leslie A. Blair, eds. As
        We Saw It: The Story of Integration at the University of Texas at
        Austin. Tower Books, an imprint of Univ of Texas Press. 2018.
It is essential to read all assigned books, articles, and digital materials in order
to fully participate in class. Readings for the week are due before the Tuesday
class session.
Attendance
Attendance will be taken at the beginning of each class. Students are
expected to attend every class, arrive on time, and remain throughout the
class session. This course includes special guest lectures, site visits and
fieldwork trips, which are mandatory. Timely arrival is essential to avoid
inconveniencing guest speakers, detracting from presentations, or disrupting
trips. You are allowed one unexcused absence. Any additional absences will
result in a deduction of 1 point from your final grade for participation. If an
absence is anticipated, you must notify me prior to the class. In the event of
emergency or serious illness, please contact me via email. Excused absences
require a note from an official such as a doctor’s office, Dean, parent, or
coach.
Classroom Environment
In this course we will cultivate an open and creative learning environment
characterized by careful listening, critical thinking, curiosity, and respect. We
will not discriminate against or criticize one another or others based on
gender, religion, ethnic origin, sexual orientation, disability, or any other
factor.
Personal Technology
I allow laptops and portable electronic devices in class as long as they are
used for taking notes; however, phones must be turned off. I reserve the
right to change this policy if misuse becomes a distraction.


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                              5
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Assessment
This course emphasizes student-driven learning through reading, discussion,
written work, fieldwork, digital storytelling production and oral
presentation. You are expected to complete all readings and projects, pose
questions, and reflect critically on the issues they raise. You should come to
class prepared to actively participate. Grades are based on attendance, class
preparation and participation, weekly questions/comments (25%), an audio
recorded, transcribed, and annotated oral history interview (15%), a 3-5
minute digital story for radio production (20%); archival and material culture
research and documentation based on a central theme/story from your oral
history research (10%); and final preparation and implementation of a public
symposium listening event, pop up digital or physical exhibition, and
facilitated dialogue with community participants (30%). All assignments
must be completed on time. Late assignments will receive a reduced or
failing grade unless you have received prior consent.
Assignments
1. Weekly reading, online posting, attendance, and class discussion (25%)
You are responsible for posting a written reaction to the readings in the
Discussion section on our Canvas site each week by 9pm, Monday evening.
These postings will help guide our class discussions for the week. You should
find freedom in your responses to react honestly, creatively, humorously,
and thoughtfully to the week’s materials. Your posts may raise questions
about a case study, take issue with authors’ arguments, make connections
to contemporary cultural circumstances, and share individual reflections on
the subject. But they must, first and foremost, reflect a critical
understanding of the week’s readings by referencing the readings
themselves. There will be a total of 15 posts. (15%). Your attendance and
participation grades constitute the last 10% of this assignment grade as well.
2.      Individual Oral History, Transcription, and Annotation (15%)
3.      Creation of 3-5 minute Audio Piece for Radio Production(20%)
4.      Visual Media Piece and/or Archival and Material Culture Research
and Presentation (10%)
 5.     Implementation of Final Class Symposium (30%)
Grading Policy:


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                 6
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following plus/minus
rubric set up by UT. Please note: to ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute,
and will not be rounded up or down. Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores
of 80.00 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
A = 94-100; A- = 90-93; B+ = 87-89; B = 84-86; B- = 80-83; C+ = 77-79; C =
74-76; C- = 70-73; D+ = 67-69; D = 64-66; D- = 60-63; F= 0-60
Due Dates and Late Work
All written assignments are due in person during class on the date specified
on the syllabus. An assignment turned in any time after the end of class on
the due date will be considered late, and the grade will be adjusted. If you
must miss class when an assignment is due, you must email me to make
arrangements to turn it in as soon as possible. It is your responsibility to keep
a copy of each assignment in case the original is misplaced; faculty are not
responsible for missing assignments. There is no penalty for work not handed
in when you have a legitimate and documented absence. If you feel that a
grade is not appropriate, please make an appointment to discuss it with me.
Grade of Incomplete
A grade of Incomplete will only be given under justified circumstances. If
such a circumstance arises, please contact me to discuss whether an
incomplete can be granted.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES:
Religious holy days: A student who misses classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day
should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so
that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Students with Disabilities: Please notify your instructor of any
modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-
related need. You may find out more information on the Services for
Students with Disabilities website: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
and/or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-register-with-ssd/
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                 7
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. One
such common, and often unintended, form of scholastic dishonesty is
plagiarism—using research without citations or using a created production
without crediting a source. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
will be strictly enforced. It is the student’s responsibility to be familiar with
all of the rules on plagiarism and other forms of scholastic dishonesty. For
further information, please visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students: All students should
be familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It
is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes
in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a
frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-
mail               address               are              available            at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html .
University of Texas Honor Code: “As A Student Of The University Of Texas
At Austin, I Shall Abide By The Core Values Of The University And Uphold
Academic Integrity.”
WEEKS at a GLANCE
Week 1         Aug 30 – Introduction: What does Civil Rights Mean to Me?
Week 2         Sept. 4-6 –Oral History and the Art of Remembering
Week 3         Sept. 13 – Remembering the Civil Rights Era: The Art of
               Commemoration
               Note: No class on Sept 11 in honor of Rosh Hashonah
Week 4         Sept. 18-20 – 1960s: The Transformation of Campus Cultures
Week 5         Sept. 25-27 – Jews in the Civil Rights Era
               Sept 27: Symposium Planning Session I
Week 6         Oct. 2-4 – Direct Action at the University of Texas
               Guest Speaker: Thorne Dreyer
Week 7         Oct. 9-11 – The Role of Jews in Participatory Democracy
               Oct 11: Digital Storytelling Workshop with Texas Folklife


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                    8
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
               Oct 11: Oral History Logs and Transcriptions Due
Week 8         Oct. 16-18 – Mining the Archives
               Oct 16: Fieldtrip to Dolph Briscoe Center and Austin History
               Center
               Oct 18: Fieldtrip to Austin History Center
Week 9         Oct. 23 – 25 De-Segregation on the 40 Acres
               Guest Speaker: TBD
Week 10        Oct 30, Nov. 1 – Counterculture on UT’s Campus and Beyond
               Nov 1: Multi Media Workshop: Adding Primary Documents
Week 11        Nov. 6-8 — The Women’s Liberation Movement
               Nov 8: Symposium Planning Session II
Week 12        Nov. 15 – Anti-War Movement on UT Campus: The Jewish Stake
               in Vietnam
               Digital Audio Stories Due
               Nov. 13: Independent Archival Research Day
Week 13        Nov. 20 – In Class Workshop
               All Archival/Material Objects and Visual Component of Digital
               Piece Due
Week 14        Nov. 27-29 – Symposium Set Up
               Nov 29: Symposium Planning Session III
Dec 2nd        Public Symposium Mandatory Attendance
WEEKLY SCHEDULE
(Please note: Schedule and Readings are subject to change due to the large number of
independent variables in this field-based class. Please check CANVAS ANNOUNCEMENTS
for weekly updates and/or schedule changes.)
Week 1 – Introduction to the Class : What Does Civil Rights Mean to Me?–
Aug 30
Week 2 –– Introduction to Oral History and the Art of Remembering --
Sept 4-6
Readings:
Donald A Ritchie: “An Oral History of our Time,” In Doing Oral History:
Practical Advice and Reasonable Explanations for Anyone.Third Edition.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2015: pgs 1-28


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                              9
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Martha Norkunas “Teaching to Listen: Listening Exercises and Self-Reflexive
Journals,” Oral History Review v. 38, no. 1 (Winter-Spring 2011): Pgs. 4-
5873-108.
Alessandro Portelli, The Death of Luigi Trastulli and Other Stories: Form and
Meaning in Oral History, Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press, 1991), pgs. 1-26 ("The
Death of Luigi Trastulli,"); “Research as an Experiment in Equality,” Pgs. 29-
44; and “What Makes Oral History Different?” pgs. 45-58.
        Sept. 6: Oral History Workshop: Fundamentals of conducting an Oral
        History Interview; Equipment; Constructing Questions; Active
        Listening
Week 3 –Fifty Years After; Remembering the Civil Rights Era: The Art of
Commemoration: -- Sept 13
Readings and Short Videos
Celebrating The Rag: Austin’s Iconic Underground Newspaper. Pgs. 1-11
People’s History of Texas; The Rag: Austin Underground Press, 1966-1977.
Part I. http://peopleshistoryintexas.org/projects-2/the-rag-austin-
underground-press-1966-1977/
Voices of Counterculture in the SW: An exhibit of the New Mexican History
Museum:
http://www.santafenewmexican.com/pasatiempo/art/museum_shows/a-
time-to-every-purpose-voices-of-counterculture-in-the/article_24c3dbdf-
619a-52f7-9c99-0666e16e6ea6.html
Turn On; Tune In Community Storytelling Project: Sharing Stories of the
counter culture in the southwest
https://www.storycenter.org/storycenter-blog//new-mexico-history-
museum-title-tbd
Brian Horrigan,” Introduction” In The 1968 Project: A Nation Coming of Age.
Minnesota Historical Society Press. 1968. Pgs 6-13.
Brad Zellar. “Epilogue” In The 1968 Project: A Nation Coming of Age.
Minnesota Historical Society Press. 1968. Pgs. 148-159
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H1LoWm8iX1c
Suggested Reading:


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                  10
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Bret Eynon. “Cast upon the Shore: Oral History and New Scholarship on the
Movements of the 1960s.” The Journal of American History, Vol 83, No. 2 (Sept
1996), pp. 560-570.
Note: There will be no class on Tuesday, Sept 11th, in honor of the Jewish Holiday
of Rosh Hashonah
Week 4 ––1960s: The Transformation of Campus Cultures—Sept 18-20
Readings:
Helen Lefkowitz Horowitz, “The 1960s and the Transformation of Campus
Cultures.” History of Education Quarterly, Vol 26, No.1 (spring 1986. Pgs. 1-
38
Richard Flacks, "The Liberated Generation: An Exploration of the Roots of
Student Protest," Journal of Social Issues 23 (July 1967): 52-75.
Miguel de Oliver: “Geography, Race and Class: A Case Study of the Role of
Geography at an Urban Public University.” American Journal of Education,
Vol 106, No. 2(Feb 1998) Pgs. 273-301
Celebrating The Rag: Austin’s Iconic Underground Newspaper. Pgs. 18-22
Suggested Reading:
Marti G. Harvey. The Evolution of the Rag: An Analysis of the Social, Political
and Technological Influences on one Underground Newspaper in the 1960s.
Unpublished MA Thesis, University of Texas at Arlington, 2010
Week 5 –– Jews in the Civil Rights Era; What’s Jewish about the 1960s? -- Sept
25-27
Readings:
Michael E. Staub, “Introduction” In The Jewish 1960s: An American
Sourcebook. Pgs. Xv-xxiii
Michael E. Staub, ed. The Jewish 1960s: An American Sourcebook. Section
1; Going South. Pgs. 3-34
Doug Rossinow: ‘The Break-through to New Life: Christianity and the
Emergence of the New Left in Austin, Texas, 1956-1964. American
Quarterly, Vol 46, no. 3 (Setp, 1994), pp. 309-340.


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                        11
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Hollace Ava Weiner: “Conscience of a Community: Levi Olan, Dallas.” In
Jewish Stars in Texas: Rabbis and Their Work. Texas A & M College Press.
1999. Pgs. 210-234
                      SEPT 27: IN CLASS: Symposium Planning Session I
  In preparation, please read:
       • Folklife and Fieldwork: An Introduction to Field Techniques (The Library of
           Congress): http://www.loc.gov/folklife/fieldwork/index.html
       • AFS Statement of Ethics: Principles of Professional Responsibility, here:
           http://www.afsnet.org/?page=Ethics
  In this first planning session, we will discuss the overall goals of the symposium and
  determine key topics/themes, a format and course of action for achieving those
  goals. Planning session will result in:
  A format for the symposium/presentation
  A list and schedule of necessary steps
  Assignment of responsibilities
  Come prepared to share your suggestions for our group symposium. We will consider
  each suggestion in relation to the following questions:
       1) What are the research questions/topics/themes that we will highlight in this
           public symposium?
       2) What are the best formats for addressing these themes?
       3) Can we address this question satisfactorily using the time, space, and
           resources that we have?
       4) Does this topic/question serve our course mission?
       5) Who will care? Who is our audience?
Week 6 ––– “You Say You Want a Revolution”: Direct Action at the
University of Texas-- Oct 2-4
Readings:
Martin Kulhman, "Direct Action at the University of Texas During the Civil
Rights Movement, 1960-1965," Southwestern Historical Quarterly 98
(1995): 551-566.
Bevery Burr. History of Student Activism at the University of Texas at Austin
(1960-1988). Unpublished Thesis, University of Texas at Austin. 1988.
Thorne Dreyer: The Spies of Texas: How UT Austin Police Tracked the Lives
of Sixties Dissidents. Texas Observer.
https://www.texasobserver.org/2343-the-spies-of-texas-newfound-files-
detail-how-ut-austin-police-tracked-the-lives-of-sixties-dissidents/


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                            12
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Oral History Interview with Jim Harrington, June 13, 2016,
https://texashistory.unt.edu/explore/collections/CRBB/
Celebrating The Rag: Austin’s Iconic Underground Newspaper. Pgs
Civil Rights in Black and Brown.
https://texashistory.unt.edu/explore/collections/CRBB/
Guest Speaker: Thorne Dryer
Week 7–– The Role of Jews in Participatory Democracy Oct. 9-11
Readings:
S. Robert Lichter and Stanley Rothman, “Jews on the Left: The Student
Movement Reconsidered.” Polity, Vol 14, No. 2 (Winter, 1981), Pgs. 347-
366
Holly V. Scott: Student Citizen, Part II: The Early New Left Is Younger Than
That Now: The Politics of Age in the 1960s.
Sean D. Stryker: Knowledge and Power in the Students for a Democratic
Society. Berkeley Journal of Sociology, Vol 38, 1994. Pgs. 89-138
        Oct 11: Digital Storytelling Workshop with Texas Folklife
        Learn to transform your oral history interview into a 4-5 minute
        digital audio story ready for radio production
Week 8 – Mining the Archives: Primary Documents from the Civil Rights
Era: Analyzing Archival Documents/Photographs/Collective Memory––
Oct. 16-18
Readings: TBD
October 16: We will meet at the Dolph Briscoe Center for American History,
promptly at 12:30pm, for an archiving workshop with Briscoe Center staff
member, Margaret Schlankey, Head of Reference Services.
October 18: Class will meet at the Austin History Center, for a guided tour
of the exhibit, Taking it to the Streets: A Visual History of Protest and
Demonstration in Austin, and a peek behind the scenes at creating an


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                13
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
exhibition from archival research with Rusty Hechaman, chief archivist at
Austin History Center.
Week 9 –– De-Segregation on the 40 Acres—Where were the Jews? Oct
23-25
Readings:
Gregory Vincent, Virginia A. Cumberbatch, Leslie A. Blair, eds. As We Saw
It: The Story of Integration at the University of Texas at Austin. University of
Texas Press. 2018
Dwonna Goldstone: Integrating the 40 Acres: The 50-Year Struggle for
Racial Equality at the University of Texas. University of Georgia Press. 2006
“How UT Students—and Eleanor Roosevelt—Integrated the Drag”
https://jimnicar.com/2014/10/01/how-ut-students-and-eleanor-
roosevelt-integrated-the-drag/
Seth Forman: “The Unbearable Whiteness of Being Jewish: The Jewish
Approach Toward Black Power, 1967-1972” In Blacks in the Jewish Mind: A
crisis of Liberalism. NYU Press, 1998. Pgs. 135-192
Bryan Edward Stone, “’Are you going to Serve Us?’: Texas Jews and the
Black Civil Rights Movement.” In The Chosen Folks: Jews on the Frontiers of
Texas. University of Texas Press.2010. Pgs. 193-215
Suggested Reading:.
Michael E. Staub, ed. The Jewish 1960s: An American Sourcebook. Section
4; Black-Jewish Relations. Pgs. 87-136
Chaim I. Waxman. ‘The Pendulum Shifts, 1965-1975.” In Americas Jews.
Temple University Press. 1983. Pgs. 104-134
Video: Civil Rights in Burnt Orange: https://vimeo.com/270483286
Oct 25: Digital Storytelling Workshop #2
Week 10 ––I Just Want to be a Cosmic Cowboy: The 1960s Counter
Culture on UT’s Campus and Beyond– Oct 30-Nov 1
Readings:
Michael E. Staub, ed. “The Making of a Jewish Counterculture” In The
Jewish 1960s: An American Sourcebook. Pgs. 273-307


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                            14
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Clifford Endres. “Homeless with the Armadillo.” In No Apologies: Texas
Radicals Celebrate the ‘60s. Daryl Janes, ed. Eaken Press. 1992 ; Pgs. 237-
248
Michael Allen. “I Just Want to be a Cosmic Cowboy”: Hippies, Cowboy Code
and Counterculture. Western Historical Quarterly, Vol 36. No. 3 (Autumn,
2005). Pgs. 275-299.
Celebrating The Rag: Austin’s Iconic Underground Newspaper. Pgs. and
additional index entries under “counterculture”
        Nov 1: Adding Visual/Material-Media to your Digital Stories
        Workshop
Week 11 ––Jewish Women and The Women’s Liberation Movement --Nov
6-8
Readings:
Michael E. Staub, ed. “Jewish Women and Feminism.” In The Jewish 1960s.:
An American Sourcebook. Pgs. 317-348
Nancy E. Baker. “Hermine Tobolowsky: A Feminist’s Fight for Equal Rights”
In Texas Women: Their Histories, their Lives. University of Georgia Press.
2015. Pgs. 434-456
Harold L. Smith: “Casey Hayden: Gender and the Origins of SNCC, SDS, and
the Women’s Liberation Movement” In Texas Women: Their Histories,
Their Lives. Elizabeth Hayes Turner, University of Georgia Press. 2015. Pgs.
359-388
Frieda Werden. “Adventures of a Texas Feminist.” In No Apologies; Texas
Radicals Celebrate the ‘60s. Daryl Janes, ed. Eaken Press. 1992: Pgs. 189-
211.
Rachel Griess: “Fight Like a Girl: Preserving Feminist History in Austin,
Texas.” Ms Blog, August 17, 2018 msmagazine.com
http://lifeandletters.la.utexas.edu/2018/07/fight-like-a-girl-how-womens-
activism-shapes-history-2/
Celebrating The Rag: Austin’s Iconic Underground Newspaper. Pgs.97-99,
195-206, 236-239, and additional index entries under “abortion rights,”
“women’s liberation movement,” “women’s community calendar,”
“women’s health organization.”


    Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                          15
    UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xF3m2g9InJE
                IN CLASS: Symposium Planning Session II: Curation of an Idea
Today we will share all research materials and determine a plan for interpretation and
representation, including
what will be displayed and how it will be presented, both materially and intellectually. We
will establish exhibition themes and the basic layout, division of labor, and installation
timeline. Finally, we will choose a working title.
In preparation, please read the AAM guidelines and past examples of winning labels
submitted to AAM’s writing competition here: http://www.aam-us.org/docs/default-
source/professional-networks/2017.pdf?sfvrsn=0
            Week 12 – “What Are We Fightin For?”: The Jewish Stake in
            Vietnam: The Anti-War Movement on UT Campus –Nov 15
    Readings:
    Michael E. Staub, ed. “The Jewish Stake in Vietnam.” In The Jewish 1960s.:
    An American Sourcebook. Pgs. 137-164
    Bruce Dancis: “From Protest to Resistance” In A Story of Protest and Prison
    During the Vietnam War. Cornell University Press. 2014. Pgs 66-85.
    Terry DuBose. “Vietnam Veterans Against the War. In No Apologies; Texas
    Radicals Celebrate the ‘60s. Daryl Janes, ed. Eaken Press. 1992: Pgs. 149-
    158
    Celebrating The Rag: Austin’s Iconic Underground Newspaper. Pgs. 128-
    137, 150-154, and additional index entries under “anti-war movement” and
    “Vietnam War.”
                                                November 13
      Today will be an independent archive day to research and finalize materials for both the
      exhibit and the digital stories slide shows. Please make arrangements in advance
    Week 13 – IN CLASS WORKSHOP-Nov 20


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                                         16
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
                                                IN CLASS:
   Today we will write first drafts of the following symposium materials;
       1. PR Materials and Flyer
       2. Exhibition labels
       3. Digital Storytelling title pages
       4. Panel Discussion Questions
Note: No class during Thanksgiving Holiday, Nov. 22
Week 14– Nov 27-29: Symposium Set Up and Run Through up
ALL EXHIBIT MATERIALS DUE TODAY (objects, texts, media, fieldwork)
                   IN CLASS: Symposium Planning Session III: Layout and Design
  Final Digital Stories; Final Exhibition Materials; Final Run Through of Symposium Panel
  Discussion Questions; Final Reception Details
Dec 2nd PUBLIC SYMPOSIUM and LISTENING EVENT
A public symposium featuring our final products, as well as a panel
discussion with noted UT faculty, and students from the 1960s, will be held
in the CLA on Sunday, December 2nd, 2018, from 2-5. Please mark your
calendars. This is a mandatory attendance date and is a significant part of
your final grade. This will be an all day affair, including set up and take
down of the pop up exhibition and digital storytelling materials. Invite your
family and friends.


Seriff, Fall 2018                                                      17
UT Jews in the Civil Rights Era
Week 15 –Class Review/Wrap Up– Dec 4-6
                          IN CLASS: De-Brief, Thank Yous, Celebration!
    •    Class-wide de-brief of symposium
    •    Return of all symposium materials
    •    Thank yous to Symposium participants
    •    Submission of final written de-briefs from class
