David (D.S.) Cohen       ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu     Office Hours: Office Hours: Wednesdays from    Fall 2019
                                                        10 to Noon, or by Appointment
AET 318 FOUNDATIONS OF VIDEO GAME DEVELOPMENT
Course Sections
 Instructor             TA                                  UID        Meeting Times         Room
 David (D.S.) Cohen      Jaxon Wallach                      20410      Tues-Thurs            DFA 4.112
                                                                       12:30 to 2pm
Abstract
        An introduction to the process of creating games from concept through publishing including
        aesthetics, design, production, and publishing.
Objective
        Learn the fundamentals of design and development for the screen based interactive medium of
        video games.
Assessment/Grading
        This course is project based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on successful completion
        of project objectives. Assignments are worth 40%, the final project is worth 30%, and the
        remaining 30% of the final grade is based on professionalism which is earned by attending class
        during the scheduled meeting times and conducting oneself in a professional manner.
        No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
        complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before the
        deadline for doing so passes.
        Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
        fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
        will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
        grade of A+.
        Letter grade equivalents:
          A = 94-100                         C+ = 77-79                           D+ = 67-69
          A- = 90-93                         C = 74-76                            D = 64-66
          B+ = 87-89                         C- = 70-73                           D- = 60-63
          B = 84-86                                                               F = 0-60
          B- = 80-83
Attendance/Absences
        ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of
        the class.
        For each unexcused absence after your first three, your final grade will be lowered by one letter
        grade.
                                                                                                               1


     Seven unexcused absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
     Please be on time for class. Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class, leaving
     class without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy.
     Every two instances you are tardy will be counted as one time absent.
     Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send an
     email and attach any class work as needed.
Professionalism
     Each class you attend, you will receive professionalism points that equate to an A for the day. If
     professionalism is maintained by the etiquette as listed below, you will maintain your points. If any
     unprofessional behavior is exhibited, points will be deducted.
     Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the
     instructor. These will have an impact on your professionalism grade, so it is important that you
     follow these guidelines...
     1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the
     beginning of class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as
     possible. And please don’t hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an
     announced break, since often the second part of the class period is when we will engage in
     group activities.
     If you have a class beforehand that is on the other side of campus, you must inform let your
     instructor know on the first day of class so adjustments can be made.
     2) Come to class prepared with your laptop computer with power cord and assignment materials.
     A dead laptop battery or forgetting your class materials is not acceptable.
     3) Turn your cell phone off or on silent, and put it away. Looking at your cell phone during
     lectures, exercises and discussions is not acceptable. Use your computer for taking notes, not
     your cell phone.
     4) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
     sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to
     loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, Sleep etc., please do so outside the
     classroom during breaks.
     5) Headphones and sunglasses are not allowed to be worn during lectures, exercises or
     discussions. Even if your headphones are not playing music, they should never be in your ears
     during these times.
     6) Arrive to class prepared, with your required equipment (IE: Computer), assignments completed,
     and reading/tutorials reviewed and ready to discuss.
     7) Be prepared and willing to participate in class discussions and present your work (in progress
     or completed) when called upon.
                                                                                                          2


     8) Do not distract other students by socializing or being otherwise disruptive in class.
     9) No bullying or discriminatory behavior will be acceptable under any circumstances.
     10) Do not fall asleep in class.
     REQUIRED File Format (Naming Convention):
             Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, concept art, etc. File Format: PDF;
             Game Builds – File Format: Executable file (.exe) with supporting files.
     File Naming Convention:
             If submitting as an individual…
             FirstInitialLastname_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
             Example: dcohen_conceptpitch_07042018
     IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it may not
     read correctly.
     REQUIRED File Format:
             See individual assignment for required file format.
Classroom Policy
     Devices
          ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
             this with me prior to class).
          ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media (unless related to
             class activities)
     Food/Drink
          ●  Food is not allowed in class.
          ●  Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
             when not in use.
Required Equipment
     All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running Unity Hub with ​Unity
     2018.2 (or higher)​ game engine. Either Mac or PC is fine.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
     Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
     students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
     current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
     communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
     minimum, twice per week.
                                                                                                      3


      It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
      in his or her official e-mail address (do so at
      https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
      Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable
      excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full
      inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the
      University or instructor. (see
      http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
Use of Class Materials
      The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
      assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
      violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
      Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor
      may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
      which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading
      class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
      students. (from
      https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Religious Holidays
      Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
      classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
      day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
      may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
      an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
      University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to
      the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
      (from ​http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf​)
Q Drop Policy
      The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
      reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
      institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
      dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
      higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Academic Integrity
      The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
      abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to
      maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken
      at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other
      scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
            ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
            ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
               assistance in preparing them;
            ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
               academic discipline; and
                                                                                                            4


          ●    avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
               student.
               (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic Dishonesty
   ●  In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
      dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
      such as:
          o Cheating
          o Plagiarism
          o Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
          o Falsifying Academic Records
          o Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
               extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
          o M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
               without authorization to do so)
          o Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
          o (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)
          o Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
               penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
               University.
               (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism
      “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
      obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
      including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
      and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
      conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
      http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-con
      duct/).
Copyright and Fair Use
      Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers.
      Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the
      doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright
      holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will
      discuss these issues during the semester as needed, but when you have questions about
      whether or when you can appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K.
      Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
     The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
      for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
      Disabilities (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or
      videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of
      class, if possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
                                                                                                          5


Student Support Services
     There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
     include (but are not limited to) the following:
     Fine Arts Career Service​s (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
     of services and resources to support students and alumni.
     The Undergraduate Writing Center
     (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for their
     courses.
     The Sanger Learning Center ​(512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
     time-management, and note-taking courses.
     University Health Services​ (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
     promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
     officially enrolled in certain University programs.
     The Counseling and Mental Health Center​ (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with
     their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
     Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
     is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
     Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
     Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Procedures
     Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide
     students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security
     of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff
     of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have
     the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of
     users subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
     https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
     (adapted from
     http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf
Overview of Schedule
     Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be
     altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design
     program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be
     announced via Canvas.
     Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas.
                                                                                                          6


Calendar
Note – The outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
 Week 1           In Class:
 Thurs: 8/29          ● Course Intro
                      ● What is game development?
                      ● Saving to the Cloud (UT Box, Dropbox, Google Drive)
                           REQUIRED
                      ● Claim your UT Gmail
                  HW​:
                      ● I Have No Words and I Must Design
                      ● Install Unity Hub
                      ● Install Unity through Unity Hub
                      ● Review Unity Tutorial
                               ○ Using the Unity Interface​ (Due Week 2, Class 1)
                      ● Create UT Box, Dropbox and/or Google Drive account
 Week 2           In Class:                                                         Project 1: Exploration
 Tues: 9/3            ● Lecture/Discussion: Game Design (Role, types,               (Design Kits)
                           approaches)
                      ● Design Kits for Project 1 - Create three challenges using
                           your design kit.
                      ● Possibility Space​. Intro to ​Explorational Game Design​.
                  HW:
                      ● Begin ​Project 1​: Create three (non-Themed) challenges
                           using Design Kit
 Thurs: 9/5       In Class:
                      ● Playcentric design (Decision making based on player
                           feedback)
                      ● Playtesting and Iteration
                  HW:
                      ● Playtest​ Project 1​ with three non-students. Adjust design
                           based on feedback, document what you've learned.
                      ●    Exercise 1 ​- Review the Unity Tutorial "​Play & Edit
                           Mode​" then submit the Unity Project outcome.
 Week 3           In Class:
 Tues: 9/10           ● Lecture/Discussion - Design Documentation
                  HW:
                      ● Write a design brief of your three challenges - Include
                           layouts and walkthroughs (To be submitted as part of
                           Project 1)
 Thurs: 9/12      In Class:
                      ● Lecture/Discussion - Postmortems
                      ● Review creating a single PDF from your work
                      ● Lab: Write a postmortem of your project
                           PROJECT 1 DUE AT THE END OF CLASS
                               ● Video Playthrough
                               ● A single PDF containing:
                                        ■ Design Brief for all three challenges
                                            with Photos
                                        ■ Playtest results
                                                                                                           7


                                  ■  Postmortem
            HW:
                ●    Essential Unity Concepts
Week 4      In Class:                                                        Project 2: Exploration
Tues: 9/17      ● Lecture/Discussion - ​Mechanics​, ​Dynamics​.              (2D Game)
                ● Intro to Project 2
            HW:
                ● Begin Project 2
                ● A Theory of Fun for Game Design Chapters 1 - 4
                ●    Exercise 2 Review "​Game Objects & Components​"
                     and "​Tweaking Components​" then submit the Unity
                     Project outcome.
Thurs: 9/19 In Class:
                ● LAB
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 2
                ● Live Sessions on Unity Interface and Essentials
Week 5      In-Class:
Tues: 9/24      ● Playtesting projects with fellow students.
            HW:
                ● Adjust design based on feedback, document what you've
                     learned.
Thurs: 9/26 In Class:
                ● Write a postmortem of your project.
                     PROJECT 2 DUE AT THE END OF CLASS
                         ● Submit a build (.exe with supporting files)
                         ● Video playthrough
                         ● A single PDF containing:
                                  ■ Design Brief
                                  ■ Playtest results
                                  ■ Postmortem
            HW:
                ● Lighting - Lights & Shading Basics
Week 6      In Class:                                                        Project 3: Exploration
Tues: 10/1      ● Lecture/discussion: Project 3 Intro                        (3D Game)
            HW:
                ● Begin Project 3
                ● Exercise 3​ ​- ​Review the Unity Tutorial "​Prefab Power​"
                     then submit the Unity Project outcome
Thurs: 10/3 In Class:
                ● LAB
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 3
Week 7      In Class:
Tues 10/8       ● Lecture/Discussion - Game Artist (Roles, Type,
                     Establishing/Communicating Visual style)
            HW:
                ● Conduct six Playtest (3 fellow students, three
                     non-students). Adjust design based on feedback,
                     document what you've learned.
                                                                                                    8


Thurs 10/10 In Class:
                ● Lab and Write a postmortem of your project
                     PROJECT 3 DUE AT THE END OF CLASS
                ● Submit a build (.exe with supporting files)
                ● Video playthrough
                ● A single PDF containing:
                                  ■ Design Brief
                                  ■ Playtest results
                                  ■ Postmortem
                ●    Asset Store Basics
                         ○ Using the Asset Store
                         ○ Access the Asset Store from the Project
Week 8      In Class:                                                       Project 4: Exploration
Tues 10/15      ● Lecture/Discussion: Paper Prototyping                     (Paper Prototyping and
                ● Introduction for Project 4                                Puzzle Game)
            HW:
                ● Build and test out 1 level design structure for Project 4
                     with a paper prototype.
Thurs 10/17 In Class:
                ● LAB
            HW:
                ● Conduct six Playtest of your Paper Prototype (3 fellow
                     students, 3 non-students). Adjust design based on
                     feedback. Document what you've learned.
                ● Begin Building Digital Version of Project 4
Week 9      In Class:
Tues 10/22      ● Lecture/Discussion: Narrative Design in Games
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 4
Thurs 10/24 In Class:
                ● Lecture: Game Audio (Roles, Purpose, Process)
            HW:
                ● Conduct six Playtest of Project 4 (3 fellow students, 3
                     non-students). Adjust design based on feedback.
                     Document what you've learned.
Week 10     In Class:
Tues 10/29      ● Lecture/Discussion: Game Tech (Roles, Purpose, Tools,
                     Planning and Communicating)
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 4
Thurs 10/31 In Class:
                ● Lab and Write a postmortem of your project
            HW:
                     PROJECT 4 DUE AT THE END OF CLASS
                ● Submit a build (.exe with supporting files)
                ● Video playthrough
                ● A single PDF containing:
                                  ■ Design Brief
                                  ■ Playtest results
                                  ■ Postmortem
                                                                                                   9


Week 11     In Class:                                                             Project 5: Theme and
Tues 11/5        ● Lecture/Discussion - Intro to Project 5. Theme Jam!!           Prototyping
                 ● Mood Boards
            HW:
                 ● Begin Project 5. Mood Boards, 3 themes (NO FAN ART
                      OR MEMES!), pick one theme and submit it for approval.
            DUE EOD:
            Submit the Mood Boards of three themes. Call out which theme
            you have selected for your final project.
Thurs 11/7  In Class:
                 ● Lecture/Discussion: Phases of Game Development
                 ● Prototyping
                 ● Theme check in. Must have Theme approved before
                      moving forward.
            HW:
                 ● Project 5 Continued - Build a single level to prototype
                      your theme you will be using for your final project.e, Must
                      integrate theme, design, and art. Write a design brief
                      explaining your theme
Week 12     In Class:
Tues 11/12       ● Lecture/Discussion - What is Level Design?
            HW:
            Project 5 Continued - Playtest Prototyped level. Integrate
            changes based on what you learned.
Thurs 11/14 In Class:
                 ● Lab and Postmortem
                      PROJECT 5 DUE AT THE END OF CLASS
                      Submit a build of your prototype (.exe with supporting
                      files)
                      Video Playthrough
                      A single PDF containing:
                           ● Moodboard of selected theme
                           ● Design Brief of prototype
                           ● Playtest results
                           ● Postmortem
            HW:
            Project 5 Continued - Create a design brief explaining the
            prototyped level, visual style, and process you will be following
            for the final project (Project 6)
Week 13     In Class:                                                             Project 6: Final Project
Tues 11/19       ●    Lecture/Discussion: Game Production (Roles, Purpose,
                      Process)
                 ●    Intro to Project 6 (FINAL)
            HW:
                 ●    Begin work on Project 6
Thurs 11/21 In Class:
                 ●    Lab and Project Check In
            HW:
                 ●    Continue Final Project (Project 6)
Week 14     In Class:
Tues 11/26       ● Lecture/Discussion: Game Publishing and Business
                                                                                                           10


                    HW:
                         ●   Continue Final Project (Project 6)
   Thurs 11/28      Thurs: 11/28
                         ● No Class - Thanksgiving
   Week 15          In Class:
   Tues 12/3             ● Lecture/Discussion: QA In Game Development
                    HW:
                         ● Continue Final Project (Project 6)
   Thurs 12/5            ●   Final Project DUE!
                         ●   Where do we go from here?
Units of Study
      1. Explorational Game Design
               ○ Use explorational game design techniques to discover gameplay and create interesting
                  play opportunities.
      2. Elements of Game Design
               ○ Readings and discussion of important design topics
               ○ Theme development and content considerations.
      3. Level Design Fundamentals
               ○ Prerequisites for engaging in level design.
               ○ Creating meaningful play.
      4. Game Development
               ○ Structure and process of studio based game development
               ○ Discussions and exploration of disciplines within game productions
Process
                                                           Projects
           Students will work individually using explorational game design techniques to discover play
           opportunities within interactive systems, develop theme, and create level design.
           Projects 1 - 4: Explorational and Playcentric Game Design
                  Utilize Explorational Game Design1 techniques to create 3 different challenges based on
                  discovered gameplay opportunities in the provided starter materials. It’s CRITICAL that
                  NO additional content be added, however duplication/modification of the starter
                  assets/systems is allowed - provided functionality is NOT significantly changed and visual
                  changes are limited to primitive shapes and colors. These constraints are essential to the
                  process.
                  Game designs will then be playtested and iterated upon to focus on the player
                  experience.
1
  https://goo.gl/DWB5jP​, Design Reboot, Jonathan Blow (2007)
                                                                                                            11


       Projects which contain superimposed, significantly modified, or additional content will
       receive a grade of 0. DO NOT under any circumstances add representational or
       thematic content. No Exceptions.
Project 5: Theme and Story
       Choose one of the previous three projects and develop a theme and/or story which aligns
       with discovered gameplay and integrate themed assets into the project. Build a single
       level prototype example, representative of the final game.
       Once you've completed your prototype, write a design brief of your design.
Project 6: Final
       Design a sequence of 5 levels which plot a clear progression. Progression can be based
       on difficulty, story, theme, etc. Consider using challenges or obstacles to create this
       sequence. Create a successful build which starts with level 1 and allows the player to
       progress to level 5. The levels should be playable by anyone in the class with minimal
       practice. In other words, the levels should not be too difficult to complete.
       Integrate final themed assets and refine/balance gameplay. ​None of the original supplied
       Project assets should be used. ​Students are encouraged to create their own themed
       assets, but purchased asset kits may also be used.
       In addition to themed assets, students must integrate music and sound effects. Students
       can use music and audio of their own creation, or audio/music from open sources
       following the creative commons license.
       The final must function as a playable build which starts at level 1 and ends with level 5. A
       starting menu screen is optional.
       Requirements:
            ●   Submit final executable on itch.io
            ●   Final hi res images and breakdown on ArtStation showing workflow breakdown
                and explaining each step in your process from concept to completion.
            ●   Single PDF Containing
                    ○    Links to itch.io and ArtStation
                    ○    Mood Board of final theme
                    ○    Design Brief
                    ○    Level Design Documents including Breakdowns with final images
                    ○    Playtest Results
                    ○    Postmortem
            ●   Submit zip file to Canvas containing:
                    ○    Final executable with supporting files
                                                                                                   12


                             ○    Video of full game Playthrough
                                                      Exercises
       Students will engage in tutorials, readings and activities focused on building their knowledge of
       game development roles, tools, and process.
       Exercise 1
           ●   Review the Unity Tutorial ​"Play & Edit Mode​" then submit the Unity Project outcome.
       Exercise 2
           ●   Review the Unity Tutorial "​Game Objects & Components​" and "​Tweaking Components​"
               then submit the Unity Project outcome.
       Exercise 3
           ●   Review the Unity Tutorial "​Prefab Power​" then submit the Unity Project outcome
Required Viewing/Reading
Unity Tutorials:
   ● Using the Unity Interface
   ● Essential Unity Concepts
   ● Live Sessions on Unity Interface and Essentials
   ● Lighting - Lights & Shading Basics
   ● Asset Store Basics
           ○ Using the Asset Store
           ○ Access the Asset Store from the Project
   ●   A tutorial on importing and using 3d models
   ●   A high level tutorial on scripting basics for unity (editor, how to access, how to edit, how to
       add scripts)
   ●   A high level tutorial on adding music and sound effects.
Elements of Game Design
   ●   Possibility Space​ (Will Wright, 2006):
           ○   A conceptual region which defines the range of possible player activities within a game.
           ○    ​https://goo.gl/7n55Qn​, ​Dream Machines,​ Will Wright (2006)
   ●   Kinesthetics​:
           ○ The sensation of movement of one’s physical body. This is related to proprioception
               which describes the sensation of position and orientation of limbs and muscle strain.
               When considered in the context of the rapid feedback loops in screen based games,
               Kinesthetics is perhaps THE primary characteristic which defines videogames as a unique
               medium.
                                                                                                        13


       ○   https://goo.gl/HLjKWY​, ​Kinaesthetics​, Errant Signal (2012)
  ● Explorational Game Design:​
       ○ Also known as Forward Game Design2 and related to emergent gameplay, this idea was
           introduced by Jonathan Blow in his GDC 2007 talk Design Reboot. Explorational Game
           Design (EGD) can be viewed as a “bottom up” approach to designing play systems in that
           the process requires designers to develop their “listening” skills in order to discover the
           latent play possibilities within interaction mechanics. This is contrasted with the more
           traditional “top down” approach (referred to as architected design by Blow) which
           subverts all development in service of a design document. Explorational Game Design is
           generally a more reliable means of creating meaningful play experiences as thinking
           through the play possibilities of a dynamic interactive system is nearly impossible for most
           humans.
       ○ https://goo.gl/DWB5jP​, ​Design Reboot,​ Jonathan Blow (2007)
       ○ https://goo.gl/oKuL5s​, ​Today I’m Going to Design an Ernesto Boss,​ Daniel Benmergui (2014)
  ● Endogenous Meaning:
       ○   Proceeding from within; derived internally. A game’s structure creates its own meanings.
           Explorational and Forward Design techniques seek to discover the endogenous meaning
           of interactive systems.
       ○    ​https://goo.gl/fjHgwY​,​ I Have No Words and I Must Design,​ Costikyan (1994),
  ● Mechanics​:
       ○   Discrete actions which change the state of the game world. Players and Non-player
           agents interact with mechanics during play. e.g. jump, move, collect, shoot, score.
  ● Dynamics​:
       ○   Sometimes referred to as emergent gameplay, dynamics are the result of mechanics
           combined through play. e.g. move and jump are combined to create platformer gameplay.
  ● Aesthetics:
       ○   The “content” of games which exists in the realm of emotion and sensation. In an applied
           sense, aesthetics can refer to any and all of the following: visual design, story, play
           systems, values, endogeny, ludonarrative meaning, and any other content not easily
           defined as mechanics, dynamics, or play systems.
  ● Game Feel/Juice:​
       ○ The intangible yet essential quality of a gameplay experience which defines the “feel” of
           interaction. Closely related to the harmony between kinesthetics and audiovisual
           feedback, Game Feel or Juice is essential for engagement, especially for action games.
       ○ https://goo.gl/BSLHMx​, ​Secrets of Game Feel and Juice,​ Mark Brown (2015)
2
                                                                                                       14


● Rewards:
      ○  Symbolic tokens which mark progress in games. ​Intrinsic ​rewards occur in the player’s
         brain in the form of chemical releases associated with pattern recognition and problem
         solving. ​Extrinsic ​rewards are given to the player by the game. They have no value
         outside the context of the game systems. The simplest type of extrinsic reward is the
         schedule reward, which is a token given to the player when a clearly defined task is
         completed.
● Ludonarrative and Ludonarrative Dissonance
      ○  Ludonarrative is the “story” generated through play. In open world games, this story is
         unique to the each player as their decisions during play determine a course of events. In
         story driven games or those with a distinct imposed narrative, play is often limited and
         serves only to unlock the next part of a predetermined sequence. Ludonarrative
         Dissonance is said to occur when a game’s narrative and its play systems conflict. i.e.
         when a game’s systems permit only actions which conflict with the in-game story. The
         term originated in a game criticism context by Clint Hocking. Some designers view
         Ludonarrative Dissonance as a tool.
      ○  https://goo.gl/4X4VFN​, ​The Debate That Never Took Place​, Errant Signal (2015)
      ○  https://goo.gl/uk65TJ​, ​Ludonarrative Dissonance in Bioshock,​ Hocking (2007)
● Flow​:
      ○ Defined by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (Meehai, Chik-sent-meehai) in 1975. Flow is the mental
         state of operation in which a person performing an activity is fully immersed in a feeling of
         energized focus, full involvement, and enjoyment in the process of the activity. In game
         design, the “flow channel” is a conceptual model which defines a region in which players
         enjoy maximum engagement while completing tasks of increasing difficulty.
● LeBlanc’s Taxonomy:​
      ○  Aesthetics defined in the MDA framework as an attempt to more precisely describe “fun”
         and “gameplay”. The taxonomy includes: Sensation, Fantasy, Narrative, Challenge,
         Fellowship, Discovery, Expression, and Submission; and is intended as recombinant utility
         for analyzing game content.
      ○  https://goo.gl/32LeXX​, ​MDA: A Formal Approach to Game Design and Game Research​, Hunicke,
         LeBlanc, Zubek (2004)
● Bartle Types​:
      ○  A classification of player types in terms of play motivation: Killers, Achievers, Explorers,
         and Socializers. Later Bartle mapped the types on 2 axes relative to play goals: Acting -
         Interacting, and Players - World. The Bartle types are often misinterpreted as describing a
         player’s single motivation, while in reality players may engage in each of the four types (or
         many more) at different times during a play session.
      ○  https://goo.gl/X2gyBf​, ​Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who suit MUDs​,​ Richard Bartle
         (1996)
● Affordance
      ○ (James Gibson 1977): A relation between and object and organism. Affordances are the
                                                                                                           15


                   “action possibilities” latent in the environment which are dependent on an agent’s
                   capabilities. e.g. a door knob or teacup handle. As a design tool, affordances can be used
                   to create play depth or by extension, suggest player actions, or manipulate players
                   expectations.
               ○   J. J. Gibson (1966). ​The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems.​ Allen and Unwin, London.
Designing Play Experience
           Video games are interactive screen based experiences.
           Their systems are dynamically manipulated by players and provide a high speed continuous
           feedback loop - these are THE distinguishing features of the medium which set it apart from
           tabletop games, sports, and other screen based media.
           Games should be FUN.
           This oft invoked phrase represents a misunderstanding of why videogames are compelling.
           Evidence suggests that player engagement is directly correlated with chosen meaningful work3 -
           the results of which can foster a sense of accomplishment, reward, awe, surprise, joy,
           appreciation, delight, content, or satisfaction to name a few.
           When exploring a game idea, use the following list to develop the play experience:
               ●   Screen based interactive experiences such as videogames function like a ​conversation​.
                   The player “speaks” through the controls and inputs, and the game “replies” by updating
                   the game state.
               ●   Engagement (​ a.k.a Fun) results from pattern recognition (​learning​), decision making
                   (​strategy​), and problem solving (​feedback​).
               ●   Games ​teach ​by exposing ​patterns a     ​ nd providing feedback to the player.
               ●   Players learn by employing strategy and ​interacting w     ​ ith the game world.
               ●   Strategy (or ​informed decision making​) is only possible in the presence of clear patterns
                   and feedback.
               ●   Obstacles ​are learning opportunities which advance the player's knowledge and
                   understanding of the game world.
               ●   Challenges ​are reinforcement opportunities which confirm/expand the player’s
                   knowledge of game systems.
               ●   Intrinsic ​and ​extrinsic rewards ​mark player progress.
               ●   Players are generally motivated by ​meaningful play (or work),​ which manifests in
                   different forms at different times. Some of these are: skill mastery, social connection,
                   exploration, story, achievement, reward, collection, fantasy, challenge, discovery,
                   expression, fellowship, competition, distraction, culture, and many others scattered across
                   the wide spectrum of human drive and desire.
               ●   The relationship between ​theme​, ​narrative​, and ​play ​systems should be clear and
                   symbiotic - even if in an unexpected way.
3
  ​https://goo.gl/TSP7iJ​, ​Reality is Broken​, Jane MacGonigal (2010)
                                                                                                                16
