                                   Bio 373 Ecology
                                         Summer 2020
                                            Syllabus
Instructor
 Dr. Laura I. Gonzalez
 Email: ligg@austin.utexas.edu
 Office hours: M/W 1-2:30 pm and by
 appointment
 Where: on line through Canvas Zoom
Time & Place
Lecture: M,T,W,TH,F 9:00-10:30 am online
through Canvas Zoom
Discussion: 84408 T, TH 2:00-3:30 pm
             84409 T, TH 3:30-5:00 pm
             both online through Canvas Zoom
 Teaching Assistants
Course description
An introduction to ecology, the study of relationships among organisms and between
organisms and their environment; adaptations, population, communities, and
ecosystems. Includes both plants and animals and both terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems. Prerequisite: Biology 325 or 325H with a grade of at least C-.
Rationale
Ecology is one of the upper-division courses available to fulfill a BS or BA in Biology.
Course Goals
Goal 1: Realize that events in the natural world are interconnected.
Goal 2: Understand that interactions in the natural world are governed by physical and
biological principles.
Goal 3: Realize that ecological interactions are simultaneously influenced by processes
acting at multiple temporal and spatial scales.
Goal 4: Appreciate that humans are a component of the natural world.
Goal 5: Realize that scientists use several approaches to study connections in nature.
Goal 6: Hone your observational, critical thinking, and communication skills while
developing an ecological inquiry
Course learning objectives


By the end of this course you should be able to:
    1. Distinguish the different types of ecological systems found in nature
    2. Explain how interactions between biological entities and their environment can
       affect other biological entities and potentially lead to unexpected consequences.
    3. Explain how much energy and matter enter and move through ecological
       systems.
    4. Compare how dynamic steady states are maintained and regulated in some
       ecological systems but not in others.
    5. Explain how evolution opens up new interacting possibilities in ecological
       systems.
    6. Explain how patterns and processes at each level of ecological organization are
       intrinsically linked in a web of cause and effect with those occurring at different
       levels.
    7. Outline how humans have virtually affected all ecological systems on Earth.
    8. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of using mensurative or
       manipulative experiments across, field, lab, mathematical and simulation settings
       to test ecological working hypothesis.
    9. Identify a pattern in nature and develop a working hypothesis to explain it.
Format
Lecture: During lecture we will discuss the fundamental principles in Ecology, and work
towards the assessment of your knowledge. In-class activities and exercises will be
implemented during lecture. Lecture assignments will be given as homework at the end
of each lecture to help you better learn the course material. The lecture assignments will
provide extra credit for your final course grade. Weekly quizzes will be posted in Canvas
each F (last one on TH) at the beginning of lecture time.
Discussion: During discussion you will have a Q & A session about the lecture material
using the questions you will submit in the Canvas discussion. You will also do some
practice exercises to help you understand difficult aspects of the lecture material.
Assignments, assessment, and evaluation
       Preliminary information on assignments and evaluations:
           a. Weekly quizzes: there will be one practice quiz and 5 official quizzes. The
               quizzes will focus on lecture material presented during the week. Quizzes
               will be done through Canvas. Each student will receive a unique quiz.
               Quizzes will be open book BUT NOT open to collaboration with peers.
               Quizzes will consist of 16 multiple answer multiple choice and 4 brief/short
               answer questions.
           b. Lecture assignments: include short exercises and questions. These
               individual assignments will be evaluated as participation and will count as
               extra credit towards your final grade. They will be submitted via Canvas.
               The lowest 2 lecture assignments will be dropped.


           c. Discussion attendance and assignments: attendance is required for
               discussion; you can make either of the two scheduled times on T and TH,
               but must attend one each day. There will be ~ 9 discussion activities.
               These activities will help you understand difficult course content. Detailed
               instructions will be provided in Canvas. The lowest 1 will be dropped.
           d. Self-guided field trip: a self-guided field trip will be assigned at the
               beginning of the course. Detailed instructions on the assignment will be
               provided in Canvas.
           e. Final exam: there will be no final exam in this course.
How to do well in this course
   1.  Download slides and learning objectives
   2.  Attend Zoom lecture meetings
   3.  Take good notes during the meetings
   4.  Submit content questions for discussion
   5.  Attend and participate in Zoom discussions
   6.  Dedicate at least 1.5 hours per day to study the learning objectives while using
       your book and slides
   7. Come to virtual office hours often with any questions you may have about the
       learning objectives
   8. Prepare each week for your quizzes (if you do 6 above you should be prepared)
   9. Do a good job on your self-guided field trip
Grading Procedures
Weekly quizzes                                                               =        65%
Discussion attendance and assignments                                        =        20%
Self-guided field trip                                                       =        15%
Lecture assignments (Extra Credit)                                           =         2%
Total                                                                        =       102%
Grade breakpoints: Grades will be assigned as follows: A: 93-100%; A-: 90-92.9%; B+:
87-89.9%; B: 83-86.9%; B-: 80-82.9%; C+: 77-79.9%; C: 73-76.9%; C-: 70-72.9%; D+:
67-69.9; D: 63-66.9%; D-: 60-62.9; F: 0-59.9.
Tentative Course Schedule
Lecture/discussion topics, readings and assignments are shown in the following table
with their corresponding schedule and due dates. The lecture schedule and
assignment due dates may change, so please keep up to speed with the course.
We will post announcements/changes on Canvas as needed.
Week   Date      Lecture Topic                   Required            Weekly             Assignments
                                                 Readings AFTER      Discussion         (Due date)
                                                 lecture             Activities
 1     4 Jun     What is Ecology?                Syllabus and Ch 1:  No discussion


                                                  2-17
      5 Jun    No lecture: Self-guided field trip
 2    8 Jun    The Physical environment I         Ch 2: 22-37                       Quiz 1 extra
                                                                                    credit: Getting
                                                                                    to know you
                                                                                    (6/8)
      9 Jun    The Physical environment II        Ch 2: 39-46         Q & A Session Practice quiz
      10 Jun   The Biosphere                      Ch 3: 49-53, 58-60,
                                                  62-64, 69-72
      11 Jun   Coping with environmental          Ch 4: 83-97         Q & A Session
               variation: temperature
      12 Jun   Quiz 1
 3    15 Jun   Coping with environmental          Ch 4: 98-105
               variation: water
      16 Jun   Population distribution and        Ch 9: 206-219       Q & A Session
               abundance
      17 Jun   Exponential population growth      Ch 11: 247-252
      18 Jun   Population regulation              Ch 11: 252-258; Ch  Q & A Session
                                                  10: 235-237
      19 Jun   Quiz 2                                                               Self-guided
                                                                                    field trip (6/21)
 4    22 Jun   Population dynamics                Ch 10: 228-235;
                                                  237-243
      23 Jun   Spatial population dynamics        Ch 9: 219-222       Q & A Session
      24 Jun   Predation                          Ch 12: 270-279;
                                                  283-286
      25 Jun   Parasitism                         Ch 13: 292-300;     Q & A Session
                                                  303-307
      26 Jun   Quiz 3
 5    29 Jun   Competition                        Ch 14: 314-327
      30 Jun   The nature of communities          Ch 16               Q & A Session
      1 July   Change in communities              Ch 17 (skip pp 384-
                                                  387)
      2 July   Species diversity in communities   Ch 19 (use learning Q & A Session
                                                  objectives as
                                                  guide)
      3 July   Quiz 4
 6    6 July   Production & Energy Flow           Ch 20 (446-461)                   Self-guided
                                                  Ch 21 (468-481)                   field trip
                                                                                    revision (7/6)
      7 July   Nutrient supply and cycling        Ch 22 (except       Q & A Session
                                                  concept 502-504)
      8 July   Global ecology                     Ch 25 (566-586)
      9 July   Quiz 5                                                 No discussion
Course Procedures
Class behavior, attendance, and participation policy:
   1. Expected behavior: to make our time together as valuable as possible, we all
      have to work hard at it. The following two basic principles provide some
      guidelines: I) Every student has the right to learn as well as the
      responsibility not to deprive others of their right to learn. II) Every student


   is accountable for his or her actions. In order for you to get the most of this
   class, please consider the following:
         a. Attend all scheduled lectures and discussions and arrive on time.
             Late arrivals and early departures are disruptive and violate the first
             basic principle listed above. Lecture attendance will provide you the first
             exposure to the material being covered in the course. Lectures and
             discussions will be recorded. Try to get in the habit of attending the
             lectures. Lecture attendance is not required but is highly recommended.
             Discussion attendance is required.
2. In-class participation is highly sought after during the course. We want you
   to feel free to express your opinions, arguments or questions about the material
   being presented. You will be able to unmute your microphone or use the chat
   feature in Zoom. We will also use Zoom poll to communicate.
3. Policy concerning make-ups: there are no make-up quizzes, assignments or
   other evaluations unless a justified reason per UT policy or a documentable
   emergency occurs. A documentable emergency needs to be communicated
   through the Student Emergency Services. You need to contact your instructor
   immediately for documentable emergencies and two weeks before being
   absent for a justified absence.
Course Readings/Materials:
1. Text: Bowman W. D. and S. D. Hacker. 2020. Ecology 5th Edition (ISBN:
   9781605359212) is required for the course. Please get the e-book version at
   https://www.redshelf.com/book/1521153/ecology-1521153-9781605359236-william-d-
   bowman-sally-d-hacker or https://www.vitalsource.com/products/ecology-william-d-
   bowman-sally-d-v9781605359236 You are responsible of reading the assigned
   chapter/pages after each lecture. This will reinforce your learning of the material
   discussed during lecture, prepare you for the quizzes and help you realize what
   you do not understand and submit questions for discussion.
2. For those students interested in pursuing a professional career in Ecology or a
   related field I highly recommend getting a copy of Gotelli’s A Primer of Ecology
   (ISBN 0878932739) and Levin’s The Princeton Guide to Ecology (ISBN:
   9780691128399) for your personal library. The first book covers at length the
   mathematical models we will be dealing with during population ecology section of
   the course. The second one is a major compilation of the fundamental concepts
   and recent advances in the field of Ecology.
3. I recommend joining the Ecolog-List Serv if you are thinking of pursuing a career
   in Ecology. Here you will find information about training and education
   opportunities, jobs, grants, interesting discussion and more. To subscribe check
   the following website https://www.esa.org/membership/ecolog/
4. If you are interested in learning and being active on biodiversity issues check the
   UT Biodiversity Center here: https://biodiversity.utexas.edu/ Make sure to check
   their biodiversity blogs and subscribe to their newsletter.


  5. Zoom lecture recordings/learning objectives/power point presentations/lecture
      assignments keys will be posted in Canvas. The zoom lecture recordings are
      designed to supplement your learning. A series of learning objectives will be
      posted in canvas under modules before each lecture. The learning objectives will
      guide your course readings and will provide a road map of what you need to
      know to do well in your quizzes. Always use the learning objectives to
      prepare for your quizzes. Lecture power points and learning objectives will
      be posted in Canvas under modules before each lecture.
Use of Canvas
      In this class I use Canvas to distribute lecture materials, to communicate, to
      collaborate online, to post grades, and to submit assignments. You can find
      support for Canvas at ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 or you can check the student
      tutorial here: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
      tutorials. You will submit your assignments through Canvas. Please learn how to
      correctly submit assignments in Canvas.
Use of Piazza
      This term we will be using Piazza for rapid class communication. The system is
      highly catered to getting you help fast and efficiently from classmates, the TA,
      and myself. Rather than emailing questions to the teaching staff, I encourage you
      to post your questions on Piazza. Our class Piazza page can be accessed
      directly on Canvas or via the link below. If you haven’t used Piazza before,
      please check out their student support page - this page has step-by-step guides
      to help with posting, replies, private messaging, and more.
      Piazza class page: https://piazza.com/utexas/summer2020/bio373/home
      Support page: https://support.piazza.com/support/solutions/folders/48000404468
Use of email
      When emailing instructors, please use a subject line. The subject should begin
      with BIO 373: and include an informative statement about the topic of your email.
      For example, BIO 373: Question about lecture 8. You also must include your
      name in the body of your email. This will help us prioritize your messages from all
      the other correspondence received. We will attempt to answer all email in a
      timely manner. Be aware that some email may trigger spam filters and therefore
      not get delivered. Check with the instructor if you do not receive a reply.
Use of Class Materials
      The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to quizzes, and
      homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying
      of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary


         actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class
         materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a
         violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic
         dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among
         other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing
         those materials with other current or future students.
University Notices and Policies
Special accommodations
As per University policy, you must inform the instructor of any special concerns by the
12th class day. Special concerns include University excused absences and special
accommodations in-class and during evaluations.
Academic misconduct: We expect you to behave with integrity and to follow University
policies regarding academic honesty. Scholastic dishonesty on any quiz or assignment
will result in a failing grade (F) which you may not drop, and will be reported to the Dean
of Students.
Q drop: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops
for academic reasons to six, please try to think clearly whether dropping this or any
other course is wise after the official date.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and
stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering
a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When
sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can: 1. Intervene to prevent
harmful behavior from continuing or escalating. 2. Provide support and remedies to
students and employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a
Title IX investigation. 3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant
policies. Beginning January 1, 2020, Texas Senate Bill 212 requires all employees of
Texas universities, including faculty, report any information to the Title IX Office
regarding sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence and stalking that is
disclosed to them. Texas law requires that all employees who witness or receive any
information of this type (including, but not limited to, writing assignments, class
discussions, or one-on-one conversations) must be reported. I am a Responsible
Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or
staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you would like to speak with someone who can provide
support or remedies without making an official report to the university, please
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and
resources, visithttp://www.titleix.utexas.edu, contact the Title IX Office via email
at titleix@austin.utexas.edu, or call 512-471-0419. Although graduate teaching and
research assistants are not subject to Texas Senate Bill 212, they are still
mandatory reporters under Federal Title IX laws and are required to report a wide


range of behaviors we refer to as sexual misconduct, including the types of
sexual misconduct covered under Texas Senate Bill 212. The Title IX office has
developed supportive ways to respond to a survivor and compiled campus resources to
support survivors.
Important Dates
Jun 5th: last day to officially add/drop a course
Jun 9th: last day to drop a course for possible refund
Jun 24th: last day to change to or from pass/fail or credit/no credit basis
July 9th: last day to withdraw/drop a course with approval
July 9th: last class day
WELCOME TO BIO 373! We are looking forward to meeting you, teaching you and
learning from you.
