                                                       Syllabus
                        Accounting 312: Fundamentals of Managerial Accounting
                                                    Summer 2019
Class Hours:      MTWTh 2:00-4:00 (71140)                        Location:       GSB 2.120
Professor:        J. William Kamas CPA, MBA                       Office:        5.126H
  E-mail:         j.kamas@mccombs.utexas.edu                      Phone:         (512) 232-6789
  Office Hrs:     See Canvas (also after immediately after class)
Required Materials
        1. MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING, by Ronald W. Hilton & David E. Platt (11th edition, McGraw-Hill
            Education, ©2017)
        2. McGRAW-HILL CONNECT and COURSESMART, on-line study and homework managers
        3. Calculator: A financial calculator is required for this course. A financial calculator is one that has
            dedicated keys for convenience in working problems involving the time-value of money. The keys
            typically are labeled N (number of periods), I/Yr (required interest rate per period), PV (present
            value), PMT (payment per period), and FV (single future payment amount). If you already have
            such a calculator, you do not need to buy a new one. However, if you do not already have such a
            calculator, you should buy an HP 10bII+. This calculator is recommended by both the accounting
            and finance faculty of the McCombs School of Business.
   CANVAS will be used for course management and any additional readings or study materials will be
   posted there. I also will use Canvas for communicating with the class.
   During the first week of class, you must ensure that:
        • you can access the class site on Canvas and have set up your communication preferences;
        • your Connect access is functioning properly.
 Learning Objectives
   If you stay engaged with the course by participating in class, reading the assigned text, completing the
   assigned work, and preparing well for cases and exams, you should obtain the results listed below:
             Expected Result                    What We’ll Do Together               How We’ll Assess the Results
      Understand how accounting      • Discuss chapter readings and current       Interesting and lively class
      systems provide data useful      topics together in class.                  discussions about cases and
      for management decisions in    • Relate managerial accounting to what is    application of materials, including
      all business areas.              going on in the business world.            current business news.
      Gain experience structuring    • Work problems together and discuss them.   Homework, cases, and exam
      business problems and          • Analyze business cases that you have       performance (grades).
      analyzing management             prepared for class discussion.
      decisions.
   This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning Flag. QR courses are designed to equip you with skills that
   are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your
   adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
   your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
        Summer 2019                               Syllabus – ACC 312                                     Page 1


   Class Preparation and Success
    You are encouraged to ask questions in class, both to seek technical clarification of points discussed and
    to understand how a particular topic relates to your personal interest in business.
    Class attendance and doing the homework are the two keys to success in this class. Students who do well
    are generally those who attend class regularly and can participate in class discussions because they have
    prepared. Although problems may seem fairly intuitive when we do them in class, you will be surprised how
    hard it is to set them up and solve them on your own. Practice is key.
   Classroom Standards
A 2017 study by McCombs marketing professor Adrian Ward showed that having your phone present (even
when it’s turned off!) takes up some of your brain power. Other recent studies have shown that using
computers in class leads to worse performance. So, although you will use your computer extensively for class-
related work (Connect homework), during class there will be no computer use, and your phone should be
silenced. A 2-point penalty will be deducted from your final exam score for excessive technology usage.
    Other class rules:
         • Be prepared to do calculations in class. Your phone calculator will not be allowed on the exam so
             it’s best if you practice with your financial calculator. I recommend the HP 10bII+ financial
             calculator because it is (1) acceptable for ACC 311 and FIN 357, (2) relatively inexpensive (usually
             under $30), and (3) non-programmable and therefore acceptable for exam use.
         • No extraneous conversation or disruptive behavior.
         • You should arrive on time. On the rare occasion when you don’t, please enter and set up quietly
             and engage with the class as quickly as possible.
         • If you must leave early, please notify me in advance.
    Also, during the semester we might do some activities in class, perhaps in teams, and the activities could
    be required for course credit as described below.
   Assessment
    Course grades will be determined using the following assignments and weights:
                  Two (non-cumulative) Midterm Exams
                      Lower midterm                          15%
                      Higher midterm                         25%
                  Final Exam (cumulative)                    35%
                  Homework (Connect)/Other                   25%
                     TOTAL                                  100%
    The BBA Program recommends a mean GPA of 3.0-3.2 for this course, but the actual grades assigned will
    be based on what you earn. All sections of ACC 312 follow the same grading policy, and you may assess
    your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-, 80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and
    below 60% = F. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing "extra credit" work either
    before or after the end of the semester. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances and
    according to university policy.
    Grade Appeals: If you believe a grading error has occurred, you must appeal within one week after the item
    is returned to the class or the grade is posted on Canvas or Connect. Submit a written explanation of your
    concern, attached to the graded item in question, to me in class or at office hours. After one week has
    passed, no appeals will be considered.
         Summer 2019                                Syllabus – ACC 312                                Page 2


Exams
    Exams are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. There will be two non-cumulative
    midterm exams. Midterm exams will be closed book/notes and will be held on the dates and times
    indicated in the Class Schedule. We will try to return the graded exams one week after the exam date.
    Calculators that are programmable or can store text are NOT allowed for exams and will be confiscated.
    There will be a cumulative final exam for all sections of ACC 312 at the end of the term. The final exam will
    be closed book/notes and we will advise you of the date for the final exam as soon as we receive it. Do not
    make travel arrangements until you are certain of your exam schedule!
    Anyone with a non-standard exam schedule (SSD or other approved exception) MUST make exam
    arrangements with me at least one week in advance. No early exams will be given FOR ANY REASON,
    including to accommodate travel schedules.
    Alternate exams: If you have another UT class or UT exam at the same time as one of the midterm exams,
    you will be allowed to take an alternate exam that will be given the day after the scheduled exam. Similarly,
    if you have another UT final exam that directly conflicts with our scheduled final exam, there is a provision
    for an alternate exam. However, in all cases permission to take an alternate exam is at my discretion and
    the request must be made at least one week in advance. Note that conflicts such as classes at other
    educational institutions and work schedules will not constitute an acceptable reason to take an alternate
    exam. If you also have a class or exam conflict with the alternate midterm exam, we can, with my prior
    approval, make arrangements for you to make up the exam. Individual makeup midterm exams must be
    taken within 48 hours of the original exam date. These exams will be given at the Testing Center located
    on the fifth floor of the McCombs School, and I will work with you to schedule it. If you do not take the
    makeup exam as scheduled, you will receive a 0 on the exam.
    If you miss an exam due to a severe illness or other emergency, you should notify me before the exam, if
    possible, and you must provide prompt notification and proof of emergency to Student Emergency Services
    (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of the emergency and will provide
    me official acknowledgement of the emergency. However, I have final authority to determine if your
    absence is excused. If so, and if it is feasible for you to take the scheduled alternate exam or an individual
    makeup midterm exam (see prior paragraph), you may do so. Otherwise, students with an excused
    absence from a midterm exam will be required to add the weight of that exam (“lowest midterm” weight) to
    the weight of the final exam. Unexcused absences will result in an exam grade of 0.
 Homework/Other (25%)
    Homework must be completed individually in Connect, however you are permitted to collaborate
    with classmates on figuring out how to structure the solution to assigned questions.
  Review Problems covering the class material will be due to be submitted in Connect. The Daily Schedule
  lists these problems. The Review Problems grade is the percent of all points on Review Problems that are
  correct as submitted. Answers to these problems must be submitted in Connect by the deadline set in the
  daily schedule. A solution will be provided in Connect after the submission window ends. Late homework
  will not be accepted. Also, note that for most questions, Connect will change the numbers in the problem for
  each student, so your data will differ from the textbook and your solution will not be identical to your
  classmates’ solutions. Connect will grade these questions, provide solutions to Review Problems. If you
  have difficulty using Connect please contact the Connect Help Desk (click Help in Connect). No homework
  assignments will be dropped. THE FIRST HOMEWORK IS DUE ON JUNE 11th BY 2pm!
         Summer 2019                              Syllabus – ACC 312                                  Page 3


Other Assignments
     Other Assignments: Other additional graded work may also be assigned, depending on my assessment of
     class progress and preparation. Examples would include (but are not limited to) quizzes, extra problem
     assignments, extra case work, in-class questions, and chapter outlines. If I choose to make such
     assignments, their scores will be treated as part of the homework grade (25%).
                                               Important Notifications
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me
at any time with any concerns.
Religious Holy Days
Per the UT Austin General Information Catalog, you must notify me “as far in advance as possible” (I expect at
least 14 days advance written notice) of your pending absence due to the observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss an examination or other assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, and you notify me
appropriately, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
In the Assignments section above, you can find specific guidance regarding individual and group work for each
of the evaluation elements in this course.
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By remaining in this
class, you agree to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear to you in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, which could include failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: copying work on tests or assignments, representing
(copying) the work of another person as your own or allowing another person to represent your work as their
own, collaborating without authorization with another student during an exam or in preparing academic work,
using or having on your desk unauthorized material or aids to complete a quiz, group exercise, or exam (e.g.,
cheat sheets, solutions, programmable calculators, cell phones, etc.). You should refer to the Student Conduct
and Academic Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty and more on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Dishonesty harms other students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, so
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. All acts of academic dishonesty receive significant
penalties and are reported to Student Judicial Services and attach to your record. This record is consulted as
part of application processes at UT (e.g., study abroad applications) and after (e.g., law school and MBA
applications, which generally require you to provide access to this record). IT’S NOT WORTH IT!
         Summer 2019                              Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 4


Campus Safety
BCAL: For concerns about individual behavior, call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050.
BE SAFE: See campus safety information at http://besafe.utexas.edu/safety-tips-apps.
    • Up-to-date information regarding university operation and emergency procedures can be found at:
       http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
    • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
       buildings when an official announcement is made.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember,
       the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    • Students requiring evacuation help should inform the instructor in writing the first week of class.
    • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
       University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Privacy in Canvas
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that if I teach multiple sections of this
course I will use a merged Canvas site for all sections. This will allow students in other sections to see that you
are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your
email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please
contact the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 for help removing your name from the view of other students.
       Summer 2019                              Syllabus – ACC 312                                    Page 5


                  Using Your Calculator for ACC 312 Homework Assignments in Connect
                          Carefully observe the rounding instructions in Connect.
            If no specific guidance is provided, do not round to less than four decimal places.
Please make sure your calculator does not round to less than four decimal places (e.g., 0.2078 does not round
to 0.208 or shorter). Four decimal places will be adequate for any homework or exam problems.
Here are the instructions for the recommended HP 10bII+ calculator (if you have a different calculator, check
your manual or search on-line). The default on this calculator is two decimal places, which is too short for
many problems.
Instructions for HP 10bII+:
        Summer 2019                            Syllabus – ACC 312                                  Page 6
