                   ALD 328: APPLIED HUMAN LEARNING
                       Fall 2018 Monday 1-4 Unique #09060
Instructor: Dr. Mary Claire Gerwels
Office: SZB 506B
Office Hours: by appointment
Phone: 512-554-8556
E-mail: mcgerwels@austin.utexas.edu
PURPOSE: This course covers learning theory, motivation, and assessment as
they are applied in the elementary school classroom. You will have the
opportunity to evaluate theory and research to develop the best teaching
methods for your classroom.
TEXT: Packet of Readings from the Co-op.
Date           Topic                             Due
Aug. 27        Introduction & Service Learning
Sept. 3        Labor Day
Sept. 10       Teaching & Learning
Sept. 17       Constructivism/Critical Thinking
Sept. 24       Creativity                        Service Learning Project Part
                                                 1 draft
Oct. 1         Social and Emotional Learning     Service Learning Project Part
                                                 1 edited
Oct. 8         Self-Regulated Learning
Oct. 15        Motivation                        Observation paper 1
Oct. 22        Mindfulness and Stress            Critical Incident 1
               Reduction
Oct. 29        Resilience
Nov. 5         Special Education and RTI
Nov. 12        Stereotypes                       Service Learning Project Part
                                                 2
Nov. 19        Thanksgiving Break!
Nov. 26        Testing                           Critical Incident 2
Dec. 3         Parent Involvement                Observation paper 2
Dec. 10        Service Learning Presentations    Service Learning Project Part
                                                 3; TBSI certificate
Check Assignments on Canvas for complete directions for all graded work.


                               General Requirements
Class participation is important. Participation means that you come to class on
time, stay until the end, and contribute to activities and discussions in a
professional manner. It also means that you are not checking your phone or
browsing on the web during class at any time, except during a break. Please
keep your phones out of sight. Laptops should not be open during class unless
they are being used for an activity.
Class attendance is expected, but if you must be absent you must turn in a 5-
page paper that 1) outlines the readings from that week and 2) provides a
description of the activities we did in class that day. You will need to ask a peer
to take notes for you when you miss class. The paper will be reviewed and
sent back if it does not meet requirements. Remember, the paper substitutes for
3 hours of class time plus annotations (i.e., you don't have to do annotations that
week), so it should reflect that amount of work. It is incumbent upon you to
remember this policy and to submit the paper within one week of your absence.
Failure to turn in the paper will result in a 5-point deduction on your final
grade.
                               Annotation Drills (10%)
It is important that you read the articles for class each week so that you can
contribute to our discussions. When reading the articles, I want you to
occasionally write comments and questions in the margins (annotations) that you
can share with the class during discussions. Shortly before the beginning of class
I will check your reading packet for annotations. If you forget your readings
packet you will get a zero for that day, so please remember to bring your
readings to class! Annotations are graded on a pass/fail basis. Highlighting
does not count as annotations. The grades will be averaged according to the
number of drills we have, but they typically count for about 10 points out of 100
each time.
                       Classroom Observation Papers (30%)
There are two observation papers that are to be completed and uploaded to
Canvas by the beginning of class on the designated date. You are to choose one
of the topics we have already covered and follow the directions (found on
Canvas in Modules) with that topic in mind. A rubric for the papers is in the
assignment directions on Canvas. The papers cannot exceed 6 pages (not
including references, pictures, graphs or other additional material).
                           Service Learning Project (40%)
The service learning project is broken into three parts; proposal, data and
conclusions, and presentation. The first two sections are worth 15% each and the
presentation is worth 10%.


                                Critical Incidents (20%)
You will write two critical incident reports, which will allow you to reflect on
something that has happened in your internship classroom. You will follow the
protocol that is on Canvas in the assignment to write each of these. Each must
be no more than 2 pages long and must use the 4 steps as subheadings.
                                   Writing Standards
Each piece of written work must be double-spaced, using at least 1-inch margins
and standard font (e.g., Times New Roman).
                                        Late Work
I reserve the right to deduct points for late work, up to a 10-point deduction per
day. If you need to turn in late work you must fill out a late request form (in
Modules on Canvas) by emailing it to me at least 24 hours in advance of the due
date. I will determine if you will be granted the extra time for the assignment and
will email you to confirm.
                              Writing Flag Requirements
You will get credit for a writing flag course and so must do a significant amount of
your work in formal, written form. Another condition is that at least one of your
papers is to be edited by your instructor and your peers. The Service Learning
Project part 1 will be used to fulfill this requirement. You will need to have a peer
look it over before you submit it for a grade. It will then be uploaded on Canvas
as a draft. You will resubmit it on Canvas with writing, formatting, and other
errors corrected for a grade.
                Online Behavioral Management Certificate - TBSI
You will complete an online module, called the Texas Behavior Support Initiative
(TBSI) through Region 4 that will fulfill a Texas legislative requirement. You will
be introduced to the website in class, but you will have to complete the module
on your own, which takes about 2 hours. Full instructions about how to access
the module are in the assignment on Canvas. You will not get credit for ALD
328 until you have uploaded a PDF copy of your certificate of completion to
Canvas. Your certificate is due on the last day of class by midnight.


                                          Grades
The following scale will be used to determine grades:
         A                    94-100                   C+                77-79
        A-                     90-93                    C                74-76
        B+                     87-89                   C-                70-73
         B                     84-86                    D                60-69
        B-                     80-83                    F              Below 60%
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the communication component of
the university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication
skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and personal responsibility.
September 14 is the last day to add or drop a class for a possible refund.
                                      University Policy
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259, 512-471-4641 TTY,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Day Observance: If an assignment or exam falls due on a day
when you are observing a religious holy day, we will work with you to find a time
to submit the work. You must let us know in advance of the absence (see late
work requests).
                                     Safety Information
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with
all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction
of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions
by the following: The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office. Other important Emergency Information can be found
at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: Use this resource to help fellow UT
members about whom you have concerns BCAL: 512-232-5050
