Syllabus - Spring 2019             Unique #:09380                  January 17, 2019
                        ALD 322
                          Individual Differences
 Instructor Info
 Jim Patton, Ed.D.
 Office: SZB 408A
 Phone: 512.740.4082
 Email: jpatton91@me.com
 Office Hours
 Tuesday: 9:00 - 10:30a
 Thursday: 2:00 - 4:00p;       Course Description
 8-9p                          This introductory course provides an overview of
                               individual differences among people across age
 *online hours to be announced levels.
 *other hours - by appointment The course focuses on basic concepts, issues, and
                               ways to accommodate individuals whose features
                               and/or conditions make them "different" and worthy
                               of consideration.
 Class Session
 Thursday: 5:00p to
                                 Support Personnel:
 8:00p (7:45p)
                                 Paul Steinle [Co-Instructor]
 UTC 3.104                        Office: SZB 214
                                  Hours: Tues:1:30-3:30p: Wed: 2-4p
                                 Jordan Dille [Teaching Assistant]
                                  Office: SZB 242H
                                  Hours: TBA


    Syllabus - Spring 2019     Unique #:09380                   January 2, 2019
Primary Text:
                           Required Readings
                           Students are asked to complete readings for
                           each class session. Most readings will come
                           from the textbook that has been chosen for the
                           course. Some readings will be made available
                           as PDFs. All assigned readings are listed on the
                           schedule.
                           Primary Text: Smith, D.D., Tyler, N.C., Skow,
                           K.G. (2018).Introduction to contemporary
                           special education: New horizons (2nd ed.).
                           Upper Saddle, NJ: Pearson
                           Course Flag
                           This course currently carries one flag:
                           “ Cultural Diversity”
                           This course carries the flag for Cultural
                           Diversity in the United States. Cultural
                           Diversity courses are designed to
                           increase your familiarity with a variety
                           and richness of the American cultural
                           experience. You should therefore expect a
                           substantial portion of your grade to come
                           from assignments covering the practices,
                           beliefs, and histories of at least one US
                           cultural group that has experienced
                           persistent marginalization.


                         Weeks 2-3:
                          Historical Perspective
                          Programs & Services
                          Diversity & Differences
                          Cultural Considerations
      My Teaching         Responsible Inclusion
       Philosophy
                          Model for Differentiating
  Learning occurs best
                             Instruction
     when folks are
enjoying what they are
 doing. I love teaching
and will have fun being
 the instructor for this
  course. I am hopeful
  that you will find the Weeks 4-15:
      sessions to be      Areas of Disability:
    informative and           Physical
engaging. Each session
                              Developmental
 will include a mixture
     of instructional         Cognitive/Learning
 techniques, including        Sensory
  some lecture, lots of   At-Risk Groups:
    discussion, guest      [from a school perspective]
   presenters, video &        Homeless
   audio clips, and in-
                              Refugees
     class activities. I
  believe that you will       Abuse & Neglect
 find that each session       Parents/Incarcerated
    will go by pretty         Parents/Serious Illness
   quickly, as will the
        semester.


Course Goals
Upon completion of this course, each of you will be
able to:
  • Familiarize students with the basic concepts and issues
 related to diversity in school, workplace, and community.
  • Introduce the concept of inclusion and understand its
 implications for school and community.
  • Introduce the concept of response-to-intervention and
 understand its implication for teachers and their students.
  • Present the key features/characteristics of a wide range
 of exceptional individuals
  • Examine the issues, needs, and strategies for working
 with students who are “at-risk” for academic difficulties.
  • Present a range of practices for differentiating
 instruction that may be appropriate for students with special
 needs across various levels of school.
  • Discuss the legal mandates and controversial issues
 associated with addressing the needs of individuals who
 differ from those in mainstream of society.
  • Highlight important familial and cultural issues affecting
 individuals with special needs.


Course Requirements —
Administrative:
Attendance. Class attendance per se will not be
considered in grading. However, regular
attendance is highly recommended for the
following reasons:
• Reading material will be discussed in class.
• In-class discussions will cover material
from sources other than readings.
• Guest speakers will cover selected
topics presented from a personal/
professional perspective.
• Credit for the completion of various in-class
activities (ICAs) can only be achieved if one is
present in class.
Assignments. Assignments are to be submitted
electronically. Work submitted should reflect a
quality in terms of scope, depth, writing
mechanics, and appearance that would be
expected of undergraduates at one of the most
prestigious universities in US and world.
Grade of incomplete. The grade of "Incomplete"
will be granted only if a student has completed
75% of the course. This grade designation will
result from a request from a student based on
extraordinary personal or academic reasons, or
by me, when deemed necessary. A due date for
completing the course will be negotiated by the
student and the instructor. If the course is not
completed by the agreed upon due date, the
grade corresponding to the number of points
already earned will be submitted. There is no
grading penalty for completing the course by the
negotiated date.
Late assignments. Late assignments of major
course requirements will be accepted; however,
one point will be deducted for each school day
after the due date of the assignment.


Accommodations          Activity make-ups. In-class activities CANNOT
                        be made up, unless extraordinary
                        circumstances explain your inability to be in
 I have tried to design
                        class.
 this class using the
 principle of universal Academic honesty. I expect that all activities
 design for learning    performed in this class conform to a standard of
 (UDL) whereby          personal integrity and honesty. I am under
 elements of the        obligation from UT not to tolerate scholastic
                        dishonesty and to report any such incidents to
 course are designed
                        the Office of the Dean of Students. The UT
 to accommodate a       Student Honor Codes reads: “As a student of
 wide range of student  The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by
 needs.                 the core values of the University and uphold
 However, I am          academic integrity.” I want you to attach the
                        following statement to all major course
 prepared and quite
                        requirements that has been individually assigned
 willing to             in this class: “I have neither given nor received
 accommodate any        assistance from any other person on this [state
 special and uniques    the activity].” After you write this statement, I
 needs that a student   want you to initial it.
 might have. I will
                        Religious Considerations. Policy for absences
 comply completely      due to religious holy days is set in the Texas
 with any official      Education Code. The code states that a student
 directives provided by who misses an examination, work assignment,
 the Services for       or other project due to the observance of a
                        religious holy day must be given an opportunity
 Students with
                        to complete the work missed within a reasonable
 Disabilities Office    time after the absence, provided he or she has
 (www.utexas.edu/       properly notified each instructor. It is the policy of
 diversity/ddce/ssd).   The University of Texas at Austin that the student
                        must notify each instructor at least 14 days prior
                        to the classes scheduled on dates he or she will
                        be absent. For religious holidays that fall within
                        the first two weeks of the semester, the notice
                        should be given on the first day of the semester.
                        The student may not be penalized for these
                        absences, but the instructor may appropriately
                        respond if the student fails to complete
                        satisfactorily the missed assignment or
                        examination within a reasonable time after the
                        excused absence.


                       Course Requirements —
                       Academic:
Due Dates              Course requirements will be discussed at the
                       beginning of the semester. In-depth
These are the due
                       descriptions of certain requirements will be
dates for the major
                       addressed in class.
course requirements.
                       General Evaluation Criteria: All products
KAs:
                       generated and activities performed in this class
  #1:     Feb 21
                       will be evaluated on the following dimensions:
  #2:     Apr 04
                          Directions were followed.
  #3:     May 09
                          Product is well-organized.
                          Content reflects comprehensiveness and effort.
Media Analysis: Mar 14
                          Content shows appropriate application of course
                             content.
AIT Lab: Apr 25
                       Readings: Assigned readings should be
SLP:      May 09       completed prior to class. Various activities based
                       on the readings will occur in class.
IP:       May 09
                       In-Class Activities (ICAs) During the course of
                       this term, typically there will be two in-class
                       activities (ICAs) every session. These activities
                       will relate to the assigned readings and topics
                       covered in class. You will receive points for
                       completing the activities. However, as indicated
                       earlier, to receive the point(s) for the ICAs, you
                       must be in class at the time of the activity. Each
                       activity is typically worth 1 point.
                         Due: during each class period
                       Outside-of-Class Activities (OCAs): I am
                       going to ask you to do approximately fifteen (15)
                       outside-class activities. These activities are
                       designed to engage you in a topic that we will be
                       covering in an upcoming session. Your response
                       will be due the night before class to allow us to
                       review the responses prior to the session. The
                       OCA information will be provided in the module
                       for a particular session. Each activity will be
                       worth 1 point.
                         Due: at 11:59p the night before class
                       Single Most Important Thing (SMIT): At the
                       end of each class session or within one hour
                       after class, you should submit a one sentence/
                       phrase that captures, in your opinion, the single


                              most important point that was discussed during
                              the session. You will receive one point for
Assignment                    completing the SMIT for each class session.
                              However, as indicated earlier, to receive the
Weighing:                     point for your SMIT, you must have been in
There are 200 points          attendance for the session.
possible for the                 Due: at the end of each class period
course. The grade you
obtain for this course        Knowledge Assessments (KA): Knowledge
depends on the                Assessments (KA). I will be administering three
TOTAL number of               knowledge assessments during the semester. The
points you earn               KAs are based on assigned readings and content
throughout the term.          covered in class -- typically an even balance of
The point values              both sources. Each KA will include material
for each course               covered since the previous KA. If you have a
requirement are               legitimate conflict with any of the scheduled dates,
provided below.               see a TA as soon as possible. The KAs come in
                              three formats: multiple-choice; short answer; and
KA:    75 points              oral. The default format is multiple-choice –
 (KA1=25; KA2=25; KA3=25)     however, if you feel that you require a different
                              type of assessment format, see a TA prior to the
SLP:   25 points              first KA. NOTE#1: All KA make-ups are the short-
                              answer format. NOTE#2: The KAs must be taken
AIT:   10 points              to receive a passing grade for the course. NB: You
                              are encouraged to examine your KA performance.
Media Analysis:     10 points If you feel that you can provide a sound, logical
                              argument for why any of your choices should be
Individual Project: 25 points
                              accepted, you can submit a written response. You
OCAs: 15 points               have until the date of the next KA to file a
                              response.
ICAs:   25 points
                              Individual Project (IP): Each student must
SMITs: 15 points              complete an individual project that involves
                              completing mini-assignments that relate to the
                              goals of this course. Guidelines will be provided
                              to explain this requirement in more detail.
                              Product: A document file (Word, Pages, PDF)
                              submitted by the due date. Extension rule
                              applies.


                   Service Learning Project (SLP): Complete at
                   least 15 hours of fieldwork in the setting in
Grade              which you are have contact with students or
Determination:     other individuals with special needs. In most
                   settings, you will provide tutoring and/or
                   mentoring to one or more individuals with special
 A = 93% and above needs; however, it is possible that you may
 A- = 90-92%       perform other activities depending on your
                   setting.
 B+ = 87-89%
 B = 83-86%        (a) Five documents that relate to this
 B- = 80-82%       requirement will be posted on Canvas in a
                   module called “SLP.” Read over the guidelines
 C+ = 77-79%       carefully, as they explain this course requirement
 C = 73-76%        in more detail and will enable you to successfully
 C- = 70-72%       complete this course requirement.
 D = 60-69%        (b) Identify a site and indicate this to us via
                   Canvas (SLP module) by Jan 31.
 F  = below 60%
                   (c) Read the "Service Learning Agreement" (one
                   of the five documents on the website) and
                   submit it via Canvas (SLP module) Feb 07. Your
                   field experience supervisor MUST sign this form.
                   Scan this form and post to the SLP.
                   (d) Generate “personal reflections” of your SLP
                   experience. These reflections should reflect your
                   reactions to the experience (i.e., your feelings,
                   thoughts, comments). This aspect of the SLP will
                   be discussed/explained in class!! You will need
                   to make at least four (4) entries over the course
                   of the term: one entry after your first visit, two
                   entries during your service learning experience,
                   and a fourth entry after your final visit. Each
                   entry will be made via Canvas (SLP module).
                   (e) Maintain a log (this form is posted in the SLP
                   module) by including the dates, a brief
                   description of tasks performed on a given date,
                   and the number of hours performed on that date.
                   Upon completion of your 15 hours of fieldwork,
                   obtain your supervisor's signature and
                   comments (optional) on the log. Scan this log
                   and upload via Canvas (SLP module). If you


need additional time, you can request this as the
term nears completion.
(f) Evaluation criteria: requirements met; effort
put into the blog entries.
Product: Seven uploads via Canvas (SLP
module): (1) indication of where you are doing
your SLP (2) agreement form (3-6) four (4)
entries with your reflections (7) log (signed by
supervisor at end of SLP). Extension rule
applies.
Assistive & Instructional Technology (AIT)
Lab Visitation. Site visits to the AIT Lab in SZB
518e are required to better acquaint students in
ALD 322 with the use of assistive technology
(AT) across a number of settings in which
individuals with special needs work, learn, and
live. Specific information about this assignment
is provided in the “AIT Lab Orientation
Assignment Information” guidelines that are
located in the AIT Lab module on Canvas.
You will need to sign-up for a visit to the lab
online early in the term – procedures for signing
up are provided in the guidelines and will be
discussed in class. Specific dates for when the
actual orientations begin and when you will have
the last opportunity to visit the AIT lab are
provided in the guidelines. I strongly advise that
you sign up as soon as you can – this class is
not the only one doing these visits.
You should collect information that is requested
on the “Site Visit Form” – use this form to take
notes when you are doing the visit – this form is
also found in the module. After you complete
your visit and have word-processed your notes,
you should upload the Site Visit Form via
Canvas (AIT Lab module). This course
requirement will be evaluated on the following
criteria:
(a) completing the site visit, as verified by the
sign-in sheet given to me by the AT lab staff at


the end of the term;
(b) completing the AIT lab evaluation; and
(c) submitting a completed report that reflects
thoroughness and effort.
Product: Document that summarizes your
observations (format in packet) submitted via
Canvas (AIT Lab module). Extension rule
applies.
Media Analysis. This activity is designed to get
you to analyze how persons with disability or
other at risk populations are portrayed in the
media . Guidelines for completing this course
activity will be provided in the module for this
activity on Canvas.
Product: Document that includes the information
provided in the guidelines. Extension rule applies


        Course Feature                                Information
Discussion Section of Cv    I am going to use the discussion feature of Canvas in a variety
                            of ways this term. However, you do NOT have to engage
                            some of them.
                            NB: if you just missed the cut-off for a grade, I will bump up
                            your grade, if, and only if, you have made at least two (2)
                            postings to any of the treads in the discussion forum named
                            “Topics of Interest” or the discussion forum named
                            “Accessibility Violations.”
Session Schedule            5:00 (sharp)            begin class
                            5:00 – 5:15             news/course business
                            5:15 – 6:25             session – part A
                            6:25 – 6:35              break
                            6:35 – 7:40              session – part B
                            7:40 – 7:45              SMIT
Class Session Activities    lecture, discussion, activities, media, guest speakers
Course Protocol/ Guidelines I am asking you to honor the following requests:
                                *respect other class members & my guests
                                *ask questions during class
                                *let me know if there are environmental needs/problems
                                *let me know in advance -- if you are going to miss class
                                    or have to leave class early
Phone use in class          In all likelihood, there will NEVER be a need to use your
                            smartphone in class. As a result, please place your iPhones,
                            Androids, or other devices in the “silent” mode.
Computer use in class       You will NEED to bring your laptop or tablet to class.
                            However, I would ask that you NOT use your computer for
                            non-class-related purposes.
                            NB: I may designate “digital-free times” when EVERYONE
                            must close his/her computer, etc.


In Class Behavior      I will KNOW who you are and will be cognizant of your in-
                       class behavior – so, if I feel that there is a problem with in-
                       class behavior (e.g., behavior that interferes with the learning
                       of others and actually your own (e.g., excessive chatting;
                       excessive non-class-related digital use -- constantly looking at
                       your computer but no notetaking), you are likely to HEAR
                       from me privately. However, I encourage students to speak
                       directly to one another about any problem that arise.
Study Guide            I will post a comprehensive study early in the term and to
                       which you can refer throughout the term.
Plagiarism             UT Senate: “if you use words or ideas that are not your own
                       you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
                       plagiarism.”
                       I am becoming increasing aware of this problem ... so, I
                       strongly recommend that you comply with issue of scholarly
                       integrity.
Syllabus               A syllabus establishes a “working relationship” between the
                       student and the course instructor. Participation in this course
                       indicates your acceptance of its content, requirements, and
                       policies. Please review this syllabus in detail as soon as
                       possible (and click the “Accept” button!).
Supports for students  UT provides a number of support services for students. An
                       initial overview of services can be found at the Dean of
                       Students website (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu). Please see
                       me if you have any questions or concerns.
Withdrawal from course If you believe that the purpose, goals, policies, requirements,
                       or some other aspect of this course does not meet your
                       interests, needs, or expectations, you should drop the class by
                       the drop/add deadline. Note that other sections (and
                       instructors) of ALD 322 are available this term at UT, and,
                       given that variations in policies and requirements do exist
                       across sections, you may want to explore these other options.
                       If you do decide to drop this course or this section of the
                       ALD 322, I wish you the best.


20jan19
                                  TENTATIVE SCHEDULE OF TOPICS
   This schedule may change to meet class needs. You will be notified if this occurs.
     DATE        TOPIC                                    Readings                NOTES/DUE DATES
1    Jan 25      Welcome                                  Smith (Epiphany)        organizational reps
                 Introductions
                 Course overview & Business
                 SLP representatives
2    Jan 31**    Historical & Legal Foundations           Ch. 4                   SLP site selection due
                 Programs & Services                      Ch. 3 [3.1-3.3; 3.7]    g: Lisa S
                 Intro to IEPs                            Ch. 14 [14.2; 14.11]
3    Feb 07      Diversity and Differences                Ch. 1                   SLP agreement form due
                 Inclusive Education                      Ch. 2 [2.1-2.5]         g: Christopher D(?)
                 Differentiated Instruction-intro         Patton-1 (di-intro)
                 Cultural Considerations
                 Traumatic Brain Injury
4    Feb 14      Physical Disability                      Ch. 11                  g: Jeff B
                 Health Impairment                        Martin
                 Accessibility
5    Feb 21      Blind & Low Vision                       Ch. 13                  g: Lori P
                 KA #1
6    Feb 28      Intellectual Disability                  Ch. 9                   g: Boyce/Amy G
                 Family issues                            Prior (Dad perspective) g: Priors
                 Transition                               Patton & Dunn (intro
                                                            to transition)
7    Mar 07      Learning Disability                      Ch. 6
                 Response to Intervention (RTI)           Reiff et al.
                                                            (LD experiences)
                                                          Ch. 2 [2.6]
8    Mar 14      Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder Ch. 7                   Media Analysis Activity
                                                          Mooney & Cole
                                                           (personal take)
     Mar 21      BREAK
9    Mar 28      At Risk: Homelessness                    Smith et al. (at risk)  g: Isa A
                            Parent – incarcerated         Herman (PTSD)           g: TBA
                            Child Abuse/Neglect
10   Apr 04      Deafness & Hard-of-Hearing               Ch. 12                  g: Lauren K
                 KA #2
11   Apr 11      Autism Spectrum Disorder                 Ch. 8                   g: Jack & Louis S
12   Apr 18      Speech & Language Disorders              Ch. 5                   g: Mirza L-N
                 Giftedness                               Ch. 15                  g: Joy K
13   Apr 25      Emotional & Behavior Disorders           Ch. 10                  AIT visit report due
                 Mental Health Issues                     Ch. 2 [2.7]             g: Jessica M
                                                          Samuels (ebd)
                                                          Kauffman & Badar
14   May 02      At Risk: Refugee students                McCue(chronic illness) g: Meredith C & Sondra M
                           Serious Illness – parent
15   May 09      Putting It All Together                  Hart (Honors Day)       IP due
                 Concluding Comments/Thoughts                                     SLP due
                 KA #3
