                  Communicating Sustainability
                                          ADV 370/PR 367
                             Unique Course Number: 06105 and 06565
                                               Fall 2019
                                             BMC 4.208
                                           MW 3:30 – 6:30
PROFESSOR:               Tim A. Scott
                         Office: BMC 4.358 (Belo Building, 4th floor)
                         timscott@utexas.edu
                         832-818-6373
                         Office Hours: Wednesdays 3:30 to 5:00 and by appointment
 TA:                     Hallie Merz
                         Office: BMC fourth floor grad student cubicles Station 19
                         hmerz@utexas.edu
                         Office Hours: M-W 4:00 to 5:00 and by appointment
 READINGS:
 Readings will be drawn from case studies, books, and journals. All readings are posted on
 Canvas. There is no textbook or reading packet to buy.
 COURSE OVERVIEW AND OBJECTIVES:
 From organic chocolate and fair-trade coffee to alternative energy and socially responsible
 investing: for today’s American consumers, daily life offers countless opportunities to be more
 environmentally friendly, more socially responsible, more ethically minded. In short: more ways
 to be more sustainable. It is not surprising, then, that an increasing proportion of Americans
 report being concerned about the environment and claim a willingness to change their
 behaviors to more sustainable ways. And yet, despite these environmentally friendly attitudes,
 there remains a profound attitude-•‐behavior gap, often called the green gap, between what
 Americans say they value and how they actually behave. Mass communication, both
 informative and persuasive, can play a vital role in closing this gap.
 The class will look closely at the ways mass media can foster, challenge and change attitudes
 and behaviors as they relate to sustainability. The class will focus on the potential challenges
 and pitfalls we face in trying to communicate with audiences about issues of sustainability. The
 focus will be on sustainable consumption, which I define broadly to encompass not only the
 purchase, use and disposal of sustainable products and services, but also the adoption of
 lifestyle choices and value orientations that help further sustainable goals. This broad definition
 encompasses quotidian behaviors, like buying a cup of coffee, but also deeper, ideological
 issues, like the decision to support green political candidates.
                                                                                                    1


A central premise of this course is that without effective communication campaigns, even the most
promising sustainable initiatives will not succeed. In the course of the semester, students will gain the
theoretical and practical foundation necessary to understand, evaluate and craft successful media
messages to communicate issues of sustainability.
COURSE THEMES
The course is structured around the following themes:
1. What is sustainability?
    This segment focuses on the social construction of issues of sustainability and the role played by
    mass media (both news and advertising/marketing). Students will learn about issue attention cycles,
    constructionist perspectives and environmental sociology, with a goal of understanding how mass
    media and communication play an integral role in the formation, definition and significance of
    sustainability as a social issue.
2. What does the public think about sustainability?
    In this segment, we will focus on public opinion about issues of sustainability and the
    environment. How do we develop opinions about issues of sustainability? What role do mass
    media play in shaping, challenging and reinforcing different stakeholders’ views of
    sustainability? We will cover important theoretical perspectives as they apply to communication,
    looking in particular at theories of agenda setting, framing, priming, cultivation theory, and third-
    person effects.
3. How do we change public opinion about sustainability?
    Having explored the foundations of public opinion as it relates to issues of sustainability, we will
    then focus on ways in which public opinion might be changed. We will pay close attention to
    theories of persuasion, including the Elaboration Likelihood Model, social judgment theory and
    consistency theories (cognitive dissonance and balance theory).
4. How do we get the public to act sustainably?
    As countless public opinion and consumer polls demonstrate, even those individuals who claim to
    hold environmental values and favor living more sustainably often fail to follow through on these
    attitudes. In this segment, students will focus on ways in which mass media can help translate
    pro-sustainable attitudes into pro-sustainable behaviors. Drawing on theories of behavior change,
    including the theory of planned behavior, social cognitive theory and social norms theory, students
    will gain solid grounding in how mass communication might effectively encourage more
    sustainable lifestyle choice.


COURSE FLAGS
This class carries two flags: Independent Inquiry Flag and the Ethics and Leadership Flag.
Ethics and Leadership Flag
This course carries the Ethics and Leadership flag. Ethics and Leadership courses are designed
to equip you with skills that are necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and
professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments involving ethical issues and the process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life
situations.
Independent Inquiry Flag
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your
major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the
independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
EVALUATION AND EXPECTATIONS
This class is a combination of lectures and discussion. I expect you to come to class
prepared to talk about the readings and your on-going group project. If you are not prepared
for a particular day’s discussion, please let me know before class starts. Do not miss class
because you feel you are unprepared or haven’t had time to read all the assigned articles or
chapters. You will still gain invaluable insights about the material, in general, and the research
project, in particular, by attending the class.
Your grade in the class will be based on the following:
     1. Participation/attendance                = 15 points     (15%)
     2. Self-change project                     = 10 points     (10%)
     3. Reaction Papers                         = 20 points     (20%)
     4. Ad portfolio                            = 20 points     (20%)
     5. Group project report                    = 25 points     (25%)
     6. Group project pitch                     = 10 points     (10%)
         TOTAL                                  = 100 points    (100%)
1. Attendance and participation (15 points)
It is assumed that students will attend every class, and I will take regular attendance to track
this. However being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be engaged and
involved scholars. Class format will include lectures, small group activities, work sessions,
guest speakers, etc. Participation – not just attendance – is integral to a successful, enjoyable
class and to you earning a high grade. Active participation means contributing to the
discussion, listening to what your colleagues have to say and engaging with the readings and
in-class activities. It means showing up on time, not checking social or email on your
computer, not texting on your phone. If you do not participate in class discussions, you will
not earn full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
                                                                                                   5


NOTE: We are in a very large classroom but I expect you to sit in the front half of the room. If
you sit in the back you will be counted as absent.
2. Self-change Project (10 points):
Persuasive communication, like advertising, is about changing or reinforcing behaviors. It’s
easy to underestimate how hard this can be. This exercise will help you understand the
challenges that go into changing behaviors, beliefs, attitudes etc. This project will entail you
adopting an environmentally friendly behavior and tracking the challenges you faced.
Deliverables include periodic posts to a class Facebook group and a reflection paper to be
submitted through Canvas. A handout with more details will be distributed in Week 2.
3. Reaction Papers (20 points)
Students are required to submit 4 reaction papers as assigned in class in response to guest
speakers or relevant class material / discussion. These papers will be assigned throughout the
semester depending on the class interest and engagement. These papers will be due on Canvas
prior to the beginning of the next class period. Reaction papers must be between 1-2 pages
single-spaced. Papers should include an introduction, body and conclusion. Each reaction
paper will be graded on a credit/no credit basis and should discuss speaker insights and how
they relate to the weeks associated class discussion.
4. Ad Portfolio (20 points)
Persuasive campaigns focusing on green and sustainable claims are often criticized for being
deceptive or misleading. The Federal Trade Commission recently revised its Green Guides,
which are designed to help marketers ensure their claims are truthful and non-deceptive. Still,
many persuasive messages promoting sustainability skirt the issue and misleading, sometimes
false claims are commonplace in persuasive green campaigns. Each of you will be responsible
for identifying and analyzing examples of green advertisements. A handout with more details
will be distributed in class.
5. Final project (35 points total including proposal, report and pitch)
The bulk of your grade is based on your final project. Working in small groups, you will identify
a sustainability-focused group and develop a consumer typology about them. Possible groups
include vegans/vegetarians, backyard chicken farmers, bicyclists, community gardeners,
electric-car owners, locavores, etc. You will conduct extensive primary and secondary
research to learn more about your chosen group. You will then use the data to develop
marketing and
                                                                                                  6


advertising insights. You will turn in a written document outlining your typology and pitch your
ideas to the class in a 10-minute presentation. A handout with more details will be distributed
in class.
GRADING SYSTEM:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s
provost office (http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/) and described below:
                                                   This is the percent      And the GPA
  To earn an:     You must earn:                   equivalent of:           equivalent of:
  A               94.00 — 100 points               94-100                   4.00
  A-              90.00 — 93.99 points             90-93.99                 3.67
  B+              87.00 — 89.99 points             87-89.99                 3.33
  B               84.00 — 86.99 points             84-86.99                 3.00
  B-              80.00 — 83.99 points             80-83.99                 2.67
  C+              77.00 — 79.99 points             77-79.99                 2.33
  C               74.00 — 76.99 points             74-76.99                 2.00
  C-              70.00 — 73.99 points             70-73.99                 1.67
  D+              67.00 — 69.99 points             67-69.99                 1.33
  D               64.00 — 66.99 points             64-66.99                 1.00
  D-              60.00 — 63.99 points             60-63.99                 0.67
  F                     0 — 59.99 points            0-59.99                 0.00
What the letter grades mean:
A, A–           Earned by work of excellent quality indicating full mastery of the subject; in
                the case of an A, it indicates extraordinary distinction.
B+, B, B–       Earned by work that indicates commendable comprehension of the course
                material and the student’s full engagement with the course requirements
                and activities.
C+, C, C–       Earned by work that indicates average and satisfactory comprehension of the
                course material and the student has met the basic requirements for
                completing assigned work and participating in class activities.
D+, D, D–       Earned by work that is unsatisfactory but that indicates some minimal
                command of the course materials and some minimal participation in class
                activities that is worthy of course credit toward the degree.
F               Earned by work that is unsatisfactory and indicates a failure to do
                minimal passing work
Some Words on Grading:
•   I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6%
    that translates into a B+ and will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
•   Any questions or concerns about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7)
    days after the grade is announced or posted. I will not discuss grades after this seven-day
    period.
•   When we grade your work, you start with zero points. You do not start
                                                                                                 7


with 100 percent and then lose points based on mistakes you might make. Your final points
represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away” for
errors or omissions.
MOODY COLLEGE WRITING SUPPORT PROGRAM
The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3.322,
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting offers one-on-one assistance without charge
to students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We
have specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer
workshops to strengthen core writing skills in each field and to inspire students to strive for
excellence. Students may book half-hour appointments on our website or drop in for
assistance during all stages of the writing process.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
OTHER UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES:
1. Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the university's official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the university informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
order to stay current with university-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-
mail address are available at: http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
2. Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official
accommodation letter from SSD.
     §   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
         accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not
         readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
     §   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
         3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related
         information: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
                                                                                                   8


3. Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
4. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior.
This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
5. Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
        “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
        permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including
        any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education,
        unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
6. Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
        § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
            Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you
            entered the building.
        § If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week
            of class.
        § In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department,
or the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions to do so.
7. Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
     §  Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
     §  CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     §  CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson,
        LCSW|CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
     §  FREE Services at CMHC:
        o Brief assessments and referral services
        o Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
        o MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
        o Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
                                                                                                  9
