ANT 301 BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY SPRING 2019
MW 9-10 a.m. in JES A121A (plus weekly lab section in SAC 5.172)
                  COURSE DESCRIPTION AND GENERAL INFORMATION
INSTRUCTOR:              Dr. Liza Shapiro
                         Office hours: Tues (12:30-1:30 p.m.), Wed (10:00-11:00 a.m).
                                                     or by appointment
                         Phone number: 512-471-7533
                         E-mail: liza.shapiro@austin.utexas.edu
Please feel free to make an appointment with me, email me or call me with questions or
concerns.
COURSE MEETING TIMES:
Lectures: Mon./Wed. 9-10 a.m. JES A121A
Labs: See your course schedule for your lab section meeting time. All labs are held in SAC
5.172. Labs begin the second week of class (week of Jan. 28)
COURSE WEBSITE: You can access the course website on Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/)
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
        This course is an introduction to the principles and methods of biological anthropology.
Biological anthropology is the study of human beings in a biological context, and seeks to
explain our relationship to other primates and to the rest of the natural world. In other words,
who are we? How are we unique? How, why, and when did we come to be the way we are?
        The study of biological anthropology requires many different types of knowledge.
Throughout the course, we will examine anatomical, behavioral, and genetic similarities and
differences among living primates, learn the basic mechanisms of the evolutionary process, and
trace the pathway of human evolution as reconstructed from the fossil record. The main goal of
the course is to obtain a clear understanding of our place in nature. Take a good look at yourself
now; by the end of the course, you might see yourself a bit differently.
        This course includes a required weekly lab section, with lab exercises and assignments
that fulfill a portion of your course grade. The labs complement the lectures and will greatly
enhance your learning experience. Labs focus on the collection and analysis of quantitative data
and will give you the opportunity for “hands-on” analysis of human and nonhuman primate
skeletal material and replicas of fossils.
PREREQUISITES: There are no prerequisites for this course.
GRADING: Letter grades will be assigned using the +/- grading system. (Note: UT does
not offer A+). Grades are rounded up only if 0.5 or above.
                                                   1


   A       A-      B+    B       B-     C+      C      C-      D+         D     D-    F
   93-     90 to   87 to 83 to   80 to  77 to   73 to  70 to   67 to      63 to 60 to
                                                                                      <60
   100     <93     <90   <87     <83    <80     <77    <73     <70        <67   <63
Grades are based on the following:
Exam 1                                                       25%
Exam 2                                                       25%
Pre-lab homework assignments (10)                            10%
Lab exercises (10)                                           20%
First lab practical exam                                     10%
Second lab practical exam                                    10%
EXAMS: The format of Exams 1 and 2 will include multiple choice, matching, fill-ins, and short
answers. The lab practical exams are timed exams in which you will be asked to identify or
interpret materials you have worked with in lab (e.g. bones, fossils, etc.)
MAKE-UP EXAMS OR LABS WILL NOT BE GIVEN UNLESS YOU HAVE WRITTEN
PROOF OF MEDICAL OR OTHER DIRE EMERGENCY (see course policies below).
LECTURE READINGS
The readings you will need for lectures include one textbook and nine articles. The articles are
all available on Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/). You should do all assigned readings before
their corresponding lecture.
TEXTBOOK (available at the University Co-Op OR as an ebook (much cheaper!)
http://books.wwnorton.com/books/webad-detail-editions.aspx?id=4294995031
Boyd, R and Silk J. (2018) How Humans Evolved. 8th Edition. W.W. Norton and Co.
OTHER REQUIRED READING: ARTICLES POSTED ON CANVAS
     1. Gebo, D. L. (2013) Primate Locomotion. Nature Education Knowledge 4(8):1
        http://www.nature.com/scitable/knowledge/library/primate-locomotion-105284696
     2. Smuts B (1987) What are friends for? Natural History 96(2):36-44.
     3. Whiten, Andrew; Boesch, Christophe (2001) The cultures of chimpanzees. Scientific
        American. 284(1):60-67
     4. Grant P (1991) Natural selection and Darwin's finches. Scientific American October,
        pages 82-87.
     5. Jablonski, N. and Chaplin, G. (2002). Skin Deep. Scientific American October, pages 75-
        81.
                                                 2


    6. Marks, J (2002) Molecular anthropology. In: What it Means to be 98% Chimpanzee.
        University of California Press, pp. 7-31.
    7. Shreeve, J. (1996) Sunset on the savanna. Discover. July, pages 116-125.
    8. Wong, K. (2013) Wong:Case for (very) early cooking heats up. Scientific American
        https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/case-for-very-early-cooking-heats-up/
    9. Gibbons, A.. (2011): A new view on the birth of Homo sapiens. Science. Vol. 331: 392-
        394.
LAB READINGS, LAB EXERCISES, AND PRE-LAB HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENTS
The readings you will need for labs, the lab exercises, and the pre-lab homework assignments
will be available on Canvas from the home page (http://canvas.utexas.edu/). You should do all
assigned lab readings and pre-lab homework assignments before their corresponding lab session,
and you should always bring your lab reading and lab exercise with you to lab. Pre-lab
homework assignments will be completed online. For detailed instructions, see section LAB
POLICIES below.
LAB POLICIES
Lab in ANT 301 is a hands-on, collaborative, and fun experience that usually helps bolster the
course grades of students who take it seriously. Labs make up 50% of your overall grade
(including homework, lab exercises, and the two lab practical exams), so it is vital that you are in
attendance at each of the ten labs and the two lab practical exams (see schedule).
Students are required to attend the lab section in which they are enrolled. Absences will be
excused only in cases of illness, observance of religious holidays, or military service (see course
policies below). If you will miss your lab due to one of these reasons, provide WRITTEN
documentation (e.g. doctor’s note) to your TA. Then you should arrange with another TA
(through email) to attend another lab section in the same week. Be sure to cc your TA on that
email.
To prepare for each lab, you are responsible for:
    (1) Reading the lab reading assignment before the lab. Bring it with you to lab.
    (2) Completing the homework assignment before the start of the lab in which you are
        enrolled. The homework assignment is on the course website and will be completed and
        submitted online. If it is not submitted before your scheduled lab time, you will receive
        no credit.
    (3) Downloading the lab exercise. You must print the exercise from Canvas and bring it
        with you to lab. Lab exercises will be completed during the scheduled lab time and are
        due at the END of each lab meeting. YOUR TA WILL NOT BRING PRINTOUTS
                                                  3


        OF MATERIALS TO LAB. If you turn in your lab exercise answers on anything
        other than the posted assignment sheet, you will lose 5 percentage points on the
        assignment.
You may work in small groups to complete lab exercises during the lab meeting. However, there
is a major difference between collaboration and plagiarism, and plagiarism will not be tolerated
(see the University policy on Scholastic Dishonesty in “Course Policies” below). Students who
arrive excessively late for lab or who otherwise disrupt lab will receive no credit for the week's
lab assignment.
                                                 4


              LECTURE, LAB,                   Reading assignment for
              READINGS AND EXAM               lecture (BS=Boyd and Silk
              SCHEDULE                        textbook; ARTICLE
                                              available on Canvas
Week 1 Jan 23 Introduction to course                                    No lab this week
Week 2 Jan 28 What is a primate?              BS: Prologue (xviii-xxi), Lab 1: Scientific
                                              plus 109-115              Method and Skeletal
           30 Living primates: Strepsirrhines BS:118-119                Anatomy
Week 3 Feb 4  Living primates: Haplorhines    BS:119-125
                                                                        Lab 2: Primate
           6  Living primates: Haplorhines
                                                                        Taxonomy
              continued
Week 4 Feb 11 Primate feeding adaptations     BS:116-117, 125-134
                                                                        Lab 3: Primate feeding
           13 Primate locomotor adaptations   ARTICLE: Gebo: Primate
                                                                        adaptations
                                              Locomotion
Week 5 Feb 18 Primate social behavior         BS: 136-141, and Ch.6
                                              ARTICLE: Smuts: What
                                              are friends for?
                                                                        Lab 4: Primate
           20 Humans: anatomy and behavior BS: 236-237, and Ch. 16
                                                                        locomotor adaptations
                                              ARTICLE: Whiten and
                                              Boesch: The cultures of
                                              chimpanzees.
Week 6 Feb 25 History of evolutionary theory  BS: Chapter 1
                                              ARTICLE: Grant: Natural
                                              Selection and Darwin's    Lab 5: Primate Social
                                              Finches                   Behavior
           27 Microevolution: genes and       BS: Chapter 2
              inheritance
Week 7 Mar 4  Microevolution: genes and       BS: Chapter 2
              inheritance
                                                                        Lab 6: Genetics
           6  Microevolution: population      BS: Chapter 3
              genetics
Week 8 Mar 11 Human variation and             BS: Chapter 14
              adaptation
                                              ARTICLE: Jablonski and    1st lab practical exam
                                              Chaplin: Skin Deep
           13 EXAM 1
                                            5


Week 9  Mar 18 SPRING BREAK
                                                                           No lab
            20 SPRING BREAK
Week 10 Mar 25 Macroevolution                   BS: Chapter 4
                                                                           No lab
            27 Movie
Week 11 Apr 1  Molecular phylogeny              BS:101-103
                                                ARTICLE: Marks:
                                                                           Lab 7: Cladistics
                                                Molecular Anthropology
            3  The fossil record: early primate BS: 207-223
               evolution
Week 12 Apr 8  Hominoid evolution               BS: 223-230
                                                                           Lab 8: Fossil primates
            10 The first hominins               BS: Ch. 10
               (Australopithecus and others)    ARTICLE: Shreeve: Sunset
                                                on the savanna
Week 13 Apr 15 The first hominins, continued    BS: Ch. 10                 Lab 9:
            17 The first hominins, continued    BS: Ch. 10                 Australopithecines
Week 14 Apr 22 Evolution of the genus Homo      BS: Chapter 11
                                                ARTICLE: Wong:Case for
                                                (very) early cooking heats
                                                up
                                                                           Lab 10: Genus Homo
            24 Evolution of the genus Homo,     BS: Chapter 12
               continued
Week 15 Apr 29 Origin of anatomically modern    BS: Chapter 13
               Homo sapiens
                                                ARTICLE: Gibbons: A new
                                                view on the birth of Homo  2nd lab practical exam
                                                sapiens
        May 1  Origin of anatomically modern    BS: Chapter 13
               Homo sapiens
Week 16 May 6  Concluding remarks, review for
               Exam 2                                                      No lab
            8  EXAM 2
                                              6


ANT 301 COURSE POLICIES
The following policies are not intended to be harsh, but are included to provide clear guidelines
on issues that students often face throughout the semester. Please read all of the information
carefully.
Make-ups
There will be no make-up exams or labs. Exceptions will be made only 1) with proof of dire
emergency or illness, 2) due to observance of a religious holy day, or 3) due to military service.
Late lab exercises
Late lab exercises will cost you 10 percentage points per day. This could change your grade
dramatically. Don't turn them in late!
Late lab homework will not be accepted.
Illness or emergency: If you miss an exam or lab due to illness or emergency, contact me and
the TA as soon as possible either before the exam or within 2 days after the exam or lab. You
will not be given a make-up unless you can provide documentation regarding the reason for your
absence.
Religious holy days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Absence for military service. In accordance with section 51.9111 of the Texas Education
Code, a student is excused from attending classes or engaging in other required activities,
including exams, if he or she is called to active military service of a reasonably brief duration.
[The maximum time for which the student may be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board as "no more than 25 percent of the total number of class meetings
or the contact hour equivalent (not including the final examination period) for the specific course
or courses in which the student is currently enrolled at the beginning of the period of active
military service.”] The student will be allowed a reasonable time after the absence to complete
assignments and take exams.
Students with disabilities: Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities at ssd@austin.utexas.edu , 471-6259 (voice), 410-6644 (video phone)
or http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Guns.
As of August 1, 2016, due to the passage of S.B. 11 (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu), licensed,
concealed handguns are now allowed in most campus buildings, including classrooms. If you
hold a license to carry a concealed weapon, it is your responsibility to know and follow the
Texas and University policies listed here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students. Visible
weapons or threatening behavior will be reported to the UT Police Department immediately.
                                                  7


The following statement serves as a reminder - I am required to notify you of this verbally, and I
will do so in class:
Based on my legal right to ban guns from my UT office, no guns are allowed in my office (SAC
5.128). Leaving a gun unattended (as it would be, if left outside my office) is against the law.
Please plan accordingly. YOU are always welcome in my office, just not your gun. Thank you.
Exam days and guns: On exam days (class and lab), you will need to leave your backpacks at
the front or back of the room. As it is against the law to leave your gun unattended, please plan
accordingly.
Note: The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly
carried gun on campus should immediately call 911.
Attendance
Attendance is not a formal part of your grade. However, whether you come to class or not, you
are responsible for keeping up with what happens in class. This applies to the content of the
class, handouts, and announcements about class policies, events, deadlines, etc. Lectures and
announcements can be found on Canvas, but it is easy to miss other pertinent information if you
are absent from class.
Grades
The grade you are given, either on an individual exam or assignment or as your final grade, is not
the starting point of a negotiation. It is your grade unless an error has been made. If you think
an error has been made, let me know within one week of receiving the assignment or exam
grade.
Extra credit: I do not offer “extra credit” opportunities. If you are struggling in the course,
please come for help during the semester when there is still time for us to help you. Make an
appointment with your TA or with me as soon as possible. Do not wait until the course is over
and ask me to change your grade because you are trying to graduate, or you have had a tough
time with your personal life this semester. By then, it is too late for me to help you.
Honor Code: Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor
Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from The
University. Scholastic dishonesty" includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair academic
advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of essentially the same written
                                                    8


assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor), or the attempt to
commit such an act.
See http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php and
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
For a tutorial and information on plagiarism, see
https://legacy.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Special note on use of social media: If students create a Facebook page (or use other social
media) to communicate about the course, Dr. Shapiro and the teaching assistants must be
provided access. Communication about content/answers to lab assignments, lab exams, or
course exams (whether verbally or via electronic communications) will be considered cheating
and students involved will be subject to disciplinary action.
Other useful information:
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
     The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and
         support for your learning.
            o Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
            o University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
            o Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
            o Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
         Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
         behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
         Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
         Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
         5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
                                                  9
