                                                SPORTS and SOCIAL MEDIA
                                        ADV 378s (06735) PR 378s (07170) SPRING 2020
Class meets: MW 10:30 to 12:00 (CNB 2.102)
Instructor: James A. Dalthorp, Jr.                                          Office: BMC 4.344
Email: james.dalthorp@austin.utexas.edu                                      Office Hours: MW 12:30 to 1:30 and by appointment
Phone: 310-874-4169
TA: Desiray Davis, Miles Onyegbule                                           Office: BMC 4th Floor TA cubicles
Email: desiray.davis@texas.edu, milesonyay@gmail.com                         Office hours: M/W 12:30pm- 1:30pm
                                                        Course Description
The course will help students understand the nature and importance of the huge shift in communication in the sports world that has
occurred with the advent of social media, enabling instantaneous two-way communication between players and their fans, shifting
media power toward individuals, away from traditional media, enabling immediate dissemination, feedback, reaction, and criticism.
What will I learn?
• Students will learn how to understand and appreciate the unique and powerful fit that sports and social media exhibit, based on an
appreciation of fan avidity and the emotional desire sports fans have to express themselves, be identified with and recognized by
their chosen teams, athletes, brands, and sports organizations.
• Students will understand the best practices, techniques, tools and philosophies being used by sports organizations to drive and
measure engagement and content amplification.
• Students will have realistic opportunities to disseminate and emulate best practices through hands on exercises and relevant social
engagements and projects.
• Students will gain an understanding how sports organizations maintain a consistent dialog with their fans all year long, and how
analytics through unique content and social engagements have dramatically changed how teams and individual players engage,
interact and communicate with interested fans and sports enthusiasts.
• Students will learn the history of communications in the sports so that they can better understand the dramatic shift from
traditional media to today’s social media landscape.
Learning Outcomes
1. Students will be able to measure the effectiveness of social media topics, posting times, platforms, and other variables in terms of
audience response and engagement
2. Students will be able to differentiate the strengths and limitations of different social media platforms
3. Students will be able to define goals for social media engagement and optimize social media posts to achieve those goals.
4. Students experience working in groups as a social media team, working with each other to post compelling content in an
environment of irregular timing and unpredictable opportunities.
5. Students will be able to use and deploy basic social planning techniques including “tent-pole” planning, evergreen content,
developing and using a content calendar, assessing engagement results to drive future action.
6. Students will be able to effectively use a basic set of design and production tools to create social posts that follow best practices
and take advantage of visual guidelines to help tell a story, desired results to increase awareness, fan avidity and drive engagement.
How will I learn?
Through class participation, spirited classroom discussions weighing the pros and cons of specific social postings, assigned readings,
lectures, specific targeted assignments, group and individual projects and through experiences related by invited industry guests, will
all be used to combine theory and skill development to help understand effective communications in the social media space.
Pre-requisites for the course
Upper-division standing and a University grade point average of at least 2.25.
How to succeed in this course
Bring your passion for sports storytelling and curiosity about how we judge what is the best content to post. Keep up with the
readings, speak up in class and embrace the need to cultivate your inner creative writer and your inner graphic designer. Don’t
hesitate to ask for help if you feel like you need it.
                                                                       1


                                                    Course Requirements
Required Materials: Course publication reading material listed below will be provided to class and posted as needed on Canvas.
Publications:
The ‘Why’ of Sports Design by Steve Wilson
Available inexpensively for Kindle and through Amazon
ISBN: 13-978-1987402476 Copyright 2018
KD Kevin Durant’s Relentless Pursuit to be the Greatest by Marcus Thomson II
Publication will be made available to students on Canvas
Atria Books an Imprint of Simon and Schuster, Inc.
ISBN: 978-1-5011-9781-9 ISBN 978-1-5011-9783-3 (ebook) Copyright 2019
Elevated: The Global Rise of the NBA by The Staff of The New York Times (Edited by Harvey Araton)
Select chapter readings will be made available to students through e-books
Triumph Books
ISBN: 978-1-62937-650-9 Copyright 2019
Billion Dollar Fantasy: The High Stakes Game Between FanDuel and DraftKings by Albert Chen
Publication will be made available to students through e-books
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt
ISBN: 978-0-544-91114-7 Copyright 2019
Sports Business Journal Students who are seriously interested in pursuing a career in sports are encouraged to take an on-line
semester subscription within a discounted program offered by the publication. Sign up information will be posted on Canvas
The Athletic: Students who are interested in pursuing a career in sports are encouraged to read The Athletic on a daily basis.
Required devices
Laptop computer (or tablet) and a smartphone. If one of these devices is not available, please see instructor for options.
                                                      Classroom Expectations
Class Attendance
Attendance is required for all class meetings and contributes a potential of 4 points to your final grade. In class assignments will get a
score of zero in the case of unexcused absences. For each unexcused absence after the second instance, a student will lose one of
the available 4 attendance points. An excused absence is defined as a documented illness, documented University-related absence
(sports team travel) and religious holidays (prior notification required). Excused absence for illness requires health provider
documentation. Attendance will be taken through daily class participation. Excused absences due to sports participation can be
arranged in advance through the instructor.
Class Participation
Class participation is essential and ranks at the top of factors students use to define a valuable course. Class participation forms part
of your grade in this class. Credit for the 6 participation points available will be based upon the student turning in 3x5 index cards
(which students should always carry a supply of) with their name, EID the topic they contributed to and a description of the
contribution. Two points will be awarded for each appropriately completed and accepted card.
Behavior expectations
Since much of this class look at the factors that appeal to avid sports fans, passionate enthusiasm is encouraged. However, it is also
important that students show behave respectfully in a civil manner. Avoid creating classroom distractions. Excessive off topic and
private conversations or device use qualifies as a distraction.
                                                              Assignments
Class Prep Assignments
There will be approximately 10 Class Prep Assignments given out over the course of the term. They will primarily deal with finding
relevant examples of certain social posts or the use of particular posting tools. They may also consist of readings with a graded quiz
with discussion questions. If a different number of assignments are given, the available points will be divided accordingly based on
the number of assignments.
                                                                       2


Two Individual Projects:
1) The Brand Called You: work to build and establish each student’s social media platform including creating an individual logo.
2) Write, design, and manage the social media account for an individual of the student’s choice in the sports world.
Two Group Projects:
2) Audit and monitor a professional sports team’s social media account from the NBA (Twitter, Instagram) and provide an analysis
of posting habits the include best practices, crisis management, and generated metrics.
3) Create the social media platform and create a communications plan for a designated Minor League Baseball Franchise
Grading for this Course
The table below represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to which you’ve done so.
  Graded Elements                                                           Points possible               Percent of Total Grade
  1. T e n C l a s s P r e p D i s c u s s i o n s                       100                             10
  2. P r o j e c t 1 : S o c i a l A u d i t                             220                             22
  3. P r o j e c t 2 : S o c i a l M e d i a T e a m P o s t i n g       220                             22
   5. I n C l a s s A s s i g n m e n t s                                100                             10
  7. E x a m 1                                                           180                             18
  8.Exam 2                                                               180                             18
                                  Total                                  1000                            100
 Course Outline
        All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
        https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
        Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
        note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
        much advanced notice as possible).
    Week        Date   Day    Class Topic                                Out of class activities         Assignments due
    1      22 JAN      W      Course Overview and Expectations
   Unit 1:
                              Managing Social Media                  Write personal biography
    2      27 JAN      M      Fan Avidity Lecture and Discussion     create social media photo profile   Biography assignment
                                                                 Historic Engagement:
           29 JAN      W      Fan Avidity Lecture and Discussion The SUPER BOWL                          Biography due Jan 31
    3      3 FEB       M      Post Super Bowl Twitter Feed           Super Bowl Social Media             Observations & Analysis
                              Engagement for Social Media            Reading #1: Fan Avidity
                                                                        3


                  Project I Sportsperson Twitter
       5 FEB   W  Instagram takeover                Social Media Engagement Readings Individual Project 1 Assigned
                 Engagement for Social Media
 4     10 FEB  M  History of Sports design          Chapters 1-5 Why of Sports Design  Reading “KD” Introduction
                                                                                       and Chapters 1-3
       12 FEB  W Graphics for Sports Brands         Chapters 6-9 Why of Sports Design Review Twitter feeds
                 Tools for designing Social Posts    Complete reading and review
 5      17 FEB M Social media for sports             the Why of Sports Design          Reading “KD” Chapters 3 -6
        19 FEB W Tools for designing Social Posts     Reading: The Social Media Audit
                 Social media for sports
                  Content planning -
 6      24 FEB M  Look at game week as a campaign     Monitoring Twitter feeds         Reading “KD” Chapters 7-10
                                                                                      Individual Project 1 Due
        26 FEB W  Tentpole Social Media Planning                                      FEB 29
                  NCAA March Madness
 7      2 MAR  M  Blogging, Fantasy Sports, epsorts   Read Blogging Best Practices     Observations and Analysis
        4 MAR  W Content Planning                                                     Group Project 2 Due
Unit 2:
 8      9 MAR  M   Exam Review                        Preparation and Review           Exam prep
       11 MAR W  MID TERM EXAM                        In-class                         SPRING BREAK MAR 16-20
                 Discuss Team Plan                   Prepare and organize groups      PROJECT 2 Assigned
 9     23 MAR M  Social Media Video                 Project Team Plan                  Posting Week 1
                  March Madness Sweet 16
       25 MAR W   Social Media Brand Films
 10    30 MAR M   Instagram and Twitter Stories                                        Posting Week 2
       1 APR   W  Sports Podcasts
11     6 APR   M  Review Project 2 Progress                                            Posting Week 3
                  The Masters social media audit
        8 APR  W  Project 2 Check-in
                                                          4


   12     13 APR  M     Social Media Influencer Strategies                                     Project 2 review
                        The 2020 Tokyo Olympics
          15 APR  W     Social Media Analytics
   Unit 3:
   13    20 APR   M     Blogging, Podcasts, esports
         22 APR   W     Social Media Success Stories                                            Project 2 Due by 5 pm
   14    27 APR   M     Social Media Advertising
         29 APR   W     Social Media Stunts/Engagements
   15     4 MAY   M     Final Exam Review and Q/A             Full test prep and review
          6 MAY   W      FINAL EXAM                                                             END OF TERM
                                                     Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
    Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
    there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
    possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also
    encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am
    happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
    As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. If you miss a
    smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be impacted significantly.
    Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
            Grade           Cutoff           Points needed
            A               94%              940
            A-              90%              900
            B+              87%              870
            B               84%              840
            B-              80%              800
            C+              77%              770
            C               74%              740
            C-              70%              700
            D               65%              650
            F               <65%             <650
                                                                  5


GRACE POLICY: Time-bank options
    Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate any unexpected,
    unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not have to utilize this policy, but if
    you find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to e-mail me as soon as possible to
    notify me that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy one of two ways (please choose, and let me
    know):
                You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
                You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
 Absences
    If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with the necessary
    information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with your team members; you
    are responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a class.
    Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating
    circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday, please let
    us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be
    responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
    If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-down and
    notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise
    questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific questions you
    have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
   •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
   •    You have a right to respect.
   •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
   •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
   •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
   •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
        environment.
   •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
        excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
   • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
        and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
   • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your
        experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy
        shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
   • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
   • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
        and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                                                6


Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters
are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the
Gender and Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may
make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
 Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that
      make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
      me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
      committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs
      with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
      documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
      at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
      authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
      Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
      getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
      on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
      rather than later is often helpful.
      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
      we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
      improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
      workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
      in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
      (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to prevent high-risk
behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about
BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
      Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
      isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                                                                  7


      The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
      512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
      alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
  •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
      exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
  •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
  •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
      given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
      Fire Prevention Services office.
  •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
      sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
      committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
      misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
            1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
            2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
                involved in a Title IX investigation.
            3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
      which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
      Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
      Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
      they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an
      official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options
      and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such misbehavior.
Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age,
disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can
be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
     • Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual misconduct and
          discrimination.
               o File a report of discrimination via online form
               o Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
     • Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
          The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing federal civil rights
          laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance from the
          Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-
          661-9600.
     • Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
          The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that make it
          illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected class, including
          discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
                                                                 8


University Policies
Academic Integrity
    Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
    University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
    integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
    own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
    plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
    understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following
    web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
    If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
    which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
    are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
    http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                               9
