                                                         Spring - 2019
                                AET361C: Physical Computing – Unique #: 20770
                                                      Michael McKellar
                                            mmckellar@austin.utexas.edu
                                                Office Hours: By Appointment
                                         Monday & Wednesday 12:00 – 1:30 pm
                                                            PAC 3.204
                                                REQUIRED assets for Class:
                                                       A notebook & pen
                                               Recommend assets for Class:
                                          A personal Arduino Uno & breadboard
OVERVIEW
Lab based hybrid class:
Focuses on the design fundamentals, correct usage and implementation with embedded micro-controllers such as
Arduino/Raspberry-Pi.
This class will develop practical knowledge for driving motors, building sensors and other electric micro-units for use in
both prototyping and permanent sculpture/experience uses.
Safe handling, wiring and implementation will cover the correct terminology and practise for voltage, current and
resistance as well as ability to both design and calculate the above for real world developments.
This studio will involve hands on experience in computing/electronics hardware as well as correct software programmatic
methods.
This class is scheduled to overlap with AET 339 – digital fabrication course for complex group project realization.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This class will take students through the design, development and implementation of micro-controller based sensor
systems. Using Arduino (Arduino.cc) as a foundation students will learn the fundamentals of human computer interaction
methods ranging from correct circuitry design and voltage/current calculations through to engaging and automatic
computer driven mechanics (motors, buttons, lasers etc.).
Initial weeks within the class will develop foundation knowledge for safe practise and implementation while offering
students as much hands on time as possible with the range of sensors, inputs and outputs offered in the physical
computing realm.
Pass/fail technical challenges will assess and compound student learning from class and offer the ability to begin building
and prototyping unique installations/experiences.
Project 1 will explore students to explore the ideas of automation and possibilities within the physical computing realms by
implementing an action or event from their everyday life in a computer controlled way. One example being using a range
of moving motors and a smart phone stylus to send a text automatically.
Project 2 will activate the cross over section of this class. Combining with AET 339 – Digital Fabrication - students will form
project groups and develop an interactive, kinetic sculpture within the loose scope and boundary set in class. Student
groups will be responsible for the design, prototyping and final implementation of a unique interactive sculpture.
The works from all groups will be shown in an exhibitions style format celebrating the work from AET students and the
SDCT. The exhibition will form part of the student’s grade.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of the semester, students will be able to:
      •    Develop critical understanding of the current state of physical computing trends and the processing in creation


       •    Developed an understanding in real-world physical computing implementations
       •    Utilised multiple Industry standard hardware and software tools to realise finished products
       •    Worked in groups to develop, build and implement a real-world showcase of interactive/reactive work
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
       •    Participation (15%): Students should be prepared to raise ideas, critique designs and add to class discussions, this
            is expected weekly.
       •    Attendance (5%): Attendance is taken during every class
       •    Technical Challenges (25% total) – technical challenges are graded on a pass/fail basis (for 4 points) if they meet
            the scope set out in the specific challenge, some challenges will have an additional grade point available allowing
            for creative or other adaptive implementation by students.
       •    Project 1 (25%) – Automate your life. Students will design, develop and implement an iterative prototype product
            that automatically performs a single task.
       •    Project 2 (30%) – Interactive sculpture exhibition. Working in collaboration, student groups will design, develop
            and implement an interactive and reactive kinetic sculpture for exhibition at an out of classroom space.
CLASS POLICIES
UT ELECTRONIC MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students. Students are
 expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related
 communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked
 daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or her official e-
 mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned to
 the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable
 messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action
 required of the University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
ATTENDANCE
Attendance and punctuality are professional attributes. This class is designed to provide students skills for a more practical
and professional future career.
You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for in-class assignments
or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up.
However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please
inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving
class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being absent.
Unexplained absences beyond the three outlined above will result in a penalty to your final grade. Normally a single grade
drop per unexplained absence. (E.g. A, becomes A-, C+ becomes C etc.)
Learning, research and development within the class all build on knowledge gained from previous lessons, you are
responsible for making up for work missed during any absence. It is your responsibly to obtain any notes or assignments
from one of your classmates.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be
absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
(from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES (SSD)


The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-
6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations
promptly.
CLASSROOM ETIQUETTE
       1.  Be on time at the start of class time and after any breaks
       2.  This class is a place for artistic discussion and critique, not texting on your phone – please turn them on silent
       3.  Discussion is good, distraction is bad – I reserve the right to reduce marks for participation for repeat offenders
       4.  Consider bringing headphones/earphones for any periods of solo work, such as class work sessions – any other
           time, these are never seen
COURSE COMMUNITACTION
The syllabus and assignments will be posted on the course Canvas site. All communications outside class hours will take
place via canvas.
This class is designed around discussion and group learning, it will help everyone if you post questions in the discussion
area wherever possible. I will post, comment and otherwise add to the discussion wherever relevant, or with topics to help
steer general discussion in class.
I will attempt to respond to all private communications within 24 hours on weekdays.
I normally check emails twice per day, once in the afternoon, once in the evening.
       •   Always ask questions where there is doubt. Do not make assumptions.
ASSIGNMENTS
       •   All assignments will be given out and discussed during class time and available to view on Canvas.
       •   Some classes will have specific technical assignments with focus on students learning specific skills in a software
           or working with a hardware. Additional smaller assignments may be made throughout the semester as the need
           arises.
       •   You are responsible for making up for any class work missed – specifically technical challenges completed during
           class time as these, and the homework assignment contribute heavily to the final grade.
       •   It is your responsibility to ask and inquire if you are unclear about what is required or when.
       •   A number of assignments will make use of lab accessible technology. You are responsible for making sure you
           leave appropriate time to access all the required technology for a given assignment.
ASSIGNMENTS DEADLINES
       • It is vital that you do not get behind in this class as all work builds upon previous work.
       • As a general rule all projects, reading, research and homework assignments must be completed before the
           beginning of each class period. However, many class assignments have a due date and time in the evening before
           class. This allows time for review and feedback, as well as discussion based upon the submitted work during the
           next lesson. Any work not submitted on time will still receive feedback but will not benefit from peer review in
           class time.
       •   All work is due as specified in the assignment listed on canvas. Work not completed before the canvas deadline
           will be considered late.
       •   Any work turned in late, without prior consent and valid reason, will be accepted for a week past the original due
           date penalized with a full grade drop from the deserved reward (an A submission will reward a B etc).
       •   Technical challenges are given out week 2 onwards
       •   Project 1 is given in week 7 due in week 10
       •   Project 2 is given in week 10, due in week 15. An exhibition external to class may result in a requirement to
           present outside of class hours.
       •   You will be shown your estimated class participate grade during mid-term week (normally week 7) based on
           current engagement. Use this as a chance to evaluate your engagement and participation in discussions and
           critiques and whether a change on your part is required.


     CLASS SCHEDULE
     Due to holidays, university breaks and other external factors some dates from the below table may change slightly from
     semester to semester.
W/C  Week    Lecture (Monday)                                       Lab (Wednesday)            Assignment  Assignment     Other
Date                                                                                           Given       Due
Jan  1       No class                                               •    Course Overview                                  Meet and
21                                                                  •    Introduction to                                  greet AET
                                                                         Arduino Uno                                      339 1:00PM
                                                                    •    The IDE &
                                                                         Breadboard
                                                                    •    My first Program
Jan  2       •     Not making fires                                 •    Lights (LED, LED      Technical 1
28           •     Wiring, Serial, Parallel                              Serial, LED Parallel)
             •     HIGH & LOW                                       •    Accessing different
                                                                         LEDs
                                                                    •    LED pattern
                                                                         generation
Feb  3       •     Input (buttons, dials, Gyroscope, etc…)          •    Developing with       Technical 2 Technical 1
4                                                                        various inputs
                                                                    •    Making interaction
                                                                         happen
Feb  4       •     Advanced Input                                   •    Oven time/            Technical 3 Technical 2
11                 (Light/Heat/Accelerometer/IR sensor/)                 security light/
                                                                         Speedometer
Feb  5       •     Movement (motors, servos, dynos, gears &         •    Working with          Technical 4 Technical 3
18                 ratios)                                               motors, gears &
                                                                         movement
Feb  6       •     Output (Screens, more LEDs, noise etc…)          •    Motion detection      Technical 5 Technical 4
25                                                                       alarm
Mar  7       •     External devices & the outside world (OSC /      •    Implementing your     Project 1   Technical 5    Current
4                  Serial/ protocols and languages)                      physical                                         Participation
                                                                         computing into                                   grade shown
                                                                         another project
Mar  8       Project 1 pitch                                        •    Project 1 Support                                Team Intros
11                                                                  •    Teams meet –
                                                                         Potential skype
                                                                         guest
Mar                                                                   Spring break
18
Mar  9       Project 1 Support                                      Group elevator pitches                                Group
25                                                                                                                        elevator
                                                                                                                          pitches
Apr  10      Project 1 – Reviewed                                   Group focused work         Project 2 – Project 1
1            Project 2 – group work kick off                                                   Kick off
Apr  11      Group focused work                                     Group focused work
8
Apr  12      Group focused work                                     Group focused work                                    Project 2
15                                                                                                                        Prototype
Apr  13      Group focused work                                     Group focused work
22
Apr  14      Group focused work                                     Group focused work                                    MAKER
29                                                                                                                        FAIRE – 4th
May  15      Project 2 tidy up                                      Project 2 – Final                      Project 2 –
6                                                                   submission – Blog &                    portfolio
                                                                    Portfolio submission
May  16                                                               No class days
13


EVAULATION & GRADING
GENERAL
Neatness, scholarship and presentation will all count towards your final grade. When designing being able to visually
communicate ideas is part of the process, this does not mean that artistic merit is awarded.
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
Technical challenges for this class are graded on a pass/fail criteria. Every technical challenge will present a number of
bullet point objectives to achieve for submission.
Unless all points marked required are present the assignment will be graded fail.
Some challenges will include ‘optional’ additional points that are not included in the grading criteria but offer advanced
skill or creative challenge.
Some challenges may indicate they award an additional point for creativity.
PROJECT WORK
Each assignment will be given a specific grading rubric covering exactly how students will earn points. A rubric section is
normally assigned a grade from 0-5:
0 – Null, not covered in submission
2 – Okay, attempts to answer brief but fall short of minimum requirements
3 – Good or great, answers the brief
4 – Excellent, goes above and beyond the brief
5 – Exceptional, a perfect professional piece of work
Some rubric points may have double (or higher) weighting that will result in your award being multiplied by weighting.
Example:
  Grading Section          Award         Weighting     Total
  1                                  3              2       6/10 (60%)
  2                                  4              1        4/5 (80%)
                                                 Total 10/15 (66.67%)
YOU WILL BE GRADED ON
       •    Reading, discussion, Participation (15%);
       •    Attendance (5%)
       •    Technical Challenges (1-5) (25%)
       •    Project 1 – augment your life (25%)
       •    Project 2 – AET 339 cross over work & exhibition (30%)
This course does not have a final exam, but student exhibition will make part of the assigned grade.
GRADING SCHEME
This class uses a mixture of points and percentages. Assignments will be given in points, but the final grade will be
calculated via the percentage of awarded points vs total available points across all assignments.
To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not recognize the grade of A+. Thus, the conversion from
percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
       •    A=        94+
       •    A- =      90 – 93.999…
       •    B+ =      87 – 89.999…
       •    B=        84 – 86.999…
       •    B- =      80 – 83.999…
       •    C+ =      77 – 79.999…
       •    C=        74 – 76.999…
       •    C- =      70 – 73.999…
       •    D+ =      67 – 69.999…


      •    D=         64 – 66.999…
      •    D- =       60 – 63.999…
      •    F=         0 – 59.999…
PRIVACY
This class is designed to be an open space for discussion, critique and learning. What is said about each other’s work during
this class should remain in the classroom. It will not be published in a blog or any other personal website, tweeted or
posted on social networks.
MOBILE DEVICES
Mobile devices of any kind must be silenced and out of sight.
There may be times when using a mobile is appropriate, such as aiding in discussion or during dedicates solo work – these
times will be very obviously announced. Usage of a mobile device outside of these terms – with or without warning, will
result in severe penalty to your class participation grade.
RESOURCES AND EQUIPMENT
This class will make use of Arduino, a programming development environment based on java (derived from processing).
Arduino.cc
We will be making notes and diagrams that relate to your safe development while using current, voltage and general
electronic devices. While nothing we deal with in class will harm a human - proper usage, documenting and understanding
are vital for future learning. As such as note pad and pen will be required for every class session.
The lab will supply a variety micro-controllers and associated sensors and devices. While not a requirement, it is suggested
students acquire their own Arduino board for outside of class development:
http://a.co/d/4j5iCgG
