Advanced Design Studio - Gulf Coast DesignLab                                                   FALL 2019 ARC 561R
Instructor: Coleman Coker, Professor of Practice
Course Description: The semester’s work incorporates a Public Interest Design approach that is part of the Gulf
Coast DesignLab’s mission https://gulfcoastdesignlab.org . Through community-based engagement using a design
build methodology, you will learn how to effectively engage your stakeholder and communicate design intention;
increase your knowledge of architectural processes; develop craftful detailing that expresses the poetic quality of your
design and; gain the satisfaction of benefitting the public through a well-designed work that you will design and build.
Stakeholder: You’ll be working with the Houston Audubon Society (HAS) https://houstonaudubon.org/ this semester.
While HAS is known for birding, it does much more to benefit natural habitats—both urban and outside the city.
Through fund raising and increased public awareness, HAS helps protect natural sanctuaries, manage and protect
public lands, advocate for urban conservation and eco-literacy for youth. They manage several sanctuaries in the
Houston/Galveston area, including their most popular, High Island. This is where you’ll work this fall. At the east end
of Bolivar peninsula, High Island sits above a salt dome. At thirty-eight feet above sea level, it is the highest elevation
on the Gulf Coast between Mobile, AL and the Yucatan peninsula in Mexico. It is nationally known as a bird watching
haven, particularly in the spring when birds return from their wintering spots south of the U.S.
Design Problem: Each year Houston Audubon Society has long-term visitors who spend several weeks on High
Island. These include biologists, environmentalists, bird counters and Winter Texan volunteers who help maintain the
sanctuary. HAS is renovating several old buildings for these visitors. Some guests arrive in Recreation Vehicles (RV)
that they live in for their time there. HAS has asked that you design and build a screened outdoor area for the visitors,
which includes a fire circle and an elevated viewing area. The structure should include seating areas and
accommodate 12-15 guests. Your design will consider the 2-acre area that HAS is reconditioning. This will include
open spaces, existing buildings, guest / RV parking and how these impact your design/build work.
Travel: Several field trips will take place during the semester. The first will be to meet your stakeholder, determine
their needs and investigate / document the place where you’ll work. You’ll return a second time to present your
design and get approval from your stakeholder. And finally, there will an extended stay of 12-14 days toward the end
of the semester in which you will install your built work. The school and stakeholder will cover your travel / lodging
expenses.
Process: NOTE: this studio is supported by a required seminar—Ethics and Poiesis: Design in the Anthropocene.
Students taking this advanced design studio are required to take the seminar. Please refer to the Fall 2019 seminar
listing for a more thorough description.
Pedagogic Objectives: Using a public interest design approach nurture more diverse and poetic ways to: 1) develop
your design skills through learning to better communicate with a stakeholder; 2) recognize that each design is
intrinsically part of and responsive to its larger social and environmental context; 3) explore and express qualities of
materiality, place and the temporal; 4) implement your newfound knowledge through an applied research approach.
Required Material: You will need what’s typically required in design studio along with incidental drawing items such
as graphite pencils, charcoal, illustration board, drawing pads and typical model-making material. Along with these
each student is required to furnish their own: tape measure, speed square, utility belt, hard hat, safety vest, etc. If you
don’t already have these, instructions as to what’s required will be given.
Required Texts: Selected and provided by instructor.
Office hours: 10am -1pm T, W, F and by appointment, room GOL 2.202 / ccoker@austin.utexas.edu
Shop Requirements: Students in this course must have taken EHS’s on-line training and pass a short exam. As this
training is supplemental to SOA’s woodshop training, no one is excluded or grandfathered from the requirement; both
are required in order to use the woodshop’s tools and equipment. As part of the school’s efforts to comply with this


mandate, the woodshop has a card reader installed at the entrance. Those who have taken the on-line EHS training
will be able to use gain access to the woodshop during operating hours by simply swiping their UT ID cards at the
door; those who have not taken the on-line training will not be allowed to enter the woodshop. No exceptions can be
made. If you haven’t completed this training class and testing it can be accessed at:
(https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ehs/class.WBX?s_course_comp=0&s_course_prefix=OH&s_course_number=0500)
Learning Outcomes: Students have been exposed to the following learning objectives in previous semesters. The
level of expectation will continue to grow as students further develop each competency. Some issues would only be
mentioned in passing in one studio but will be studied in more depth in another.
      •   Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and space, both exterior
          and interior; building envelope
      •   Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures,
          construction, and environmental system
      •   Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant contextual;
          environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project
      •   Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents; research skills
      •   Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level
          of skill displayed
      •   Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through active engagement in all activities of the studio
Studio Culture: The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning
encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio offers an environment
where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and discussed among
classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one
instruction from faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking
skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project-
based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the school's core
values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of
architecture's fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
Evaluation Criteria: While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of
each grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to
deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
      Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
          •    The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of inquiry
          •    The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
               models, etc.) in the development of the design
          •    Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is asked;
               direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
      Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in
               companion courses.
          •    A strong and clearly stated design objective
          •    Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements –
               and sectional development
          •    Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through
               creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and
               environmental system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in
               support of the design objective


          •   Structural competence and material sensitivity
     Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final
     design presentation.
          •   Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
              displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
     Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and
     reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of
Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements.
Studio Course Grading Guide:
Grading: Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other
academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a
significant portion of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of issues. Grading for studio courses
is broken into three components for each given mark:
30% Concept: Grasping and implementing the ideas behind exercises, combined with an appropriate process of inquiry
and completion of those exercises.
30% Process: the consistent and rigorous testing and advancement of design ideas that result in a refined resolution
and completion of designed work.
40% Resolution: mature demonstration of competence, completeness and finesse of a final design through graphic
representation, physical modeling, mockups, oral presentation and artifact making, which not only presents a broad
conceptual basis for the final work but also indicates a thorough grasp of detail and economy in the competent
execution of the evidence-based research work.
Your work in these three areas will be evaluated on its evolution and thoroughness over the semester.
Grade Descriptions:
A/A- Excellent: Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond
what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- Above Average: Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.
Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is
complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C Average: Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor: Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F Fail Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will
be assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
X Excused Incomplete: Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation
with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed
before the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling, according to School of Architecture policy.


Attendance: Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused
absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered
by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only
excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due
dates.
If a student is late (15 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused
absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students
must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not
acceptable.
Religious Observances: A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is
excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or
complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University
policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a
religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Academic Integrity: Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly
enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures
on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Mental Health and Support Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your
way, there are options available for help:
      •    In-house CARE counselor (see below)
      •    For immediate support
                o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                     M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
                o CMHC Crisis Line:
                     24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
      •    Free services at CMHC:
                o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
                o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
                o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
                o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Care Program: Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who
are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Laura Dannenmaier (LCSW) is the CARE Program Director and is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of
Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html


Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students
(471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the
instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that
time. http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Campus Carry: Texas law permits individuals who have obtained a concealed handgun license (CHL) to carry their
loaded, concealed weapon in university buildings on campus. The university has determined certain sensitive areas
and buildings where concealed weapons will be prohibited. All students are to be familiar with and abide by the
publically displayed campus policies on the school’s official website.
Security, Safety and Sustainability: The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it
necessitates the careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other
substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and
your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave
your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce material
consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with white bags.
The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio
and fabrication coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab.
All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the
end of the semester.
BCAL: Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be
reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If
something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Emergency Evacuation: In the case of emergency evacuation:
     •    Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
          when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     •    Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
     •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
          class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     •    Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
