                                                             PSY 339 (42550), page 1
          BEHAVIOR PROBLEMS IN CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS
                               PSY339 (Unique# 83110)
                                     Summer 2019
Class Meets: M-F 10:00-11:30
Instructor:           Rebecca Neal-Beevers, Ph.D.
       ***Please use Canvas for course-related email communication.***
                               COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course will cover the epidemiology, diagnosis, etiology, associated features,
and treatment of psychological and developmental disorders in childhood and
adolescence. Relevant theories, research, and developmental considerations
will also be reviewed. This course will cover material related to infant mental
health, disruptive behavior disorders, internalizing disorders, and developmental
disorders. Classes will be structured to include both lecture and class
discussion.
Prerequisites for the course
The Psychology Department will drop all students who do not meet the following
prerequisites: (a) PSY 301 with a C or better, (b) PSY 418 (or an equivalent listed
in the course schedule) with a C or better, and (c) Upper-Division standing (60
hours completed). Students who do not meet these prerequisites will be dropped,
no exceptions.
Course Materials
Course materials including the syllabus, assignment descriptions, and readings
will be posted on Canvas at https://canvas.utexas.edu/. Students are responsible
for checking these online resources and downloading course materials. Canvas
will be used to send electronic announcements to the class and to post
assignments and exam/assignment grades. Be sure that your email information
in Canvas is correct. Check your email regularly (e.g., at least daily), as certain
communications may be time sensitive. Canvas support is available through the
website or by calling the UT ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400, Monday through
Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Teaching Philosophy
The textbook provides an excellent overview of the material. However, it does not
cover in detail some aspects of current research and theory. Therefore, lectures
will be used to fill in the picture more thoroughly and to provide greater detail on
particular topics. This will be accomplished by focusing on particularly influential
studies, discussing case studies, watching film clips, etc. Please be aware that this


                                                             PSY 339 (42550), page 2
means that at times the lectures will accompany and complement the text, while
at other times the lectures will introduce information not covered in the text.
How to succeed in this course
The keys to success in this class are: preparation, engagement and
communication. Please come to class prepared by reviewing all assigned
readings and, in particular, the DSM-V diagnostic criteria. Please be fully
engaged in the material by participating in lecture and discussion, and reviewing
exams. Keep lines of communication open. Ask questions during class if you
would benefit from clarification or additional information. Often times, multiple
students will ask me the same question after class and/or during office hours.
                            COURSE REQUIREMENTS
REQUIRED MATERIALS
Notecards
Please buy yourself one package of 3x5 notecards, and make sure that you bring
about 2-3 to class each day.
Textbook
The textbook is required reading for this class. Note that in order to keep textbook
costs down for students in this class, I am using an older edition. While you are
welcome to purchase ahardcover textbook for this course, please know that the
publisher also provides more economical options including renting a hardcover
textbook, renting an E-Book, or purchasing an E-Book.                 Please go to
https://tinyurl.com/ybf6rj6r to review these options. Also, you are not required to
obtain any software that might come with new versions of the textbook.
Mash, E.J. & Wolfe, D.A. (2016). Abnormal Child Psychology (6th ed.). Belmont,
      CA: Wadsworth.


                                                               PSY 339 (42550), page 3
Articles
In order to provide greater depth and breadth on select topics than is provided in
your textbook, you will be required to read the following research papers.
Electronic copies of these readings (e.g., PDF files) are available on Canvas.
1. Nature, Nurture & Psychopathology
Belsky, J., Bakermans-Kranenburg, M.J., & van Ijzendoorn, M.H. (2007). For
       better and for worse: Differential susceptibility to environmental influences.
       Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 300-304.
2. Infant Mental Health
Tarullo, A., Obradovic, J., & Gunnar, M.R. (2009). Self-control and the
       developing Brain. Zero to Three, Jan, 31-37.
Zeanah, C.H. & Lieberman, A. (2016). Defining relational pathology in early
       childhood: The Diagnostic Classification of Mental Health and
       Developmental Disorders of Early Childhood DC:0-5 approach. Infant
       Mental Health Journal, 37, 509-520.
3. Autism
Gernsbacher, M.A., Dawson, M., & Goldsmith, H.H. (2005). Three reasons not to
       believe in an autism epidemic. Current Directions in Psychological
       Science, 14, 55-58.
CLASSROOM EXPECTATIONS
Class Attendance & Participation
Class attendance is not mandatory, but is strongly recommended. Extra credit
participation points may be earned in class throughout the semester. Additionally,
exams will include material covered in class lectures that is not presented in the
textbook.
Lectures Online
This class is using the Lectures Online recording system. This system records the
audio and video material presented in class for you to review after class. Links for
the recordings will appear in the Lectures Online tab on the Canvas page for this
class. You will find this tab along the left side navigation in Canvas.
To review a recording, simply click on the Lectures Online navigation tab and follow
the instructions presented to you on the page. You can learn more about how to
use the Lectures Online system at http://sites.la.utexas.edu/lecturesonline/. I
reserve the right not to record portions (or all) of any given lecture. Occasionally
there may be technical or other difficulties that could prevent the recording of these
lectures. You can find additional information about the lecture capture system
at: http://sites.la.utexas.edu/lecturesonline/. Please take advantage of this service


                                                                PSY 339 (42550), page 4
provided to you by the College of Liberal Arts. Students report Lectures Online is
especially useful for filling in gaps in their notes from class notes or when they have
to miss a lecture.
Assignments
Exams: There will be four non-cumulative midterm exams and one (optional)
cumulative final exam on the days specified in the syllabus. Exams will include
material presented in the assigned reading, class lectures, and any supplemental
materials covered in class. Information regarding the material covered on each
exam will be posted on Canvas approximately three days prior to each scheduled
exam.
Research-supported responses: One learning goal for the semester is for you to
become comfortable using the psychology research literature to answer common
questions or debates surrounding developmental psychopathology. To achieve
this goal, you will present one research studies that addresses a controversial
question/issue that I designate. In other words, you will be prompted to respond
to four questions during the semester. For each question, you will be required to
develop a response based on available research focused on that topic.
Specifically, you will be required to find a research study published in peer
reviewed research journal. (This should be the strongest source that you can
find.) You will use this research article to develop brief response that you will
present in class. Please note that you are required to upload PDF files of your
research article to Canvas by 9:30am on each assignment due date. Files
uploaded after 9:30am will be considered late. Late submissions will be
penalized 5 points per day until all points for that assignment have been
depleted.
**Please make sure to review the research-supported response assignment
description posted on Canvas.**


                                                             PSY 339 (42550), page 5
COURSE SCHEDULE
Following is a list of the topics to be covered in each class. This is a tentative
schedule, as some topics may take more time to review than others. While topic
dates may shift, assignment due dates are fixed and will not change.
   Date      Lecture Topics                                         Reading(s)*
     6/6     Course Overview & Review of Assignments
     6/7     What is Abnormal Behavior?                                 Ch. 1
    6/10     Developmental Psychopathology: Theory &                   Ch. 2-3
             Research
    6/11     Nature, Nurture, & Psychopathology                       Articles 1
    6/12     Nature, Nurture, & Psychopathology                       Articles 1
    6/13     Assessment & Diagnosis                                     Ch. 4
    6/14     Treatment                                                  Ch. 4
             *Research-Supported Response
             Assignment 1 Due: Do placebo treatments
             ease mental health symptoms in children
             and/or adolescents?
    6/17     Infant Mental Health                                     Articles 2
    6/18     *Exam 2
    6/19     Intellectual Disability                                    Ch. 5
    6/20     Autism Spectrum Disorders                          Ch. 6 (pp. 157-186)
                                                                      Articles 3
    6/21     Autism Spectrum Disorders                          Ch. 6 (pp. 157-186)
             *Research-Supported Response                             Articles 3
             Assignment 2 Due: Do vaccines cause
             autism spectrum disorder?
    6/24     Communication & Learning Disorders                         Ch. 7
    6/25     *Exam 2
    6/26     Communication & Learning Disorders                         Ch. 7
    6/27     ADHD                                                       Ch. 8
    6/28     ADHD                                                       Ch. 8
             *Research-Supported Response
             Assignment 3: Are stimulant medications
             safe for use in children/adolescents?
     7/1     Disruptive Behavior Disorders                              Ch. 9


                                                              PSY 339 (42550), page 6
     7/2      Anxiety Disorders: Phobias                                Ch. 11
     7/3      *Exam 3
     7/4              Fourth of July Holiday – no class
     7/5      Anxiety Disorders: OCD & PTSD                             Ch. 11
                                                                   Ch. 12 (pp. 420-
                                                                         433)
     7/8      Mood Disorders: Major Depressive Disorder                 Ch. 10
              *Research-Supported Response
              Assignment 4: Do SSRI medications
              increase suicides in adolescents?
     7/9      Mood Disorders: Bipolar Disorder                          Ch. 10
    7/10      Thought Disorders/Schizophrenia                    Ch. 6 (pp.187-193)
    7/11      *Exam 4
    7/12      Review/Catch-up day
  July 13     *Cumulative Final Exam (Optional)
  7–10 pm
*Assignment due dates
                              CLASSROOM POLICIES
Midterm & Final Exams
For all exams, students are expected to arrive at the beginning of the class
period. Exams will not be returned to students, but students will have the option
to review their exams with Dr. Neal or Molly during office hours.
Grading Policies
Final Course Grades are based on: (1) the best four scores of the five exams
(four during the semester and the optional cumulative final exam; 100 points
each), (2) empirically-supported response assignments (25 points each), and (3)
any extra credit points earned during the semester. Under no circumstances will
additional points be given (e.g., if you are just below a cut-off point) after the final
distribution has been determined.
                Final grade distribution: (out of a possible 500 points)
                           A             450 and above
                           B+            435-449
                           B             415-434
                           B-            400-414
                           C+            385-399
                           C             365-384
                           C-            350-364


                                                              PSY 339 (42550), page 7
                            D+           335-349
                            D            315-334
                            D-           300-314
                            F            295 and below
Students who are satisfied with their grade based on the four midterm exams are
not required to take the final exam. Any student may attempt to improve their
grade by taking the final exam to replace their lowest midterm exam score. Final
grades will be calculated based on the best four of the five possible exams (four
midterms and final).
Exam Make-up Policy
Students are expected to take the midterm and final exams on the days specified
in the syllabus. No make-up exams will be allowed for the midterm exams.
Please note, however, students who miss one of the first four exams for any
reason will be allowed to take the final exam to replace the missed one.
Students who miss the final exam, will be allowed to make up the exam if they
are able to provide proper documentation within 24 hours of the final exam date.
According to UT policy, make-up exams may be given only if there is proper
documentation of a UT-sanctioned reason (serious illness, death in the family,
but not planned vacations, weddings, over-slept, etc).
Absences
Class attendance is not mandatory, but is strongly recommended. Exams will
include material covered in class lectures that is not presented in the text.
Students are responsible for obtaining class notes from other students for missed
lectures. Please also see information below regarding absences related to (1)
personal or family emergencies and (2) religious observances under University
Policies and Non-Academic Resources.
                     UNIVERSITY POLICIES & RESOURCES
Administrative Deadlines
It is your responsibility to keep track of the deadlines for dropping the course,
changing to Pass/Fail, etc.
Academic Integrity
Ethical conduct is expected at all times. Unethicalconduct (cheating on exams,
quizzes, etc.) may result in an automatic failing grade in the course and/or
academic probation.
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of


                                                                PSY 339 (42550), page 8
the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will
be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
Personal or Family Emergencies
If you experience a personal or family emergency (death in the family, protracted
sickness, serious mental health issues) that prevents you from attending an
exam or forces you to miss multiple days of class, you should contact Student
Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of Students
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/index.php. They will work with you
to communicate with your professors and let them know of your situation.
Religious Observances
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you
must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and
abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning environment and
activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me,
or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated,
please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment
for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Students with disabilities
may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the


                                                               PSY 339 (42550), page 9
Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All
students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
(JES A332).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There
are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the
college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any
academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, I
strongly encourage you to seek support via the MHCC line at 512-471-CALL
(2255). Also, http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Important Safety Information
If you have a behavioral concern about someone else and need some advice on
what to do, you may call BCAL (Behavior Concerns Advice Line) at 512-232-
5050 to talk with someone about it. The call is confidential, and you decide how
much information you’d like to share.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office
of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
       may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you
       used when entering the building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in
       writing during the first week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
       instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the
       following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
       Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
       procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Student Disclosures of Sexual Violence.
The University of Texas fosters a campus free of sexual violence including
sexual harassment, domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and/or any form


                                                            PSY 339 (42550), page 10
of sex or gender discrimination. If you disclose a personal experience as a UT
student, the course instructor is required to notify UT's Title IX Office.
