                                         Human Rights & World Politics
                                               GOV F365W (80684)
                                              Summer Session 1 2020
                                                  Online Syllabus
COURSE INFORMATION
Instructor: Rhonda L. Evans, J.D., Ph.D.
Email: humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours:
June 4 - June 25
T/W/TH 5:00 – 6:00 pm; or by appointment
June 29 - July 1
Monday, June 29, 5:00 - 6:00 pm
Tuesday, June 30, 3:00 - 4:00 pm
Wednesday, July 1, 5:00 - 6:00 pm
July 6 - July 8
M/T/W 9:00 - 10:00 am
Office Hours Location: Online via Zoom in Canvas
Teaching Assistant: Christine Bird
Email: humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: W 8:00 - 11:00 am
Office Hours Location: Online via Zoom in Canvas
Teaching Assistant: Siyun Jiang
Email: humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: T 11:00 – 2:00 pm
Office Hours Location: Online via Zoom in Canvas
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Human rights feature prominently in contemporary world politics. Today there exists a large and
complex international human rights regime consisting of the United Nations and several
regionally-based human rights systems. Focusing on the UN, this course introduces you to the
legal, political, and policy dimensions of international human rights. In so doing, it addresses: (1)
the legal and institutional infrastructures and processes that exist at domestic and international
levels for the promotion and protection of human rights; (2) the main actors involved in human
rights advocacy, including states, international organizations, tribunals, activists, nongovernmental
organizations, and national human rights institutions; (3) the interests of these actors as well as the tactics
that they employ to advance their interests; and, (4) the challenges of assessing the effectiveness of
human rights advocacy and how these challenges can be met by employing basic precepts of quantitative
and qualitative political science research.
By the semester’s end, students should be able to answer the following questions: What is international
human rights law? How does international human rights law figure into human rights advocacy? How
effective is international human rights law, and under what conditions does it work? And finally, how do
we know whether or not it works? Considering the significant resources and efforts that are devoted to
international human rights institutions and advocacy each year, these are clearly very important questions.
And yet, you may be surprised to learn that much remains to be learned about the efficacy of international
human rights law. In exploring why this is so, we will consider the various challenges to studying
international human rights law from an empirical (as opposed to a strictly normative) perspective. You


should emerge from this course with an enhanced understanding of the mechanics of human rights
advocacy and an improved ability to evaluate its effectiveness. This course is designed to increase your
knowledge about human rights, but more importantly, it is designed to help you develop your general
analytical skills. The latter are fungible skills in which prospective employers are often most interested.
ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES & REQUIRED UNIVERSITY NOTICES & POLICIES
Communication (Email) Policy
How to Contact the Instructor and Teaching Assistants
If you wish to contact the Instructor or Teaching Assistants, use the following email
address: humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu.
Do not use the email function in Canvas. We will not receive those email messages. Do not use our
personal email addresses.
How the Instructor and Teaching Assistants will Communicate with you
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence. We will email you at your
officially registered email address, and notifications will be sent to that address via the Announcements
function in Canvas.
You are responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. It is your responsibility to keep the University informed about changes to your e-mail
address. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address here.
You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical.
Before emailing questions about some aspect of how the course operates, review the Canvas page. It will
likely contain the answer that you seek. Substantive questions about the course material will be answered
at office hours not via email.
SSD Accommodations Policy
I strive to create a supportive learning environment for all students and to ensure that all students enjoy
equal access and opportunity in the course of their educational experiences at UT-Austin. Some students
require accommodations in order to achieve these objectives. Any student with a documented disability
who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at
471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations.
If you require accommodations, you are required to present your accommodations letter no later
than June 10 (or shortly after your accommodations have been approved if that occurs mid-semester) so
that we can discuss the types of accommodations that you need. Help me help you.
Please use this email address: humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu.
Yes, I can access your accommodations letter online. Nevertheless, accommodations will not be provided
until I have met with you. I prefer to meet with you during office hours or by appointment so that we can
consider together ways in which I can facilitate your learning experience in my class. Of course, you are
not required to disclose to me any information about your disability. Your disability information will be
kept confidential. No later than five business days before an exam, please remind me of any testing
accommodations you will require. In some instances, a student has not gone through the formal process of
documenting their disability with the University. If you find yourself in this situation, let’s talk. For more
information, visit this website.
If you require note-taking accommodations, notes can be collected from a student in the class and posted
to UT Box. A TA will coordinate the collection and uploading of the notes as well as managing student
access to the files. The TA is your primary point of contact regarding notes.
What if I’m struggling in the course?
Seek Help
The TAs and Instructor are here to help you. Visit our online office hours as soon as you experience
difficulty. Do not delay! Discuss the material with us; and, solicit feedback on drafts of your


assignments; solicit feedback on assignments on which you performed poorly. We want to see you
succeed. Help us help you in a timely fashion!
The pass/fail and credit/no credit exceptions for spring 2020 will not be in place for the summer sessions.
The university has returned to regular university grading for the summer term. To read more, click here.
Personal Emergencies
If you experience a personal or family emergency (COVID-19 issues, death in the family, protracted
sickness, serious mental health issues, etc.) that prevents you from participating in the course, you should
contact Student Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of Students. They will work with you to
communicate with your professors and let them know of your situation. If you do not have off-campus
access to a computer and/or Wi-Fi, please contact Student Emergency Services for support.
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) Crisis Line:
If you are experiencing a mental health crisis (depression, anxiety, e.g.) call the confidential CMHC
Crisis line at 512-471-CALL (2255). Call (from wherever you are) even if you aren’t sure you’re in a full-
blown crisis but sincerely need help. Staff are there to help you even now during the crisis.
Student Emergency Funding for UT Students:
There are two main resources you should look into for emergency funding.
1. CARES Act Emergency Assistance Fund
2. Student Emergency Fund
Consider taking an "Incomplete"
If you are unable to complete the course requirements, it may be possible to receive an incomplete (“X”)
rather than a letter grade for the course. Keep in mind that if you do not complete the work by the
prescribed deadline, the University converts the incomplete into an “F.” For more information,
go here. Students are advised to speak with their academic advisor before taking an incomplete.
Classroom Behavior: It’s important that we have a classroom atmosphere (this includes a virtual
classroom) that optimizes teaching and learning, and we all share the responsibility for creating a civil
and non-disruptive forum. Students are expected to conduct themselves at all times in a manner that does
not disrupt teaching or learning. All class-related discussions and activities, including those conducted via
Zoom or Canvas, should be open and free-flowing, but this can be accomplished using civilized and
respectful language.
Grade Complaint Policy
TAs will grade the quizzes, discussion posts, and writing assignments according to a key generated by the
Instructor, and they will consult with the Instructor during the grading process. Complaints about the way
in which an item has been graded must first be lodged in writing (e.g. by email) with the TAs
within three days of items being returned to students for their review. A TA will consider a complaint’s
merits and may exercise discretion to alter the grade. Students who are dissatisfied with the course of
action proposed by a TA may submit an item for re-grading in its entirety by the Instructor, who may
assign a higher or lower overall grade than that originally assigned by the TA. Students who remain
dissatisfied with a final course grade may elect to pursue action at the College-level. More on that here.
Academic Integrity Policy
The University of Texas maintains an Honor Code. Its core values are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to
uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Because academic integrity is a fundamental value of higher education at UT, I will not tolerate acts of
cheating, plagiarism, falsification or attempts to cheat, plagiarize, or falsify.
Should I determine that an academic integrity violation has taken place, I will follow the University’s
formal process for dealing with such matters. I am a former Assistant Prosecuting Attorney. You do not
want to give me a reason to slip back into prosecutorial mode—sometimes I miss my old job.


The academic integrity module is intended to educate you about what constitutes plagiarism, but it is
ultimately your responsibility to ensure that you understand what plagiarism is and how to avoid
committing it.
Intellectual Property Policy
This course was created by Dr. Evans, and as such, it is her intellectual property. Students are,
therefore, not permitted to disseminate by any means any of the course content created by Dr. Evans,
including lecture recordings, power point presentations and slides, or other learning materials. Students
who do so without permission will face legal action in a court of law.
Accommodations for Religious Holidays Policy
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. Notification is only necessary if you will miss an examination. If you
must be absent for this reason, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center, the Employee Assistance Program, and The University of Texas Police Department. Call 512-
232-5050 or visit this website.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
Dr. Evans, Christine, and Siyun are Responsible Employees and must report any Title IX related incidents
that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with us, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit this
website or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
RESOURCES FOR GETTING THE MOST OUT OF YOUR UT-AUSTIN EXPERIENCE
A university education entails more than completing a prescribed curriculum. If you want to be successful
on the job market or in obtaining admission to a postgraduate program (including law school), then you
need to avail yourself of the opportunities that UT-Austin provides for enhancing your skillset,
broadening your experience, and ultimately “building your brand.” The University offers many such
opportunities, though I have discovered that many students are either unaware of them, or they fail to
appreciate their value. These resources aim to expose you to these opportunities and encourage you to
think about how your participation in them might help you achieve your goals.
Canvas contains a page that provides information about various programs and organizations at UT-Austin
that offer undergraduates opportunities to broaden or deepen


their studies; obtain internships; acquire firsthand research experience; learn more about a profession;
and/or, otherwise expand their skill-sets. We will post new information there throughout the rest of the
semester. The Instructor will sometimes provide advice on related topics, such as “how to get good letters
of recommendation” or “how to write a personal statement.” If you have ideas for topics or speakers for
this series, please share them with the instructor ASAP.
How the Course Operates
This course is asynchronous, which means that there are no scheduled class meetings; but, this
does not mean that you may take it entirely at your own pace. You cannot rush through the course in an
effort to complete it in fewer than five weeks; nor can you wait until the final two weeks of the session to
complete all of the course requirements. The course, instead, follows a middle path that offers some
flexibility for those of you who may wish to accommodate your busy schedules by working ahead. Read
on.
The course's content is structured in a series of modules. Module contain the following materials and
assessment items:
• an Introductory Video that explains the module's topic and learning objectives and offers insights to
     help guide you in your reading;
• a Learning Guide that lists the reading assignment, key concepts (where appropriate), and a set of
     discussion questions to help guide you in your reading;
• a prerecorded Lecture or Series of Mini-Lectures;
• the corresponding Power Point Slides for those lectures;
• a prompt for an entry in your Learning Journal; and,
• a Quiz that covers material from that module.
Each day, one new module will be published in its entirety so that on any given day you will have access
to two modules. You will have access to all of the readings from the start of the course after you have
taken the Academic Integrity Module Quiz and submitted Learning Journal Entry 0.
You will find separate modules for the two writing assignments.
All readings have been cleared to be provided to you at no charge on Canvas. To be clear, you
do not need to purchase books or a course packet.
Given the nature of online learning and assessment, an understanding of and commitment to Academic
Integrity is essential. For this reason, a special module has been created in Canvas on this topic, and you
are required to complete a quiz on the material provided there before you can access Module 2 or the
following modules.
If you need to contact the Instructor or Teaching Assistants, use this email
address: humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu.
Grading Scale: Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to
ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus, a B- will
be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
F = 0-60


Extra Credit: Don’t ask; there will be none.
Writing Assignments (40 percent total)
[WA1] 20 percent
[WA2] 20 percent
Learning Journal (30 percent)
Quizzes (30 percent)
Writing Assignments:
You must submit both writing assignments to receive credit for the course. Submission must be made as
Word documents via Canvas. Put your name on your assignments.
[WA1] Practical Application of Commitment Theory: Due: Sunday, June 21 by 11:59 pm (worth 20%
of final course grade).
[WA2] Practical Application of Compliance Theory: Due: Sunday, July 12 by 11:59 pm (worth 20%
of final course grade).
For more details on each writing assignment, please see their respective Canvas modules.
For extra credit on writing assignments, you may submit your writing assignment to the university writing
center (http://uwc.utexas.edu) for help before the due date. At the time of assignment submission, you can
attach the writing center support confirmation email and evidence that you adjusted your assignment as a
result from the writing center (PDF ONLY PLEASE). All writing center help must be prior to the
assignment deadline. The extra credit bump will be for one letter grade increase. For example, if your
assignment is graded as a B- and you submitted writing center confirmation at the time of submission,
you will receive a B on the writing assignment. You are allowed one extra credit bump per writing
assignment.
Late Policy
Five points will be deducted from writing assignments submitted after the due-date/time for each day that
they are late.
Academic Integrity
In short, all work assigned in this course is individual work not group work. Each writing assignment
must be original and done exclusively by the student submitting it. All writing assignments will be run
through plagiarism detection software. Please review the Academic Integrity Policy for more
information.
Still have questions or want to discuss a Writing Assignment grade?
Send an email to humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu. Do not use the email function embedded in
Canvas and do not send an email to a personal email address.
Learning Journal Entries:
Purpose
In order to facilitate your active participation in the learning experience that this course presents, you are
required to keep a Learning Journal. It serves to foster your engagement with and reflection on the
material and to help you develop your critical thinking skills. Because this assignment is meant to get
you thinking about the material, research beyond the course readings materials and lectures is strictly
prohibited.
Read the material, watch the lecture, and then take some time to think for yourself. The "right" answer is
not out there for you to find via Google.
How it Works
You must submit a total of 17 entries into your Learning Journal. The average of your grades on all 17
will serve as your Learning Journal grade, which is worth 30% of your final course grade.
Required Learning Journal Entries:


You are required to write entries for Module 0 and Module 26. You cannot access subsequent modules
until you have submitted a Learning Journal Entry for Module 0. You will not receive a grade for the
course unless you have submitted a Learning Journal Entry for Module 26.
Remaining Learning Journal Entries:
For Modules 1 to 25, you may select the 15 modules for which you submit a Learning Journal Entry. You
must follow this schedule in making your selections:
 Week          Included Modules              Minimum Entries Due         Due Dates & Times
 Week 1        Modules 1 - 6                               4             Sunday, June 14 by 11:59 pm
 Week 2        Modules 7 - 11                              3             Sunday, June 21 by 11:59 pm
 Week 3        Modules 12 - 16                             3             Sunday, June 28 by 11:59 pm
 Week 4        Modules 17 - 21                             3             Sunday, July 5 by 11:59 pm
 Week 5        Modules 22 - 25                             3             Sunday, July 12 by 11:59 pm
  ---------    Module 26 (required)                       ---            Sunday, July 12 by 11:59 pm
Learning Journal Entry Requirements and Instructions
Entries must be between 300 and 500 words. You are to post these to Canvas using the designated
Learning Journal link that is embedded in each module.
To learn more about Learning Journal Entries, see the Canvas page entitled “Everything You Need to
Know about the Learning Journal”.
Quizzes:
The course contains a total of 26 quizzes. Your grade will be the average of your Academic Integrity Quiz
and 20 of the remaining quizzes (21 quizzes total). Remember quizzes count towards 30% of your final
course grade.
Required Academic Integrity Quiz:
This quiz is required. It covers all of the material provided in the Academic Integrity Module. It
is mandatory (i.e., you may not opt out of taking it). You are required to achieve at least a 90% on this
quiz. You can retake it as many times as is necessary to reach that grade, but keep in mind that you
cannot access course material beyond the Introduction to the Course Module until you have cleared
this hurdle.
Remaining Quizzes:
Each quiz covers the material presented in the module that accompanies it. Each week all quizzes will
close on Sunday at 11:59 pm. You must take them before then in order to prevent incurring a penalty.
You must take a minimum of 20 quizzes and you must do so according to the following schedule:
 Week           Included Modules            Number of Quizzes Due          Due Dates & Times
 Week 1         Modules 1 - 6                              5               Sunday, June 14, 11:59 pm
 Week 2         Modules 7 - 11                             4               Sunday, June 21, 11:59 pm
 Week 3         Modules 12 - 16                            4               Sunday, June 28, 11:59 pm
 Week 4         Modules 17 - 21                            4               Sunday, July 5, 11:59 pm
 Week 5         Modules 22 - 25                            3               Sunday, July 12, 11:59 pm
Quiz Format
Quizzes will be roughly ten questions in length, and they will be timed. You will know in advance how
many questions each quiz contains and how long you will have to take it. You will have two attempts at
taking each quiz. We will take the higher of the two grades. The quizzes are open-book and open-notes.


    In terms of format, quiz questions will be true-false and/or multiple-choice. They will be generated from a
    bank of questions so that students will receive different versions of the same quiz.
    Late Policy
    Late quizzes will be docked a letter grade for every day that they are late.
    Academic Integrity Policy
    This policy applies to all quizzes. You are not receive assistance from any source other than your own
    notes or the textbook. This means that: (1) you are not permitted to have someone else take a quiz on your
    behalf; (2) you are not to collaborate on quizzes (i.e., you are not to take them together); (3) after you
    have taken a quiz, you are not to share quiz questions and answers with other students; and, (4) you are
    not to use group-generated documents (including but not limited to Google Docs) while taking a quiz.
    Still have questions, or want to discuss a Quiz grade?
    Send an email to humanrights.evans@austin.utexas.edu. Do not use the email function embedded in
    Canvas and do not send an email to a personal email address.
COURSE SCHEDULE
June 4       Introduction to the Course
June 5       Module 1: Why international human rights?
Ann Marie Clark, “Human Rights Norms as Challenges to State Sovereignty,” in Diplomacy of Conscience:
Amnesty International and Changing Human Rights Norms (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001), pp.
3-11; 21-27.
June 8       Module 2: Does international human rights law work?
Eric Posner, “The Case against Human Rights,” The Guardian, 4 December 2014 (9 pages);
Beth A. Simmons, “What’s Right with Human Rights,” Democracy Journal, Winter 2015, No. 35 (10 pages);
Human Rights Measurement Initiative and Universal Rights Group, Is the global situation of human rights
improving or deteriorating? Making the case for the empirical measurement of human rights change, 2019 (2
pages of text).
June 9       Module 3: Are international human rights universal?
Michael Freeman, “Universalism of human rights and cultural relativism,” in Scott Sheeran and Sir Nigel Rodley
(eds.), Routledge Handbook of International Human Rights Law (New York: Routledge), pp. 49-57.
June 10      Module 4: Are human rights Western constructs?
Jack Donnelly, “A Brief History of Human Rights,” Universal Human Rights in Theory and Practice (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 2013), pp. 75-92.
June 11      Module 5: How do human rights work?
Michael Goodhart, “Human Rights and the Politics of Contestation,” in Mark Goodale (ed.), Human Rights at the
Crossroads (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 31-44.
June 12      Module 6: Why international human rights law? Part I


Beth A. Simmons, “Why International Law? The Development of the International Human Rights Regime in the
20th Century,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic Politics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 23-36.
June 15      Module 7: Why international human rights law? Part II
Beth A. Simmons, “Why International Law? The Development of the International Human Rights Regime in the
20th Century,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic Politics (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 36-56.
June 16      Module 8: Why international human rights law? Part III
Ann Marie Clark, “Torture,” in Diplomacy of Conscience: Amnesty International and Changing Human Rights
Norms (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001), pp. 37-69.
June 17      Module 9: Why do states ratify international human rights treaties? Part I
Beth A. Simmons, “Theories of Commitment,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in
Domestic Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 57-71.
June 18      Module 10: Why do states ratify international human rights treaties? Part II
Beth A. Simmons, “Theories of Commitment,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in
Domestic Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 71-80; 108-111.
June 19      Module 11: Hard Law: Treaty Ratification, Reservations, and Derogations
Rhona K.M. Smith, “Human Rights in International Law” in Goodhart (ed.), Human Rights: Politics and
Practice, 2nd ed., pp. 26-44.
June 22      Module 12: Treaty Bodies and Soft Law, Part I
Rhona K.M. Smith, “Human Rights in International Law” in Goodhart (ed.), Human Rights: Politics and
Practice, 2nd ed., pp. 26-44.
June 23      Module 13: Treaty Bodies and Soft Law, Part II
Nigel S. Rodley, “The Role and Impact of Treaty Bodies,” in Shelton (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of International
Human Rights Law, pp. 626-41.
Mallene Alleyne and Felix Kirchmeier, “Small states face big challenges in engaging UN treaty bodies,” Open
Global Rights (4 December 2019).
June 24      Module 14: Treaty Bodies and Soft Law, Part III
Claire Callejon, et al. Treaty Bodies Individual Communications Procedures: Providing Redress and Reparation
to Victims of Human Rights Violations (The Geneva Academy of Humanitarian Law and Human Rights, 2019),
pp. 12-21.
TBD


June 25     Module 15: Interpreting International Human Rights Treaties
Cecilia Medina, “The Role of International Tribunals: Law-Making or Creative Interpretation?” in Dinah Shelton
(ed.), The Oxford Handbook of International Human Rights Law (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp.
649-61.
June 26     Module 16: Treaty Bodies and Soft Law: An Exercise in Interpretation
TBD
June 29     Module 17: Social Science Research
Janet Buttolph Johnson and H.T. Reynolds, “The Empirical Approach to Political Science,” Political Science
Research Methods, 7th ed. (Sage/CQ Press, 2012), pp. 33-48.
Johnson and Reynolds, “The Building Blocks of Social Scientific Research: Hypotheses, Concepts, and
Variables,” Political Science Research Methods, 7th ed., pp. 102-116; 119-126.
June 30     Module 18: Social Science Research
Janet Buttolph Johnson and H.T. Reynolds, “The Importance of Theory,” Political Science Research Methods, 7th
ed. (Sage/CQ Press, 2012), pp. 43-46.
Johnson and Reynolds, “The Building Blocks of Social Scientific Research: Measurement,” Political Science
Research Methods, 7th ed., pp. 127-134; 136; 144-153.
July 1      Module 19: Measuring Human Rights
Todd Landman, “Measuring Human Rights: Principles, Practice and Policy,” 26 Human Rights Quarterly (2004):
906-31.
July 2      Module 20: A Critical Perspective on Constructing Measures
Sally Engle Merry, “A World of Quantification,” from The Seductions of Quantification: Measuring Human
Rights, Gender Violence, and Sex Trafficking (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2016), pp. 1-22.
July 3      Module 21: A Theory of Compliance, Part 1
Beth A. Simmons, “Theories of Compliance,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic
Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 112-125.
July 6      Module 22: A Theory of Compliance, Part 2
Beth A. Simmons, “Theories of Compliance,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic
Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 125-148.
July 7      Module 23: A Quantitative Approach to Studying Compliance
Beth A. Simmons, “Equality for Women,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic
Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 209-222.


July 8      Module 24: A Qualitative Approach to Studying Compliance
Beth A. Simmons, “Equality for Women,” from Mobilizing for Human Rights: International Law in Domestic
Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009), pp. 236-245.
July 9      Module 25: Concluding Thoughts
