English 316P, 80770                                                     Dr. B. Berry
Masterworks of Literature
Summer 2019, 2nd Session
                                 E 316P COURSE SYLLABUS
Course Overview
Because this course covers the broad range of American literature, nearly four centuries of writing,
it will necessarily involve a rich variety of nonfiction, fiction, poetry, and drama. We will begin by
examining the origins of American literature from its colonial beginnings in New England in the
17th century through the Enlightenment of the 18th century and the particular brand of Romanticism
that marked the early 19th century. Then we will focus on a myriad of American voices of the late
19th and 20th centuries, noting, as we proceed, both continuities and innovations. We will explore
writing by by Crane, Miller, and others—that will provide special opportunities to study the
relationship between a particular work and the history and culture in which it is grounded. We will
seek to define and elucidate a genuine national literature that is powerful, multicultural, and
inclusive. There is a fair amount of reading to be done in this class—intense and condensed during
summer sessions, but the rewards can be immense.
REQUIRED TEXTS:
o Jenn’s Copy & Binding Packet (available for purchase at 2200 Guadalupe)
o Stephen Crane, Maggie, A Girl of the Streets, and Other New York Writings
   (Random House Modern Library)
o Arthur Miller, Death of a Salesman: Certain Private Conversations in Two Acts
    and a Requiem (Viking Penguin)
Please Note: Bring the appropriate text or texts (if we are overlapping) to each and every class. Be
prepared to take notes each and every class.
Films, handouts, and all other class materials: In class we will see director Milos Forman’s film of
Ken Kesey’s novel One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest (though we will not be reading Kesey’s
novel). All in-class film footage, slides, handouts, and all other in-class materials viewed or
distributed will be subject to examination the same as class texts.
Course Prerequisites: One of the following: English 303C (or 603A), Rhetoric and Writing 306,
306Q, or Tutorial Course 303C (or 603A).
Course Objectives: This course is designed to provide an overview of selected American literary
voices in essays, poems, short stories, one play, and four novels. We will examine author
biographies and a close reading of the texts, including the contextual, historical, cultural and
ideological background information that gave rise to such works.
Core Curriculum: English 316M may be used to fulfill the humanities component of the
university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills,
personal responsibility, and social responsibility. Our collective goal regarding all course readings,
materials, and films will be to ask ourselves and to answer to the best of each student’s ability and
knowledge gained by this course’s study: What do these texts, individually and as a whole,
communicate to observant and culturally responsible people about values and choices of different
people or different groups of people who live in our own or, to employ a critical term, “Other”
social and historical contexts?
         This course provides an overview of selected American literary voices in essays, poems,
short stories, one play, three novels, and two films. We will examine author biographies and


                                                                                                  2
concentrate on learning & executing a close reading of course texts. including the contextual,
historical, cultural and ideological background information that gave rise to such work.
Accommodation Policies: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Students with Disabilities at 471.6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone), or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
I will discuss the University’s policies on academic honesty and the honor code in detail at the
beginning of the semester. In short, plagiarism or academic dishonesty may result in an F for the
class.
GRADE PERCENTAGES:
35% EXAM 1/MIDTERM EXAM [Friday, July 26th — in class]
45% EXAM 2/FINAL EXAM [Monday, August 19th, 2-5 p.m. — location tba but
        probably in same classroom]
20% Attendance, note taking, curiosity & focus, quizzes, enthusiasm!
Please note: o Both exams must be taken to receive a passing final grade in the course.
                 o Plus and minus grades will given in this course.
                 o You are to have completed your reading assignments completed prior
                   to their corresponding date on the syllabus. *
                 o Please bring with you to class the text or texts we are addressing that day
                   and note taking materials.
                 o Please feel free to chat with me after class and not before,
                   as I need to use this time to set up lecture and media materials.
* The importance of completing these readings by their corresponding class date cannot be
overemphasized. Not having read your assignments by class time—even if you will re-read
afterwards—will result in significantly less context and comprehension on your part from class
lectures and discussions. If your goal is to do splendidly in this class and score high on course
exams, you should take this course requirement to heart. Check ahead on the syllabus to allow
ample time for longer readings. All readings may be found in the course packet unless indicated as
a “separate text” on your syllabus.
JULY
15      M:       FIRST CLASS DAY: Intro to instructor and teaching assistant, course focus and
aims; bio cards; begin Lecture: Puritans/Calvinists/Colonialists/Early American Lit: The year
is 1620.
16:     T:       William Bradford, bio and essay, “Of Plymouth Plantation”; Samuel Sewall, bio &
The Diary of Samuel Sewall”; William Byrd, bio and “The Secret Diary of William Byrd of
Westover.”
17      W:       Jonathan Edwards, “Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God” and John Winthrop
“City Upon a Hill” speech.
18      Th: From the New World’s “Dark Ages” to The Enlightenment/Age of Reason:
Lecture: From the New World’s “Dark Ages” to The Enlightenment or The Age of Reason
(18th Century): Benjamin Franklin, bio & from “The Autobiography of BF”; Jean de Crèvecoeur,
bio & “What is an American?” and “Letter IX: Description of Charleston.”
19      F:       Catch-up for the week and begin Lecture: The American Renaissance (19th
century).
JULY continued
22      M:       Herman Melville, “Bartleby the Scrivener, A Story of Wall Street.”


                                                                                               3
23     T:      Lecture: The American Renaissance (19th century). Ralph Waldo Emerson, “The
American Scholar”; Walt Whitman, bio & Song of Myself.
24     W:      Song of Myself; Langston Hughes, bio & poems “I, Too” and “Theme for English
B.”
25     Th:     Short Stories from Realism; Charlotte Perkins Gilman, bio & “The Yellow Wall-
Paper” and Kate Chopin, bio & “The Storm.” EXAM 1 NEXT CLASS.
26     F:      EXAM 1. NO MAKE-UPS!
29     M:      Begin Lecture: Naturalism and its Sustainability: Stephen Crane, bio and poems
“A Man Said to the Universe” and “A Man Adrift on a Slim Spar.”
30     T:      Crane short story “The Open Boat.”
31     W:      “The Open Boat.”
AUGUST
 1     Th:     First half of Crane’s novel Maggie, A Girl of the Streets [separate text].
 2     F:      Second half of Maggie, to end.
 5     M:      Short stories: Ernest Hemingway, bio & “Hills Like White Elephants”; Flannery
O’Connor, bio & “A Good Man is Hard to Find”; Richard Wright, bio & “The Man Who Was
Almost a Man”; Katherine Anne Porter, bio & “The Grave.”
 6     T:      Chapter from Richard Wright, Native Son [this will be a handout in the class].
 7     W:      Begin Arthur Miller, Death of a Salesman [have read separate text in full]; see
scenes from film version starring Dustin Hoffman and John Malkovich.
8      Th:     Death of a Salesman.
9      F:      Finish Death of a Salesman.
AUGUST continued
12     M:      Begin film One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, based on Ken Kesey’s novel by the
same name.
13     T:      Cuckoo’s Nest.
14     W:      Cuckoo’s Nest.


                                                                                                     4
15      Th:    Catch-up and prepare for final exam.
16      F:     All important LAST CLASS DAY. Wrap-up and catch-up; course evaluations;
prepare for final exam.
19      M:     EXAM 2/Final Exam: 2-5 p.m., location tba [but probably in our same
classroom]. The final exam will only cover course readings and materials that come after Exam 1.
Be strictly on time. Final Exam times are scheduled by university mandate and allow
absolutely no exceptions. Arriving more than 20 minutes late may forfeit your right to take this
exam. No extra time will be given as a result of a late arrival. The exam location will be available
and can be accessed online approximately 3 weeks before the end of the semester.
o Attendance rolls will be taken at the beginning of each class. (You must attend the full class
to receive a “Present.”)
o Please avoid late arrivals or early exits—a distraction to the class and instructor.
o Consult Course Policy Statement for further details about general class comportment and
format.
o All cell phones are to be put away at the beginning of lecture; no text or time checking, no
phones in sight period.
o This course is LAPTOP-FREE!
       — The instructor retains the right to vary readings on this syllabus. —
