Course: ADV 378. 360-Video Production (Unique# 06714)
Time: Monday, Wednesday and Friday from12 p.m. – 1 p.m.
Location: CMA, Room 4.144
Instructor: Octavio Kano-Galvan, Assistant Professor of the Practice
Office: BMC, Room 4.308
Office Hours: Monday, Wednesday and Friday from 10 to 11:45 a.m. and by appointment
Email: Octavio.KanoGalvan@austin.utexas.edu
TA: Pratik Shah
Office: Station 1A, BMC 4th Floor
Email: Pratik.Shah@utexas.edu
Office hours: Wednesday from 12 to 2 pm and by Appointment
Course Description:
360-video technology offers creative and interesting new ways to create immersive visual content. The
goal of this class is to provide students the required skills to plan, capture, edit and produce 360-videos.
What will I learn?
    •    360-video production planning
    •    360-camera functions and operations
    •    Adobe Premier, After Effects and Photoshop 360-video editing
    •    Media analysis
    •    Filmmaking process and considerations
Learning outcomes:
    1.   Students will be able to visualize, plan, execute and produce 360-Video stories
    2.   Students will gain the skills and abilities to operate a 360-Video camera
    3.   Students will be able to proficiently use Adobe video editing software.
    4.   Students will be able to form a production team with specific roles and responsibilities to
         produce a professional-quality 360-video.
How will I learn?
Students will work individually and in groups to write scripts, video-shoot, and edit their own projects.
Sample student projects during the semester include commercials, short films, music video and/or news
stories. Selected videos are Oculus screened during class throughout the semester to enhance the
analysis and learning process. Students will work with the following software on desktop/laptop
computers: Adobe Premiere, After Effects, Audition and Photoshop. Experimentation, exploration, and
creativity are highly encouraged.


Course Materials
    •    Magma Sketchbook, Sketchbooks for the Twenty-first Century FILM & Animation (14
         dlls) https://www.amazon.com/Magma-Sketchbook-Film-Animation-
         Sketchbooks/dp/1856699439
    •    Access to a 360-Video 4K camera. (School will provide the camera)
    •    Access to a computer/laptop that supports 4k video editing
    •    Access to VR Headsets 3D Virtual Reality Glasses with audio integrated (Oculus) provided by the
         school
    •    Mobile device that supports Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
    •    Full access to Adobe Creative Cloud https://moody.utexas.edu/technology/digital-media-
         production-labs (Links to an external site.)
    •    UT Box account (You will need to use Box to submit your projects on Canvas)
    •    Canvas and Box apps
Course Outline (Units and Essential Questions):
Unit 1. Careers in 360-video production
    •    What are the available careers in 360-video production and what is involved with each?
    •    What are the differences between 360-video, virtual reality, and augmented reality?
    •    What are: Director, Videographer, Video Editor, Sound Engineer, Technical Director, Producer,
         Graphics Editor?
    •    How can I work with a team to develop an answer to a question or solution to a problem?
    •    How does an efficient 360 video production workflow look like?
Unit 2. Equipment Orientation & Safety
    •    What are the classroom rules for 360-video production?
         What is the behavioral contract and how is it applied in 360-video production?
    •    What are the expectations regarding the appropriate use of class equipment?
Unit 3. Basic 360-Video Camera Operation, Shot Composition and Pre-production and Post-production
Considerations.
    •    What are the basics of using a 360-video camera?
    •    What are the stitching principals of a 360-footage? Use this to work on a manual stitching
         project
    •    What are the basic camera shots and angles along with framing heights?
    •    What is a video sequence? How are scenes incorporated into a video sequence?
    •    What is continuity in 360-video production?
    •    How is audio used in a 360-video production?
    •    What are the basic operational techniques you need to know to operate a 360-video camera?
    •    What are the proper lighting and audio considerations for 360-video?


Unit 4. Video and Sound Editing
    •    What are the basic project settings to begin editing in Adobe Premiere and After Effects?
    •    How is video imported into the program to begin editing?
    •    How is a simple edit accomplished in Premiere?
    •    How is a shot placed on a timeline in Premiere?
    •    What is the function of the toolbar in Premiere?
    •    How are transitions added to video clips in Premiere?
    •    How are titles formatted and entered in Premiere?
    •    What special effects are available for video in After Effects?
    •    How is audio edited in Premiere and Audition?
    •    What effects can be used to manipulate audio in Audition?
    •    How are videos exported from Premiere and After Effects to social media?
Unit 5. Story Visualization or Story Planning
    •    How do I give shape and form to my ideas?
    •    Script, where do I start?
    •    What is basic story structure and how does the beginning, middle and end of a story relate to
         video segments?
    •    What is the difference between a dramatic and factual story for video?
    •    What is a commercial, and how does it differ from a Public Service Announcement?
    •    What is a Focus Statement and how is it used to help create a story?
    •    What is a storyboard and how is it used to organize and plan a story?
6. Career Development
    •    How do I use technology as a tool? (Little planets, Bullet shoot, etc.)
    •    How do the skills and knowledge I am learning in this class gets applied within a job setting and
         employers will value?
Course Structure
Think of this class as an agency/studio setting. You and your team will draft a script, brainstorm, critique,
create and execute your projects. 360-video production employs constant communication throughout
the process. You will use class meetings as an opportunity for refreshers and status meetings. Some days
you will report your progress and then be given the next steps in the process. Often, however, you’ll use
the time as a work session, in which you roll up your sleeves and get into the process. Given that we
have only a limited time to create a movie for a “client”, your dedication is expected, as is your
preparedness for each session. You must keep up with the pace. Attendance and participation at all
class meetings are mandatory.
E-Mail Communication
In addition to classroom instructions, we will communicate through Canvas announcements during the
course of the semester. It’s your responsibility to routinely check your Canvasemail on a daily basis. We


will use this forum to share case details and research findings, content, and monitoring general project
progress and logistics.
Computer and Cell Phone Use
Collaborative learning is a key component of this class. You are strongly encouraged to bring your own
laptop and mobile device to class. When class is in session, however, please accept the “class use only”
rule regarding your computer and mobile device usage. Do NOT use your computer to study for other
classes, surf the web, type emails, check social media, etc. Please mute your cell phone, music player, or
other electronic communication devices in class.
Course Schedule
The following schedule is tentative in the sense that if we hit on a topic that sparks a great deal of
interest, we will stay with it longer than the schedule below would seem to allow. This means we all
need to stay alert to changes in the schedule, project assignments, and so on. To ensure each class is
successful, it is essential for you to attend class and to work on the assigned project prior to class.
Changes to the schedule may be also made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
receive the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
The syllabus is a living document and will need to maintain a degree of flexibility to adapt to changing
circumstances.
Policies:
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if
you would like.
Grading Policies
As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. If
you miss a smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be
impacted significantly. Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.


 Grade                               Cutoff                                                  Points needed
 A                                   94%                                                     940
 A-                                  90%                                                     900
 B+                                  87%                                                     870
 B                                   84%                                                     840
 B-                                  80%                                                     800
 C+                                  77%                                                     770
 C                                   74%                                                     740
 C-                                  70%                                                     700
 D                                   65%                                                     650
 F                                   <65%                                                    <650
Absences
If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with the
necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with your
team members; you are responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a
class.
Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check
with us for details or arrangements.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-
down and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were
gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email
specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is
not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •   You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •   You have a right to respect.
     •   You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •   You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •   You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •   You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
         learning environment.
     •   You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
         isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.


With these rights come responsibilities:
     •    You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
          the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     •    You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
     •    Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to
          it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     •    You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
          excluded.
     •    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
          these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they
have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center (Links to an external site.).
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor your
request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc.). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester
so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible.
I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability
who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-
6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information,
visit: http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/. (Links to an external site.)
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.


 If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek
support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html (Links to an external site.)
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of
Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/ (Links to an external site.)slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center:http://uwc.utexas.edu/ (Links to an external site.)
Libraries:http://www.lib.utexas.edu/ (Links to an external site.)
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/ (Links to an external site.)
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/ (Links to an external site.)
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus,
go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal (Links to an external site.).
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ (Links to an external site.)
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
     •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
          first week of class.
     •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.


     •     Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
           found at: utexas.edu/emergency (Links to an external site.)
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
           become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies (Links to an external
           site.).
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.eduFor more information about reporting options and resources,
visit titleix.utexas.edu (Links to an external site.)or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ (Links to an external site.)
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be
found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to
an external site.)
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed


six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
 TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
      1. 1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
      2. 2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
          have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
      3. 3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
 Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that
are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
 I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such
misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion,
national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual
orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and
Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
      •   Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual
          misconduct and discrimination.
               o   File a report of discrimination via online form
               o   Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
      •   Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
          The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing
          federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive


  federal financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination
  covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
• Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
  The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal
  laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a
  protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in
  Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
