                               THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                              STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number: SW F325                                       Instructor’s Name: Rachel Union, LCSW
Unique ID: 87540                                             Office: N/A
Semester: Summer 2020                                        Email: rachelaunion@gmail.com
Meeting times: Mon – Thurs, 10:30a – 12:30p                  Text: Google Hangouts to my gmail account
Meeting Room: Zoom- synchronous classes                      Office hours: virtual; by appointment
Tues/Thurs with the exception of Week 4
(see schedule)
                  Foundations of Social Justice: Values, Diversity, Power & Oppression
I. STANDARIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course is based the following assumptions: 1.) membership in a population-at-risk group (e.g.,
people of color, women, gay and lesbian persons) significantly influences an individual’s life experiences,
world view, and increases risk factors for exposure to discrimination, economic deprivation, and
oppression; 2.) professional social work ethics and values demand culturally competent practices; 3.) it is
necessary for students to learn to apply social justice approaches to influence assessment, planning, access
to resources, intervention, and research; and 4.) professionals and programs have strategies to critically
analyze distributive justice, human and civil rights, and global interconnections of oppression. There is an
emphasis in this course on the impact of discrimination and oppression by individuals and society on
people of culturally diverse backgrounds and orientations. This course carries the flag for Cultural
Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with
the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
II. COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course students will be able to:
1.) Critique and apply culturally competent and social justice approaches to influence assessment,
planning, access to resources, intervention, and research;
2.) Demonstrate familiarity with the history and heritage of population-at-risk groups, including women
and culturally diverse populations globally, as well as those prevalent in the southwestern region of the
United States;
3.) Understand the social construction of race and ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation;
4.) Examine the personal and professional use of self in ethical, culturally competent, and socially just
social work practices and,
5.) Assess the impact of discrimination (e.g. racism, sexism, homophobia) and oppression on public
policy, institutional structure, service delivery, and one's own role in promoting social and economic
justice.


EPAS Competencies
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on Social Work
Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the UT SHSSW engages in
ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s Education Policies and
Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of knowledge, skills,
values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following competencies:
Competency 2: Engage Diversity and Difference in Practice
Outcome 2.1: Responses demonstrate an ability to apply and communicate understanding of the
importance of diversity and difference in shaping life experiences in practice at the micro, mezzo, and
macro levels Outcome 2.2: Responses demonstrate an ability to present themselves as learners and engage
clients and constituencies as experts of their own experiences
Outcome 2.3: Responses demonstrate an ability to apply self-awareness and self-regulation to manage the
influence of personal biases and values in working with diverse clients and constituencies
Competency 3: Advance Human Rights and Social, Economic, and Environmental Justice
Outcome 3.1: Responses demonstrate an ability to apply their understanding of social, economic, and
environmental justice to advocate for human rights at the individual and system levels
Outcome 3.2: Responses demonstrate an ability to engage in practices that advance social, economic, and
environmental justice
III. TEACHING METHODS
Teaching involves a partnership between the instructor and the student in a collaborative and passionate
commitment to the mutual learning process. My philosophy of teaching is to provide students with
relevant content in the form of presentation, text, and instructional activities that assist students in the
integration of the material. Within the field of social work, content delivered without its applicability to
micro and macro level practice is irrelevant to the student that gravitates to the profession to be an agent
of social change. Essentially, as an instructor I see my role as 1.) creating a safe learning environment that
2.) allows for the sharing of ideas, in-depth critical analysis and integration of the material.
IV. REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Required Text: This course has one text and many readings that can all be downloaded from the UT
Libraries or from URLs provided in the modules in Canvas. The text is
Kimmel, M., & Ferber, A. (2018). Privilege : a reader (Fourth edition.). New York ;: Routledge, Taylor
& Francis Group. Retrieved from:
https://search.lib.utexas.edu/discovery/fulldisplay?docid=alma991057971705906011&context=L&vid=01
UTAU_INST:SEARCH&lang=en&search_scope=MyInst_and_CI&adaptor=Local%20Search%20Engin
e&tab=Everything&query=any,contains,privilege%20a%20reader&offset=0
There are assigned readings that are available on-line via the UT Austin Libraries and electronic content
including websites, podcasts, and videos. See Canvas modules for specific material assignments. The


instructor reserves the right to provide and/or assign additional reading to supplement the material
assigned in this syllabus.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
marginalization.
Personal Reflection Paper (see below for 2 different due dates; 15 points total)
This paper will be confidential and only the instructor will read it. This paper will be completed in two
parts. Papers should be completed using 12pt Arial font, 1” margins all around, no extra spacing, and bold
only section headers (if you have section headers). Page numbers should be placed in the bottom right of
the footer.
Part I: Due: Sunday, June 7, 2020 by 11:59pm via Canvas (5 points)
For Part I, students should submit a two-page paper that discusses their thoughts about their identity. This
paper requires critical thinking. Consider the following: to what community, if any, do you belong? Is
this by choice or one you were born into? How did you get to college? What level of social mobility do
you have? What adversity, if any, have you encountered and if you have not encountered any, why not?
This is a paper where you write what you consider your identity to be based on what you know today.
No citations are required for this Part I.
Part II: Due, Friday, July 3, 2020 by 11:59pm via Canvas. (10 points)
For part II, students should integrate what they have learned over the course of the class to rethink and
refine Part I. This paper should be between 8-10 pages and have a separate page for references. Papers
should be completed using the same formatting outline in part I.
For this part, students should discuss if, after this course, they have grown to understand more about their
personal identity and whether their thoughts have changed since writing Part I. (It is fine if your thoughts
have not changed but you should discuss why they have not changed.) Students should interview
someone older in their family, if possible, to discuss how that family member views their identity and that
of their family including all the parts of identity listed in Part I with discussion about their family’s
history, ability to negotiate identity within multiple cultures, interactions with other cultural groups,
implicit and explicit biases. Students should discuss implicit biases, if any, they’ve held over time and
discovered during this class as well as ways in which they have contributed to perpetuating racism and
historical violence. Finally, students should address how they plan to incorporate class lessons,
professionally and personally, to disrupt social injustice.
If no family member is available, please briefly discuss why this is the case, what you know about your
family of origin, adoption, or of choice and how structural and/or systemic racism may have played a part
in your separation from your family of origin and your subsequent identity formation.


Part II should include a minimum of three citations from references used in class using the APA 6th
edition formatting. References from outside class materials, beyond the initial three, are highly
encouraged. Each page must be fully covered. In order to protect confidentiality, you may use codenames
for yourself and your family members. The paper structure is outlined below. Use this outline in your
paper:
         A. Introduction
i) A brief discussion of Part I and how the information discussed during this course may have, or have
not, changed how you view your identity. When you first discussed your identity, did you include
multiple aspects of identity such as race, ethnicity, age, ability, body size, religion, gender and sexuality,
and class? Why or why not? Which aspects did you not include at first that you are including now and
why?
ii) Briefly describe what you know about your family’s background with special emphasis on what you
learned during your interview or otherwise discussed above if unable to complete an interview. Compare
experiences between different family generations, how your views differ or concur with your family
members, and how behavior norms are taught from one generation to the next (this should be 2 to 3
pages).
         B. Your Family on the Continuum of Privilege and Oppression
This section should be the bulk of the paper. Here you will reflect upon your family history and identify
where you are located on a continuum between privilege and oppression. In what circumstances has your
family, including you, experienced privilege? What did that feel like? In what circumstances have you
and your family experienced oppression (being oppressed and oppressing others)? What did that feel like?
When thinking about privilege and oppression, consider your purchasing power, how you use the world’s
resources, how you generate and dispose of garbage, how you participate in your community, whether or
not you exercise any privileges (covertly or overtly), and how you may perpetuate cultural appropriation.
(This should be 2 to 3 pages)
         C. Conclusion
This section will be a brief summary of the main things you learned about yourself and your family. What
implicit and explicit biases have been a part of your family and your life; which cultural groups you do
not know much about, and what types of clients you might feel comfortable and uncomfortable serving or
working/living alongside. (This should be 2 to 3 pages)
Global Social Justice Presentations: (15 Points) Due: July 8, 10am (presentations via Zoom on this
date)
Although this course focuses primarily on social justice issues within the United States, it is imperative
that social workers cultivate awareness regarding international social justice issues.
     •   The class will be divided into groups of 3. Each group will cover one topic from the list below.
     •   Group presentations should be 15 minutes with an additional 5 minutes of class discussion.
     •   PowerPoints for all presentations will be due on July 8 prior to the start of class.
     •   Presentations will take place via Zoom on July 8.


         Topics:
     •   Geopolitics and the refugee crisis
     •   Effects of free trade policies
     •   Exploitation of sweatshop workers
     •   Erosion of indigenous cultures
     •   Environmental justice & eco-imperialism
         Groups are expected to find at least three scholarly sources that address the topic. They should
         provide a summary of the readings related to the topic and are encouraged to use short video clips
         in their presentations. The groups will present the main points of the articles in a 5 to 10 slide
         PowerPoint presentation. The last slide should list your references.
Discussion Posts (5pts each = total of 50 points) Due: various due dates throughout the semester;
see schedule below.
Students will provide answers to ten discussion questions (200-300 words per post to Canvas). The
questions will cover multiple themes discussed during the course (including but not limited to implicit
bias, cultural relativism, ethnocentrism, culturally competent organizations, and privilege). Each week,
students are expected to answer the two discussion posts listed in the modules. These posts should be
well thought out, demonstrate critical thinking, and include at least one citation from the materials
provided in the modules.
Op Ed – What it Means to be an Ally (10pts) Due Friday, June 26 by 11:59pm
This assignment is geared towards helping you become familiar with writing an opinion based on
facts. Writing (and publishing) Op-Ed pieces is also a way to advocate for ideas you care about,
participate in our democracy, and demonstrate how to be an ally.
Cite all sources used and include a reference list following APA format (see Publication Manual of the
American Psychological Association, 6th Edition) and include a reference page of all cited literature. We
will use NY Times word limit guidelines for op-ed submissions, recommended 750 words.
This writing exercise is a way to present an effective and concise argument about important issues that
impact the lives of your clients and the communities they live in. An Op-Ed is intended to be published
in a newspaper (or online) and is written in a way that is respectful, thoughtful and worthy of public
consumption. Op-Eds are polite (for the most part).
There are several Op Ed pieces assigned as reading materials. Every student must post their Op Ed topics
to the relevant Canvas Discussion board by June 12, 2020 11:59pm. Students must have a topic different
from their cohort and of a group with which they do not identify. No two students may write on the same
topic.
Participation: (10 Points)
The richness of the learning process is enhanced by the participation of all members of the class both in
the classroom (physically or virtually) and on-line via Canvas Discussion posts. Participation will be
assessed by attendance, oral comments and questions during class, and by the quality of your discussion


posts in response to your classmates. While responses to your classmates’ discussion posts will not be
graded per se, it is expected that you will engage with your classmates using all tools available including
Canvas and Zoom.
Each class absence will result in a reduction of one point for the participation grade. Three late arrivals or
early departures equal one absence. Three or more absences will result in a one letter grade reduction in
your final grade. It is your responsibility to sign the weekly attendance sheet.
Extra Credit (3 points)
I offer a one-time opportunity for extra-credit if you attend a social justice related webinar during our
course dates. You must take notes, post the notes in a Discussion post, and send me proof that you
attended (a screen shot of you in the webinar, a completion certificate, or similar) that demonstrates that it
was truly you in attendance. Your discussion post should provide information about the webinar (such as
what it was about, to which social justice issue it pertained, who was the intended audience), whether you
found the experience useful (why or why not), how you will use this information in your pursuit of social
justice, and a link either to the recording or where further information can be found.
Extra credit will not be used to supplant any discussion post or other graded material not submitted.
Failure to submit required assignments will reflect in points being deducted for the assignment and for
participation.
Here is an example to get you started: https://www.theopedproject.org/seminars. The OpED Project will
be offering Write to Change the World seminars. They also have weekly chats with journalists and free
resources. I’ve been told that students can apply for scholarships to attend the webinars and there is also a
‘pay what you can’ option which also includes free. You can find more information here:
https://www.theopedproject.org/scholarships.
VI. GRADES
Grades will be assigned according to the cumulative number of points the student has earned on the
required assignments:
94. 0 and above A
90.0 to 93.999 A-
87.0 to 89.999 B+
84.0 to 86.999 B
80.0 to 83.999 B-
77.0 to 79.999 C+
74.0 to 76.999 C
70.0 to 73.999 C-
67.0 to 69.999 D+
64.0 to 66.999 D
60.0 to 63.999 D-
Below 60.0 F
VII. CLASS POLICIES


    1. Social work students adhere to the Student Standards for Professional Conduct of the NASW
         Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for their conduct. Scholastic honesty and integrity are to
         be consistent social work values.
    2. The instructor will comply with University guidelines regarding scholastic dishonesty, including
         plagiarism.
    3. Social work practitioners respect others. Therefore, differences in values, opinions, and feelings
         of class members and guest speakers will be respected.
    4. Punctuality and timeliness are important for social work practitioners. Class attendance is
         expected. Each absence will result in a reduction of one point for the participation grade. Three
         late arrivals or early departure equal one absence. Three or more absences will result in a one
         letter grade reduction in your final grade. It is your responsibility to sign the weekly attendance
         sheet.
    5. The instructor should be notified in advance of any planned absence and as soon as possible in
         the case of an unforeseen, serious emergency.
    6. Students are expected to be active in the learning process, to do the assigned readings and
         participate in the class activities and discussions. If you do not have a personal computer with
         Internet access, there are computers available for your use at the SW Learning Resource Center
         (LRC), the Flawn Academic Center, campus, and public libraries. (Please see syllabus addendum
         for more information related to classes being held during the COVID19 pandemic).
    7. Barring serious, unforeseen medical illness or family emergencies, assignments should be turned
         in by the due date/time listed in the syllabus and on-line in each Canvas module for this class.
         Late assignments will receive a penalty of 5 points deducted for each day they are late unless
         approved by the instructor at least 24 hours prior to the due date.
    8. The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association Sixth Edition (APA) is the
         style manual to be used by all students. The manual is available at the library or for purchase at
         the Co-op.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations
must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the
semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the
professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects
students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared
to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings
together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by
such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national
origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of
positive engagement and mutual respect. This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and
dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with
complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be


impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas and
opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor
requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to
course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the
professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course
assignments and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is
desired. If counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the
UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain
that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to
participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is
said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing
potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms of
electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived by
clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to
minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training.
Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are obliged to
block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should not be
referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the identification
of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate
any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as certain
material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for
Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as
well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the
university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity
of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the
student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to
exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action being
taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific, express


approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of
academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other
things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other
current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal
matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is
protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such,
sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of
confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of
academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as
an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email
for university and course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping
the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly
and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating their e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must
miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, the
professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the
University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from
discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field instructors, staff,
and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or any other forms of sexual
misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will
be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources
related to Title IX, may also be found at https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu
on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that involve
working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present some risks.
Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to
be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students
should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their behavioral
health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center


(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made.
Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    ·      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that the
        nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    ·      If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of
        class.
    ·      In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    ·      Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the
        UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Electronics in Class
See syllabus addendum.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
Complete reading assignment for each date before coming to class.
DATE         TOPIC              ASSIGNMENT DUE               REQUIRED MATERIALS DUE
                                                             Syllabus
Week 1       Introduction                                    Review and complete Canvas Module 1
                                Self-Reflection Paper Part
                                I Due:
June 4       Implicit Bias      Sunday, June 7, 11:59pm
Week 2
                                Discussion Post #1:
June 8                          Tuesday, June 9,
                                11:59pm                      Review and complete: Canvas Modules: 2 and
             Privilege &
June 9                                                       3
             Oppression
                                Discussion Post #2:
June 10                         Thursday, June 11,
             Structural and
                                11:59pm
             Systemic Racism
June 11                                                      Speaker: Neel Lane, J.D. (Monday, 6/11/20
                                Op Ed Topic posted to        10:30am
                                Canvas: Sunday, June 14,
                                11:59pm


        Intersectionality Discussion Post #3:
                          Tuesday, June 16, 11:59pm
Week 3
        Cultural
        Relativism
June 15
                          Discussion Post #4:       Review and complete:
        Ethnocentrism
June 16                   Thursday, June 18,
                          11:59pm                   Canvas Modules: 4 and 5
        Immigration
June 17
                          Topic Due via Canvas
        Religion          Discussion for Global
June 18
                          Justice Presentations,
                          Sunday, June 21 11:59pm
Week 4
        Ableism                                     Review and Complete:
                          Discussion Post #5:
June 22                   Tuesday, June 23, 11:59pm Canvas Modules: 6 and 7
        Ageism
June 23                   Discussion Post #6:
        Gender Identity
                          Thursday, June 25,
June 24                   11:59pm
        Sexuality                                   Speaker: Nick Winges-Yanez, PhD, (Wed.,
                                                    6.24.20, 10:30am)
June 25
        Weigtism/Body     OP-ED PAPER: HOW TO
        size/type         BE AN ALLY Due:
                          Friday, June 26 11:59pm
                          Discussion Post #8:
                          Thursday, June 30,
Week 5                    11:59pm
June 29   Global Social                          Review and Complete:
                          Discussion Post #9:
          Justice
                          Thursday, July 1,
June 30                   11:59pm                Canvas Modules: 8 and 9
          Historical
          Violence/
July 1                    SELF-REFLECTION
          Colonialism
                          PAPER
July 2                    Part II Due:
                          Friday, July 3 by
                          11:59pm
                          Discussion Post #10:   Review and Complete:
Week 6    Culturally
                          Tuesday, July 7,
          Competent
                          11:59pm                Canvas modules: 10 and 11


              Human Service
              Organizations GROUP                          .
July 6                           PRESENTATTION
                                 POWERPOINTS,
July 7                           Due: Thursday July 9,
              Social Justice 10:00am.
July 8        on micro,
              mezzo, and
July 9        macro levels
X. Bibliography
Alexander, M. (2012). The color of justice. In The New Jim Crow: Mass incarceration in the age of the
colorblindness (97-104). New York: The New Press.
Ali, S. R., Yamada, T., & Mahmood, A. (2015). Relationships of the practice of Hijab, workplace
discrimination, social class, job stress, and job satisfaction among Muslim American women. Journal of
Employment Counseling, 52(4), 146-157.
Arbona, C., et al. (2010). Acculturative stress among documented and undocumented Latino immigrants
in the United States. Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 32(3), 362-384.
Armstrong, E. A., & Crage, S. M. (2006). Movements and memory: The making of the Stonewall myth.
American Sociological Review, 71(5), 724-751.
Burdge, B. J. (2007). Bending gender, ending gender: Theoretical foundations for social work practice
with the transgender community. Social work, 52(3), 243-250.
Carney, N. (2016). All lives matter, but so does race: Black lives matter and the evolving role of social
media. Humanity and Society, 40(2), 180-199.
Chapman, E. N., Kaatz, A., & Carnes, M. (2013). Physicians and implicit bias: how doctors may
unwittingly perpetuate health care disparities. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 28(11), 1504-1510.
Corley, N. A., & Young, S. M. (2018). Is Social Work Still Racist? A Content Analysis of Recent
Literature. Social Work.
Davis, L. E. (2016). Why are they angry with us? Essays on race. Chicago: Lyceum Books.
DeLuca, K. M., Lawson, S., & Sun, Y. (2012). Occupy Wall Street on the public screens of social media:
The many framings of the birth of a protest movement. Communication, Culture, and Critique, 5(4), 483-
509.
Fairchild, E. E., & Blumenfeld, W. J. (2007). Traversing Boundaries: Dialogues on Christian Privilege,
Religious Oppression, and Religious Pluralism among Believers and Non-Believers. College Student
Affairs Journal, 26(2), 177-185.


Fennig, M., & Denov, M. (2018). Regime of Truth: Rethinking the Dominance of the Bio-Medical Model
in Mental Health Social Work with Refugee Youth. The British Journal of Social Work.
Fisher-Borne, M., Cain, J. M., & Martin, S. L. (2015). From mastery to accountability: Cultural humility
as an alternative to cultural competence. Social Work Education, 34(2), 165-181.
Gill, R. (2014). Unspeakable inequalities: Post feminism, entrepreneurial subjectivity, and the repudiation
of sexism among cultural workers. Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State & Society,
21(4), 509-528.
Hammond, R. A., & Axelrod, R. (2006). The evolution of ethnocentrism. Journal of conflict resolution,
50(6), 926-936.
Hancock, T. U., Waites, C., & Kledaras, C. G. (2012). Facing structural inequality: students' orientation
to oppression and practice with oppressed groups. Journal of Social Work Education, 48(1), 5-25.
Herf, J. (2007). Comparative perspectives on anti-Semitism, radical anti-Semitism in the Holocaust and
American white racism. Journal of Genocide Research, 9(4), 575-600.
Hinrichsen, G. A., Kietzman, K. G., Alkema, G. E., Bragg, E. J., Hensel, B. K., Miles, T. P., . . . Zerzan,
J. (2010). Influencing public policy to improve the lives of older Americans. The Gerontologist, 50(6),
735-743.
Hollington, A., Salverda, T., Schwarz, T., & Tappe, O. (2015). Concepts of the Global South. Global
South Studies Center Cologne.
Hook, J. N., Davis, D. E., Owen, J., Worthington Jr, E. L., & Utsey, S. O. (2013). Cultural humility:
Measuring openness to culturally diverse clients. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 60(3), 353.
Johnston-Goodstar, K. (2013). Indigenous youth participatory action research: Re-visioning social justice
for social work with indigenous youths. Social Work, 58(4) 314-320.
Jackson, K. F., & Hodge, D. R. (2015). Native American youth and culturally sensitive interventions: A
systematic review. Research on Social Work Practice, 20(3), 260-270.
Jadalla, A. A., Hattar, M., & Schubert, C. C. (2015). Acculturation as a predictor of health promoting and
lifestyle practices of Arab Americans: A descriptive study. Journal of Cultural Diversity, 22(2), 15-22.
Jones, S. (2012). Working with immigrant clients: perils and possibilities for social workers. Families in
Society, 93(1), 47-53.
Kimmel, M. S., & Ferber, A. L. (Eds.). (2017). Privilege: A reader (4th ed.). Boulder, CO: Westview
Press
Kiang, L., Witkow, M. R., & Thompson, T. L. (2016). Model Minority stereotyping, perceived
discrimination, and adjustment among adolescents from Asian American backgrounds. Journal of Youth
Adolescence, 45(7), 1366-1379.


Kolivoski, K., Weaver, A., & Constance-Huggins, M. (2014). Critical Race Theory: Opportunities for
application in social work practice and policy. Families in Society: The Journal of Contemporary Social
Services, 95(4), 269-276.
Locklear, E.A. (2012). Native American mascot controversy and mass media involvement: How the
media play a role in promoting racism through Native American athletic imagery. Explorations, 152-159.
Lopez, W. D., LeBrón, A. M., Graham, L. F., & Grogan-Kaylor, K. (2016). Discrimination and
depressive symptoms among Latina/o adolescents of immigrant parents. International Quarterly of
Community Health Education, 36(2), 131-40
Mcauliffe, G. J., Grothaus, T., Jensen, M., & Michel, R. (2012). Assessing and promoting cultural
relativism in students of counseling. International Journal for the Advancement of Counselling, 34(2),
118-135.
Mueller, A., James, W., Abrutyn, S., & Levin, M. (2015). Suicide ideation and bulling among US
adolescents: Examining the intersections of sexual orientation, gender, and race/ethnicity. American
Journal of Public Health, 105(5), 980-985.
Musto, M., Cooky, C., & Messner, M. A. (2017). “From Fizzle to Sizzle!” Televised Sports News and the
Production of Gender-Bland Sexism. Gender & Society, 31(5), 573-596.
Nam, Y. & Jung, H.J. (2008). Welfare reform and older immigrants: Food stamp program participation
and food insecurity. The Gerontologist, 48(1), 42-50.
National Association of Social Workers. (2001). NASW standards for cultural competence in social work
practice. National Association of Social Workers.
Nelson, T.D. (2005). Ageism: Prejudice against our feared future self. Journal of Social Issues, 61(2),
207-221. Nguyen, D. (2012). The effects of sociocultural factors on older Asian Americans’ access to
care. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 55(1), 55-71.
Osta, K. and Vasquez, H. (2019, June 13). Don’t talk about implicit bias without talking about structural
racism, National Equity Project. Retrieved from: https://medium.com/national-equity-project/implicit-
bias-structural-racism-6c52cf0f4a92#1a25
Polack, R., & Chadha, J. (2004). An emerging approach to teaching global social justice issues. Critical
Social Work, 5(1).
Reason, R. D., Scales, T.C. & Millar, E.A.R. (2005). Encouraging the development of racial justice allies.
New Directions for Student Services, 2005 (110), 55-66.
Rogge, M. (2013). Environmental Justice. In National Association of Social Workers and Oxford
University Press (Eds) Encyclopedia of Social Work.
Sacks, K. B. (2010). How Jews became White. In Kimmel, M. S., & Ferber, A. L. (Eds.), Privilege: A
reader (2nd ed). ( 87-106). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.


Schlosser, L.Z. (2003). Christian privilege: Breaking a sacred taboo. Journal of Multicultural Counseling
and Development, 31(1), 44-51.
Shires, D. A., & Jaffee, K. (2015). Factors associated with health care discrimination among a national
sample of female-to-male transgender individuals. Health & Social Work, 40(2) 134-141.
Simmons, L. (2016). Opportunities for community organizing in the realm of economic justice and low
wage worker struggles. Journal of Community Practice, 24(2), 166-18.
Smith, L. & Redington, R.M. (2010). Lessons from the experiences of white antiracist activists.
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 41(6), 541-549.
Solis, S. (2006). I'm “coming out” as disabled, but I'm “staying in” to rest: Reflecting on elected and
imposed segregation. Equity & Excellence in Education, 39(2), 146-153.
Szymanski, D.M. (2005). Heterosexism and sexism as correlates of psychological distress in lesbians.
Journal of Counseling & Development, 83(3), 355-360.
Williams, J., Simon, C., & Bell, A. (2015). Missing the mark: The image of the social work profession in
an African-American community. Journal of Ethnic & Cultural Diversity in Social Work. 24(1) 56-70.
Willis, D. G. (2004). Hate crimes against gay males: An overview. Issues in Mental Health Nursing,
25(2), 115- 132.
Wise, T. (2010). On White pride, reverse racism, and other delusions. In Kimmel, M. S., & Ferber, A. L.
(Eds.), Privilege: A reader (2nd ed). (133-144). Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
                                        Course Syllabus Addendum
                                      Online Guidelines and Policies
Course Technology Requirements. Students will need to have access to the following to participate in
this online course:
             •   Computer with dependable access to reliable, high speed internet connection and webcam
             •   Headphones and a well-lit private room for participation in the synchronous portion of
                 the class each week
             •   Access to the Internet, MS Word or Pages, PowerPoint and Excel
             •   Accounts in Canvas
Virtual Classroom Expectations.
Out of Class Time Assignments (Asynchronous). It is required that students complete the asynchronous
portion of each class module on the due date indicated in the course schedule and in Canvas. The specific
requirements for the Asynchronous portion of each class will be posted in Canvas at least one week prior
to the due date.
Required class readings are included in the expectations of class preparation and that time is not
considered part of asynchronous class activities.


Students should take notes of any questions, comments, thoughts and feelings while engaging in the
asynchronous units/modules/activities and be prepared to share during the synchronous class meeting
times.
Synchronous Class Meeting Times (The Virtual Classroom). Although class participants are not in a
physical classroom, the virtual environment needs to be treated with respect as a learning environment.
External distractions should be kept to a minimum. Students should do their best to find a quiet, well-lit
space prior to logging into the synchronous class session.
Classroom Decorum and Establishing an Environment for Safe Communication:
             • Classroom attire-students should wear something they would wear to an in-person class.
             • Children-should not be on the student’s lap or in the vicinity of the camera’s view in
                 respect to other students.
             • Pets-appearances should be kept to a minimum.
             • Safety-students should not access the virtual classroom when driving.
             • Distractions-both television and music should not be on during class time. Students
                 should not be in a public space such a coffee shop during class time. Students and their
                 computers should be in a place where students can hear and be heard without distractions.
                 Cell phones should be off or in silent mode and not used during class time unless there is
                 an urgent issue that you have informed the instructor about before class.
             • Set up for class-Students’ computer cameras should give a full view of the student’s face
                 in order to engage with others in the virtual classroom.
             • Class participation- Students should monitor contributions to class as they would in a
                 physical classroom. Students should be aware of when they can contribute more and
                 when they need to pull back with the level of contribution to give others space.
             • Language-Students should use academic discourse through speech, chat room or email.
                          When posting written communication, avoid typing in all caps or bold as this can
                          be viewed as yelling in some online communities.
                          Use emoticons and other symbols to indicate tone when appropriate. This helps
                          to decipher tone and intent.
                          Students should take time to critically think about messages posted and how to
                          formulate responses. Thoughts don’t need to be perfectly formulated but should
                          be respectful.
                          Chat room entries should be relevant to the topic being discussed in the
                          synchronous portion of class.
