PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
                          ADV 319 PSYCHOLOGY OF ADVERTISING
                                   Dr. Lee Ann Kahlor
                                        Fall 2018
                                    Tues 12:30-3 p.m.
                                       BMC 2.106
TEACHING TEAM
Professor
Lee Ann Kahlor
Office Hours: Th 1 – 2 p.m. and by appointment
Office: BMC 4.370
512-791-5726 (this is my cell so call or text only 9 am -7 pm when you need
immediate response, otherwise email me at Kahlor@austin.utexas.edu)
Teaching Assistant
Justin Graeber
jgraeber@utexas.edu
Office hours: 3:30-4:30 p.m. on Tuesdays and by appointment
BMC 4th floor TA cubicles
Undergraduate Learning Assistant
Lydia Medhanie
lmedhanie@utexas.edu
Office hours: 2-3 p.m. on Thursdays and by appointment.
BMC 1.206 (Student Leadership Suite)
-------------------------
REQUIRED TEXT & APP
Solomon, Michael R. (2017), Consumer Behavior: Buying, Having and Being (12th
edition), New Jersey: Pearson-Prentice Hall. This book is available as an ebook,
value edition or as a bound hardcover. You can find it at the Co-op, Amazon, Pearson
Higher Ed, and other venues, but it is vital you buy the correct edition as chapters
and their contents map directly onto our weekly quizzes. GET THE BOOK ASAP!
Also required – you must use the iClicker Reef app (available from App Store or
Google Play) to participate in class polls. The app uses geo-location so you cannot
participate or sign in unless you are in the lecture hall. Be sure to enable location
sharing for the app and then sign in on Canvas under assignments.
-------------------------
This course meets your 3-credit UT Core Requirement for Social and
Behavioral Science (SB).
                                                                                      1


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course is designed to help students understand the psychology of persuasion
and consumer behavior. It is an overview of key psychological concepts and theories
as they relate to marketing, advertising and public relations. The ultimate goal of
this course is to provide an understanding of the psychology behind advertising and
public relations planning, execution, and impacts.
COURSE FORMAT
Lectures supplement and complement the readings by providing focus and
additional insight on the major topics. You will take weekly online quizzes via
Canvas on the readings each week. There also are required in-class iClicker Reef
polls and in- and out-of-class Canvas discussion posts, participation in 2 research
studies, and three in-class exams (see schedule for dates).
CANVAS: Students should keep up daily with their performance in the class, pick up
lecture materials, check for other course content and new assignments, participate
in quizzes and discussions and check grades and announcements on
Canvas https://utexas.instructure.com.
--------------------
COURSEWORK
Examinations
3 in-class multiple-choice exams plus an optional (makeup) final
63% of your grade
Three in-class exams are scheduled during the term. See the Canvas Calendar for the
scheduled dates.
Exams will cover materials presented in class and from assigned readings. Each in-
class exam will cover the 1/3 of the class up to that day. A study guide and online
review will be provided about one week prior to each in-class exam. After the exams
are graded and the grades are posted, students will be given ONE WEEK to look
over the exam during office hours. Any concerns about the grading of each test
must be resolved during this one-week period.
The only make-up option is a cumulative optional final exam given during our
scheduled final exam time. This is for anyone who has missed one of the in-class
exams or for anyone who wants to try to improve an existing exam grade. (The
optional final grade will replace the lowest in-class examination only if it is higher.
Otherwise, it will not be included in the calculation of the final grade.) If anyone
misses a regularly scheduled examination, then she/he must take the optional final
exam.
                                                                                        2


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
Weekly Online Quizzes
10% of your grade
The quizzes are available on Canvas, are timed for 10 minutes, focus only on the
book, and consist of 8 questions each. Quizzes are due by class time on the days
noted on the class schedule below. Quizzes disappear after the deadline and are not
available for future studying, so look at results carefully. If a quiz is accidentally left
up and you take it late, it will eventually be changed to a 0. It is suggested that
you complete the readings for the week, take notes and then take the quiz. I will
drop your one lowest quiz grade – this includes forgotten quizzes, sick days,
travel, emergencies or technical failures. You have one week from the day a grade is
posted to resolve disputes.
NOTE: Sometimes Canvas crashes or freezes – I am not likely available the hours
right before class.
In-class iClicker Reef polling & Canvas Discussion Posts
25% of your grade
We use iClicker Reef for polling in class. These are NOT announced ahead of time. I
will drop the two lowest scores.
I also require periodic discussion posts on Canvas. No discussion scores will be
dropped. These will be responses to news articles I share with you, ads I want you to
critique, etc.
The purpose of both is to build an in-class community, share ideas and test your
burgeoning knowledge.
Professionalism & Research Participation
2% of your grade
Professionalism: Please use a respectful tone when addressing me or your peers.
Remain attentive and engaged in lecture. Arrive at class on time, do not pack up
early, and stay for the entire class period (or until dismissed). Please refrain from
distracting behaviors like watching movies in class or surfing the web.
Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence. Lecture
notes from previous days are not available from the professor.
In class, students who use laptops are asked to sit in designated seats.
Attitude and professionalism will be considered in determining final class
professionalism grade.
Research Participation: As research is a big focus in this class, you are required to
take part in a total of 2 research studies that I will make available to you
throughout the semester. I do not honor research points from other departments or
                                                                                            3


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
schools. Do not take a study more than once (e.g., to meet another class’
requirements) or the credit will be voided.
You will not receive extra credit in this class for participating in more than 2 studies,
although you may have additional research requirements in other classes.
----------------
FINAL GRADES
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. I do NOT
round, which means a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999%.
The University does not recognize the grade of A+. NOTE: All Advertising and PR
majors are required to have a minimum grade of C in all communication courses and
all courses required and elective for their major.
 A = 94-100%
 A- = 90-93
                       NOTE: I do not respond the way you hope when you email
 B+ = 87-89
                       me at the end of the semester about your need for an extra .1
 B = 84-86
                       point to get a certain grade. Cutoffs are listed so you can work
 B- = 80-83
                       from day 1 to ensure you are not on the edge by the end.
 C+ = 77-79
 C = 74-76
 C- = 70-73
 D+ = 67-69            UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
 D = 64-66
                       The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
 D- = 60-63
                       learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to
uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes,
but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission
of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the
student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-
career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Please read more information
                                                                                        4


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external
site.).
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937
(video phone).
If your accommodations include testing time and control of distractions,
please arrange to take your exams in the SSD facility. Remind me to send the
exam there 24 hours before the scheduled exam, and ask SSD to email your
completed, scanned exam back to me.
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
Notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable timeframe.
   Struggling? Know your resources.
   Your teaching team! Kahlor, Graeber, and Medhanie!
   UT’s Sanger Learning Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
   Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
   UT resources for health and wellness:
   http://www.utexas.edu/campus-life/health-and-wellness
   Other resources:
   http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
   https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line
   https://titleix.utexas.edu/resources/
                                                                                      5


PLEASE REVIEW THE SYLLABUS CAREFULLY THROUGHOUT THE COURSE
COURSE CALENDAR
Students are responsible for schedule changes announced in class. Note
quizzes are on readings for the corresponding week. In-class assignments are not
announced ahead of time.
 Wk    Dates      Topic                           Reading (do      Quiz (due     Exam
                                                  before quiz)     by class)
 1     Sept. 4    Intro                           Ch. 1
 2     Sept. 11   Consumer & Well-being           Ch. 2
 3     Sept. 18   Perception                      Ch. 3            Q1-Ch 3
 4     Sept. 25   Learning & Memory               Ch. 4            Q2-Ch 4
 5     Oct. 2     EXAM                                                           Exam 1
 6     Oct. 9     Motivation & Affect             Ch. 5            Q3-Ch 5
 7     Oct. 16    Self: Mind Gender Body          Ch. 6            Q4-Ch 6
 8     Oct. 23    Personality & Values, Attitudes Ch. 7, 8         Q5-Ch 7-8
 9     Oct. 30    Dec Making, Buying              Ch. 9, 10        Q6-Ch 9-10
 10    Nov. 6     EXAM                                                           Exam 2
 11    Nov. 13    Groups & Social Media           Ch. 11           Q7-Ch 11
 12    Nov. 20    Income & Class                  Ch. 12           Q8-Ch 12
 13    Nov. 27    Subcultures, Culture            Ch. 13-14        Q9-Ch 13-14
 14    Dec. 4     EXAM                                                           Exam 3
Optional Final: Wednesday, December 19, 2-5 pm
                                                                                  6
