                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                         ADV 378 – INFLUENCER MARKETING
                                                                  Identifying, Employing, And Developing Influencers
                                                                          Campaigns to Achieve Business Goals
                                                                                        FALL, 2019
                                                                              Syllabus/Course Overview
                     (See Course Schedule for weekly learning objectives, readings, and assignments.)
                           Instructor                                              Teaching Assistant
                    Amanda Russell, MBA                                                    TBD
                 University of Texas at Austin                                University of Texas at Austin
                           BMC 4.206                                               Austin, TX 78712
                       Austin, TX 78712                                                   E-mail:
                    Phone: (917)628.5824                                                  Phone:
                     E-mail: @utexas.edu
            Office Hours: by appt. (e-mail, phone)
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Throughout history, Influential individuals have shaped thought and behavior in politics, religion, business, even interpersonal
relationships. Today, because of the democratizing effects of digital media, social influence is no longer limited to the
traditional ranks of authority figures. Modern influencers include subject-matter experts (from scientists to non-credentialed
bloggers), social media stars, even individuals who prefer to remain "anonymous."
These influencers have become critical components of modern marketing campaigns, particularly given the fragmentation of
audiences across millions of media outlets, and the formidable expense of mass-media/omni-channel advertising. True
influencers can efficiently generate awareness in niche audiences, amplify messages, and also lead their followers to desired
actions, whether that means buying, voting, or simply changing their minds.
To integrate influencers into campaigns, marketing executives must know how to distinguish the truly influential — those who
can motivate actual behavior — from the "merely popular." That is especially critical in social media, where commonly cited
measures of "influence" — such as followers and likes — can be purchased and otherwise artificially inflated. Marketers need
to conduct qualitative and quantitative analysis, since many influencers may have little to no social media popularity.
In this course, you will learn not only how to work with influencers to reach your business goals — including identifying,
analyzing, approaching, managing, and measuring them — but also how to identify and build true influence.
This course answers questions such as
     •   Why is influencer marketing central to the future of marketing?
     •   What are the biggest mistakes even the smartest brands and marketers are making when it comes to influencer
         marketing and how do we avoid them?
     •   How do you persuade someone that influencer marketing is worthy of support?
     •   What are the main issues in influencer marketing?
     •   How do we evaluate and select the right influencers?
     •   How is influence potential measured?
     •   How do we connect influencer strategies to business goals and profitability?
Influencer Marketing- ADV 378                                                                                             Fall 2019


                                                                                                                     Page 2
    •     What methods are most effective for tracking and measuring success of influencer strategies?
    •     What communication and tactics are most appropriate for building high value influencer partnerships?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
To facilitate understanding of influence management, you will analyze case studies, hear presentations from influencers and
communication managers, read articles in both academic journals and business media, and practice using professional tools
and tactics. By the end of this course, you will acquire expertise and experience to:
    1.    Identify and define what influencer marketing is and is not…and why the difference matters
    2.    Summarize the current marketing environment and break down why influencers are important to your marketing
          efforts, and why you should engage them.
    3. Compare/Contrast the types and levels of Influence and how you can put them to work for your brand.
    4. Recognize and identify different ways to integrate and leverage your Influencer relationships across all elements
          of your business
    5. Apply frameworks such as the purchasing funnel to align influencers with objectives and achieve desired results.
    6. Select and articulate the smart business goals for your marketing efforts, and then work backwards
    7. Discover, identify, and assess influencers that fit your brand, your goals, and your purpose
    8. Strategically create and evaluate influencer agreements. This includes the ability to compare/contrast a long-
          term, win-win relationship with influencers versus a transactional one-off approach.
    9. Formulate a content strategy to facilitate, encourage, create, build, and maximize influencer marketing content
    10. Measure, critique and summarize the success of your efforts, using both qualitative and quantitative data.
What does all this mean? Essentially, my mission is:
    a) To give you a full strategic understanding of how to think and approach influencer marketing as more than a stand-
          alone tactic.
    b) A deep ‘know-how’ for creating and executing long-term, win-win, brand-growing influencer alliances.
At the end of this course you should be able to expertly define, explain, analyze, and evaluate the critical elements of Influencer
Marketing which are as follows:
               True Influence
                    o What (Definition)
                            • Address the myths
                    o WHY
                            • Then vs now
                            • The influencer marketing landscape
                            • Roles of influencer marketing
               Types
                    o Levels (micro, macro, personal)
                    o Categories (authority, expert, affinity, celebrity)
               Goal (step 1 of the code)
                    o Objectives
                    o KPIs
                    o 3 Bs Framework
                            This is a checklist of assessment for creating or evaluating campaigns or ideas (Brand, Buzz, Behavior –
                            great campaigns achieve all three)
               OBSERVE (step 2 of the code)
                    o Target Market
                            Consumer Journey
                    o Identifying the Right Influencer(s)
                            Determining influence level/type
               CONNECT (step 3 of the code)
                    o Engaging Influencers
                            Developing an effective outreach strategy


                                                                                                                 Page 3
                           Creating real value for the influencer
                           Growing/defining the relationship
                           • Potential Paths to take
                                              o Ambassadors
                                              o Advocates
                                              o Content Collaboration
                                              o Co-Creators
                           •    Measuring Success
COURSE STRUCTURE
The course is designed around readings, on-line discussion, lectures, and exercises. The unifying assignment for the course as
a whole is the creation of an influencer marketing plan for a product or service that could be a business you are personally
connected with or want to start.
INSTRUCTOR
Amanda Russell was an influencer before the term even existed...and when brands like Lamborghini, Cedars-Sinai and
Lionsgate want to better understand influencer marketing, they call one person...Amanda Russell.
The Toronto Star calls her the “Real-life Iron Woman” and “the ultimate go-getter”. As an international fitness icon, sought-
after speaker and brand strategist, Amanda has been at the forefront of the digital marketing and social media revolution from
its infancy.
Amanda designed & co-created UCLA's' Influencer Marketing curriculum, the world’s first fully accredited program in
Influencer Marketing and currently teaches this program, along with marketing, branding, and business strategy at UCLA and
UT Austin, to a global audience of students and future leaders.
She advises some of the top companies in the world on influencer marketing and how they interact with their customers. Her
upcoming book, The Influencer Code, teaches brands how to use collaboration to grow and scale their business.
Amanda co-founded the Interesting Agency, and eventually sold her own eponymous consulting firm to take the CMO helm at
Valeo Securities, where she’s heading up a re-brand and international re-launch as Valeo Fit. She graduated from the
University of Richmond on a full-ride track scholarship, and holds an MBA with a concentration in marketing.
READINGS
Required
     •   No required text, articles will be chosen weekly and will take the place of text
Recommended
     •   Contagious: Why Things Catch On, by Jonah Berger, 2013 Simon & Schuster
         Written by a Wharton professor, this book explains what makes something "go viral." He based his findings on
         academic research, not from personal experience. (The book made him an influencer, but prior to that he was little
         known outside academic circles).
     •   Made To Stick, by Chip Heath & Dan Heath, 2007 Random House
         This book by the Heath brothers (professor Chip and consultant Dan) explores what makes an idea memorable, with
         elements such as emotion, storytelling, and specific concrete language.


                                                                                                                 Page 4
   •   The Influentials, by Ed Keller & Jon Berry, 2003 The Free Press/Simon & Schuster
       Written by two senior executives of the marketing research firm RoperASW, this pioneering book on influencers uses
       extensive data to identify and evaluate the "one American in ten [who] tells the other nine how to vote, where to eat,
       and what to buy."
G RADES & C O URS E REQ UIREM ENT S
Grading
       A        94.0% or higher
       A-       90.0%-94.0%
       B+       87.0%-90.0%
       B        84.0%-87.0%
       B-       80.0%-84.0%
       C+       77.0%-80.0%
       C        74.0%-77.0%
       C-       70.0%-74.0%
       D+       67.0% -70.0%
       D        64.0%-67.0%
       D-       61.0% - 64.0%
       F        61% or lower
   •   Criteria: A's and A-minuses must be earned by "going the extra mile" to develop professional caliber work that could
       be presented to a client or CEO. A-level work is mistake-free, reflects in-depth research, shows creativity and
       superlative communication skills, and demonstrates a strong understanding of the course material. Personal
       recommendations will be provided on request to students who earn an A.
       B's are awarded to undergraduate-school caliber work, reflecting in-depth research and analysis, as well as a strong
       understanding of course material. The ideas would need to be stronger to succeed in a professional setting.
       C's and lower are given to amateur work, marked by insufficient research, many errors in writing and implementation
       of course material, or superficial analysis.
   •   Attendance: You must attend every class, arrive on time, and stay for the entire class (missing more than 10 minutes
       counts as a half absence). Makeup assignments will be given for any excused absences, such as illnesses or athletic
       commitments. Should you need to miss a class, notify the instructor in advance (except, of course, in the case of
       emergencies), and obtain what you missed from classmates and online. Two unexcused absences will result in a
       complete loss of participation points. More than two unexcused absences will result in a course grade of C- or lower.
       Note: unauthorized use of phones or computers in class will be counted as an absence, since you are in attendance but
       not truly present.
   •   Critical Thinking: In communication there are few "right" answers: what works for one company might fail for
       another — or even for the same company at another time. Assignments must describe "why" and "how," not just
       "what," and will be evaluated on the quality of the reasoning.
   •   Professional Writing: Since this a undergraduate program in communication, your writing and document formatting
       will be factored into all assignment grades, so please proofread to eliminate all errors. If you need help with fluency or
       simply polishing your work, contact Moody Writing Support Program.
   •   Research and References:
            o Your work must be supported by research from authoritative sources, such as academic journals,
                professional journalists and news publications, and credible experts. Please vet your sources.
            o If you use Wikipedia, do not cite it as a reference. Rather, refer to the sources listed in the Wikipedia article,
                and cite if applicable.


                                                                                                                    Page 5
              o    Do not limit your research to whatever Google turns up. Contact experts on campus or online. You may also
                   conduct focus groups, interviews, and surveys; just make sure to include all contact information (dates,
                   medium, etc.) and any disclaimers about statistical significance.
              o    Bibliography entries must include complete source information — a URL alone is never enough. You may use
                   APA style, which includes the name of the source, article titles, author names, and dates of publication. In
                   addition, in the case of websites, you should include the date you accessed the source. Purdue OWL is a great
                   resource for APA style.
                   https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/apa_style/apa_formatting_and_style_guide/general_form
                   at.html
     •    Respect: Treat classmates and speakers with courtesy. You may certainly question and criticize ideas — that is
          encouraged in the learning environment — but never criticize the person. Also, be present: all computers and
          phones must be turned off and put away during lectures — no exceptions.
Grading Components
  Your final grade will be determined based on the following:
  Participation and Engagement                                                                        30%
  IMPACT Talk Conversation - Individual posts and responses to 2 other classmates (26 pts)             5%
  Mid-Term Individual Campaign Analysis (Individual) (100 pts)                                        30%
  Team Peer Evaluation for Team Influencer Marketing Plan (30 pts)                                     5%
  Final Team Influencer Marketing Plan – Final (Team) (100 pts)                                       30%
Honor Code
Each member of the class is expected to conduct him/herself in accordance with the policies of the University of Texas at
Austin. All work turned in for a grade should be your work alone, unless specifically instructed otherwise. Penalties for
unauthorized collaboration or research are severe.
The following assignments will test your ability to apply in-depth research, academic theories, analytical frameworks, and
critical thinking in support of plans and arguments. In addition, all papers will be partially graded on the quality of the writing
and overall presentation (organization and formatting). Specific assignment instructions will be provided on each assignment
prompt.
Participation and Engagement (In class and online) : This includes your weekly article and discussion board responses,
your in-class participation, and peer review of another student’s campaign analysis - Individual Assignment
As entrepreneurs and managers, a major element of your success in business depends on your ability to communicate relevant ideas
in a clear, concise, and persuasive manner. It is absolutely critical that you be able to follow a discussion, synthesize and evaluate
perspectives, and offer insights to advance discussion, i.e., to contribute to your work group’s effectiveness. Therefore, a high priority
is given to the development of oral and written communication skills in this course.
Each of you has valuable work and study experience, and that experience will provide essential alternate points of view on the
concepts discussed. Therefore, as you will see in your teams, in on-line discussions, and in class, a sizeable portion of your
learning will depend on listening to, interacting with, and debating with your peers.
Moreover, post-secondary study requires that you move beyond simple memorization and understanding of concepts. Upper
division courses demand analysis, synthesis and evaluation of those concepts for a variety of situations and applications. To
this end, active discussion, both on line and in class, is required in order to permit the exploration of ideas. Therefore, as a
member of this class, it is part of your responsibility to contribute to the learning of your peers.
Some of the things that have an impact on effective class contribution, through either in-class discussion or on-line participation in
exercises, are the following:


                                                                                                                  Page 6
     1.  Is the participant a good listener? That is, do the participant’s comments reflect an understanding of what previous
         participants have said?
     2.  Are the points that are made relevant to the discussion? Are they linked to the comments of others?
     3.  Do the comments add to our understanding of the situation?
     4.  Do the comments show evidence of analysis of the reading?
     5.  Does the participant distinguish among different kinds of data (e.g., facts vs. opinions.)?
     6.  Is there a willingness to test new ideas, or are all comments “safe”? (For example, repetition of case facts without analysis
         and conclusions or a comment already made.)
     7.  Is the participant willing to interact with other class members?
     8.  Do comments clarify and highlight the important aspects of earlier comments and lead to a clearer statement of the
         concepts being covered?
     9.  Is the participant mindful of his/her effect on the class as a whole? Does the participant contribute to or monopolize
         discussion?
The grades for this area depend upon student engagement with course participants and course content and are scored from
the Canvas Discussion Board as well as in class. Grades are given for feedback provided to another student’s Influencer
Evaluation draft and responses to weekly articles. Discussion board responses will be evaluated by content quality. Note: It is
always best to avoid high frequency posts containing poor quality contribution.
For session 1-5, responses will be to choose a relevant industry article and explain its relevance and/or critique based on
course learning that week. Responses will be closed at 11:59 p.m. on the Tuesday before class. The purpose is to engage
students with the assigned readings during the week before class. Posts made after the deadline will incur a 1-point (out
of 10) penalty for each day that they are late.
NOTE* Full participation score cannot be earned simply by attending. In most class sessions, you must speak, ask questions,
and debate respectfully. In addition, you are expected to stay informed of current events, and may be called upon to discuss a
major influencer-related story in the news. Finally, please note that use of phones or computers in class, tardiness, and
absences will result in the loss of participation points.
IMPACT Talk Conversation - Individual Assignment (5%, 26 points)
A big part of this course is to learn about Influence Marketing while simultaneously building your own influence. To become an
expert in your field you are expected to stay informed of current events, and should become consistent with sourcing valuable
information across digital platforms. Every week you will post your chosen article summary or topic specifically repurposed
and optimized for two formats: Linked In, Facebook, Instagram, blog or Twitter, using the hashtag: #influencercode to
cite/source it and for tracking. In addition, you will conduct social listening and add valuable comments/responses to at least
two other classmates posts.
Two Part – Influencer Campaign Analysis– Individual Assignment (30%, 100 points)
Each student will individually apply course concepts to critically analyze a brand or campaign that uses influencers to achieve
organizational goals. For example, this may be a business selling a product, or a government agency encouraging a certain
behavior (voting, recycling, healthy living). In a paper (3-4 pages), you will evaluate the following:
              1.   The objective of the brand or campaign, including the target audience.
              2.   The influencers and why they were selected.
              3.   The appropriateness of the match between objective, audience, and influencers.
              4.   The effectiveness of the campaign beyond whether it achieved the objective, including impact on the
                   organization's brand, media buzz, and stakeholder behaviors.
This assignment is also a detailed writing assessment, with every sentence evaluated for clarity.
First Draft Due: Thurs, Sept 26th, 11:59pm CST. Your first draft will receive peer evaluation from another student on *the


                                                                                                                  Page 7
strength of the evaluation and critical analysis* of his/her persuasive evaluation, then be returned to you for revisions as you
deem necessary by Thurs, Oct 3rd, 11:59PM CST.
Final Draft: Due as your Mid-term Evaluation: Due: Thurs, Oct 10th, 11:59pm CST. Uploading the final version to Canvas by
the due date.
Images may be included and encouraged but not counted towards total pages.
         Papers received after the due date/time will incur a 10-point penalty for each day they are late.
Final Exam – Team Influencer Plan – Team Assignment (25%, 100 points)
Each student is expected to contribute to his/her team’s development of an influencer plan for a product/service that could be
for an existing brand or one you would like to create (for example, some students have used this as a way to start their own
business idea). In a paper (6 pages) and a PowerPoint presentation of up to 7 minutes, your team will create the following:
              A. An original influencer campaign for an organization, product, or cause of your choice. Elements:
                  o Your overall business goals and campaign S.M.A.R.T. objective(s)
                  o The target audience.
                  o The influencers you will employ (minimum 3) and why you selected them.
                  o How you will approach and enlist each influencer (your outreach process, and sample outreach script or
                       letter)
                  o The roles your influencer will play (ex. media and messages you will ask your influencers to promote,
                       roles outside of distribution)
                  o How you will measure the success of your campaign.
                  o The agreement outlining all the specifics of the campaign
                  o Implementation timeline of dates and activities.
Complete instructions are posted in Canvas. Papers received after the due date/time will incur a 10-point penalty for
each day they are late.
Peer Evaluation ( 5%, 30 points)
You will conduct two important peer evaluations. The first will be to one other student for the individual influencer campaign
analysis, the second will be for your final team project in which you will evaluate each member of your team. Your insightful
feedback and evaluation will be crucial to demonstrating your own comprehension of the assignment, its relation to course
concepts, and how well the evaluation has been critically presented.
Providing accurate, realistic evaluation of one’s peers (and subordinates) is a key part of any manager’s job. Therefore, to get
practice in this important skill, you are expected to provide as accurate an estimate as possible of the contribution made by
each of your teammates in your Team Project as well as critical and insightful feedback on a peer’s influencer campaign
analysis. The appropriate Peer Evaluation forms is posted in the Individual Influencer Campaign Analysis and Team
Influencer Marketing Plan modules respectively on Canvas.
Re-grade requests
If you believe that you received too little credit for your work, you may submit your work for a re-grade under the following
restrictions. (1) All re-grade requests must be submitted with a clear, written statement that explains why you believe the
original grade was incorrect referencing the grading criteria. (2) All requests for re-grades must wait 24 hours after receiving
the grade to petition for re-grading and must make the request within 1 calendar week of when the graded work is returned.
We will re-grade the assignment, and if we were overly generous we will deduct points. Thus, your grade can go up or down on
a re-grade.
Cover Page, Font Size and Margins on Assignments
All assignments in this course must include a cover page in APA style. All assignments have page limits *page limits do not
include the cover page or photos/images*. Keeping with that spirit, there are also font size and margin requirements. For all
documents, please use 1-1½ inch margins and Calibri 11 point font (This is usually the default for Microsoft Word).


                                                                                                               Page 8
Assignments that exceed the limit, or that circumvent page limits by changing font size and/or margins, will be penalized by 1
point per line exceeded


                                                                                                               Page 9
LECTURE SCHEDULE
This schedule may change depending on the pace of class discussions and the availability of guest speakers. For final
requirements, please refer to the lecture slides, which will be posted to canvas. Readings should be completed prior to the next
class. All articles are available on Canvas unless otherwise indicated.
GUEST LECTURERS: Given the nature of this course is discussing influencers and working with them, we will have various
guest lecturers throughout the semester that will shift the topics in each module accordingly.
Part I: Defining and Managing True Influence
Class 1, Wed, Aug 28: Class Introduction, Influencers — Who Are They And Why Do They Matter?
    • Influence Defined
    • The Myths: Beyond the stars: theories and definitions of "influence" and "influencers"
    • Story of WHY
    • The Marketplace: Then vs. Now - Communication challenges posed by the marketplace + the influencer solution.
    • Objectives: What do you want to learn or be able to do (questions, concerns etc) 3-5 things
    Assignments (All weekly assignments and readings due before the following class unless otherwise specified):
    • Readings
               o See Canvas Module 1
    • Assignment due next class (9/11): introduce yourself on Canvas and bring in a printed bio and name card
    • Articles Evaluations (on discussion board)/Impact Talk
    • Objectives: What do you want to learn or be able to do (questions, concerns etc) 3-5 things
    • Entry/Exit Card
PART 2: Step One: GOAL
Class 2, Wed, Sept 4: Types and Roles of Influence & Influencers
Review readings and Objectives
Roles (beyond reach)
The types of Influencers:
               o Levels
               o Categories
    • Why popularity is no guarantee of influence: qualitative and quantitative metrics that matter
    • Cases: Tom Brady, Warren Buffett, Simon Cowell, APPLE
    • Introduce the 3 Step Code: Framework for Consistent Influencer Marketing
    • Assignment 1: Macro Influencer Evaluation — upload to Canvas before class 3
    Assignments: Check Module 2 on Canvas
    • Readings TBD
    • Articles Evaluations/Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 3, Wed Sept 11: Start with the End in Mind
    1. Review Readings – Discussion
    2. Setting S.M.A.R.T. goals, objectives and Key Performance Indicators
    3. Influencer marketing vs Influencer advertising
    4. Identifying Influencers by starting with the Sales Funnel (AIDA+ L)
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD – Check Module 3 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/Impact Talk
    • Entry Card


                                                                                                         Page 10
Class 4, Wed, Sept 18: Who are you trying to Influence?
    • Identifying your Target Market (who is really influencing your market)
    • Creating Buyer Personas
    • The Consumer Journey
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 4 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 5, Wed Sept. 25: The Many Roles Influencers can Play
    • Influencer Marketing across your Business
    • How to leverage influencers beyond reach and awareness
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 5 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
PART 3: Step Two: OBSERVE & IDENTIFY
Class 6, Wed, Oct 2: Identifying the Right Influencer
    • Fishing Analogy
    • Where to look
    • Case: A Tale of Two Influencers
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 6 on Canvas
    • Prepare 2-3 questions for Guest Lecturer: Susan Tormollen (topic: championing employees as influencers and
         advocates)
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 7, Wed, Oct 9th: Mid-Term Campaign Analysis & Presentations
    • Identifying Influencers from the Inside
             o Brand Ambassadors
             o Championing Employees
    • Guest Lecture: Susan Tormollen
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 7 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 8, Wed, Oct 16th: Measuring the Influence of the Influencer + Crafting the Opportunity
    •    Measuring Real Influence
    •    Spotting Fake Influence
    •    Crafting the Opportunity
             o Not a quick fix
             o The place for pay-to-play
PART 4: Step Three: CONNECT


                                                                                                                Page 11
Class 9, Wed, Oct 23rd: Approaching and pitching influencers
    • Successful vs unsuccessful strategies and practices
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 10 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 10, Wed, Oct 30: The Knitty Gritty: Agreements & Contracts
    • Creating Influencer Agreements
    • Legal Implications to be aware of
    • Guest Lecture: Shane Barker
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 11 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 11, Wed, Nov 6th: Measuring Success
    • Establishing qualitative and quantitative metrics that matter for influencers
    • The HIIM Model of Measurement: Creating a narrative
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 12 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 12, Wed, Nov13th: High Impact Content
    • The Keys to Great Content
            o How to identify, facilitate, create, collaborate on, build and optimize great influencer content for campaign
                success
    Assignments:
    • Readings TBD - Check Module 13 on Canvas
    • Articles Evaluations/ Impact Talk
    • Entry Card
Class 13, Wed, Nov 20th: The Crystal Ball Predictions
    • The Future of Influencer Marketing
            o Predictions in three categories (technology, relationships, management)
    Assignments:
    • Work on Final
Class 14, Wed Dec 4th – FINAL Presentations and Course Recap:
            o You will present your team influencer plan to the class for discussion and feedback
            o You will peer evaluate each presentation using a cohesive rubric
            o Assignment: final paper and powerpoint due before class
            o Team peer evaluation


Page 12

                                                                                                                 Page 13
                                                            Appendix
                                             ADV 378 Discussion Board Guidelines
On Canvas Discussion Board.
Readings/ Articles will be posted at the end of each class and the Discussion Board will be closed at 11:59 PM on the Tuesday
before class. The purpose is to engage students with the assigned readings during the week before class. This is also a good
way for students to “speak up” online throughout the semester if they prefer not to do so in class.
If you respond to the discussion questions as posted, you will meet the quantity requirements. The quality requirement is
explained below in the appendix.
  Of 4
  points                                            Evaluation Criteria
  0        No response = No credit
  1        Responses do not directly address the essence of the questions. Instead, they touch peripherally
           and wander off track. Usually less than 200 words, or drags on beyond 300 words without making
           a substantial argument.
  2        Concise responses (200-300 words, unless otherwise indicated) that make some reference to
           the article issues/topics raised through readings/class. Conveys little evidence of a
           personal response to the issues/topics with vague information and hypothetical situations
           Regurgitations of others’ responses on the same board.
  3        Concise responses (200-300 words, unless otherwise indicated) that demonstrates awareness of
           the important issues raised through the readings and in class. Conveys evidence of a
           personal response to the issues/topics by using principles/ theories with unique and original
           application for reference based on personal experiences or publicly known events.
  4        Concise responses (200-300 words, unless otherwise indicated) that demonstrates engagement
           with the important issues raised through the readings and in lecture. Conveys extensive
           evidence of a personal response to the issues/topics by using principles/ theories covered in
           the readings and lectures, demonstrating mastery of concepts that apply to a wide range of real life
           cases. If citing/ quoting from course readings or any other reference in print, please specify source
           and page number in your responses. If referencing a website, please include the URL).


                                                                                                                   Page 14
Additional Online Sources
     •   Advertising Age - http://adage.com
     •   Digiday - http://digiday.com
     •   Kissmetrics Blog - https://blog.kissmetrics.com/
     •   MarketingLand - http://marketingland.com
     •   Marketing Sherpa - http://marketingsherpa.com
OTHER INFORMATION
Advising
Students are encouraged to keep in touch with me throughout the course. Students who wish to schedule phone calls with me
are encouraged to e-mail me in advance. Please feel free to contact me to talk. I’m happy to help any way possible, and my cell
phone number is on the first page of this document.
Program and Course Policies
All deliverables are due by the due dates identified in the Course Schedule. Make-up work and notification of faculty for all
absences from class meetings are the responsibility of the student. Students must contact faculty directly to submit any work
due in missed class sessions, which will be permitted in exceptional circumstances.
Grades of incomplete in the program are not permitted.
Students will monitor program communication channels (e-mail; Canvas) on a regular basis (at least weekly) to be aware of
current issues and events pertaining to the individual courses and the program in general.
Laptop Policy
To maintain focus on class activities, in-class laptops/tablets will need to be closed during lecture and discussion periods.
However, there will be exercises in most classes, during which they will be used. This will permit (and encourage) on-line
student involvement in these exercises through chat/Skype functions.
You should treat the classroom as you would a corporate boardroom.
Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and every class session. Students are expected to
be professional in all respects.
The Texas classroom experience is enhanced when:
•    Students arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and finish at the scheduled time. On time
     arrival shows respect for both fellow students and faculty and it enhances learning by reducing avoidable distractions.
•    Students display their name cards. This permits fellow students and faculty to learn names, enhancing opportunities for
     community building and evaluation of in-class contributions.
•    Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment improves when disruptions are limited.
•    Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning in the Stan Richards School program takes place during
     classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they cannot contribute to the overall learning process. This affects
     not only the individual, but their peers who count on them, as well.
•    Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and debate are encouraged. Intolerance for
     the views of others is unacceptable.
•    Phones and wireless devices are turned off or in airplane mode (not just on ‘silent’). While multi-tasking is the reality
     of our world today, considerable research demonstrates that it is detrimental in a *learning* situation. Learning requires
     mentally manipulating concepts; multi-tasking inhibits that. As a result, you wind up having the illusion that you’re learning
     something when sitting in class and multi-tasking. Add to that the ideas that it is not professional and it cuts off the flow of
     discussion, and the problem is multiplied. When a true need to communicate with someone outside of class exists (e.g., for
     some medical need) please inform the professor prior to class.


                                                                                                                  Page 15
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas
at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very
seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must
cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Standards of Conduct and Academic Integrity principles.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline, which typically
occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any
public Texas institution.
Religious Holy Days
Please notify me at least fourteen days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are
aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make
our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you
need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an
effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I
promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough
sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on
campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than
later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we
strongly encourage you to seek support at the Counseling and Mental Health Center.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve
their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private
learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.
For more information, please call 512-471-3614 or drop in for a visit at JES A332.
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to prevent high-risk
behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal
and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Additional Services for Students
University Writing Center
Libraries
ITS
Student Emergency Services


                                                                                                                  Page 16
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
at 512-232-5050. You can also submit a report online at the BCAL web site. Your report can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Campus Safety and Security.
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
          exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
          given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
          Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
The office of Emergency Preparedness provides information on safety apps for your mobile device, emergency preparedness
manual, and a guide for surviving an active shooter situation.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual
misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to
fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a
          Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means
that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report
any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any
faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want
to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit the Title IX Office web site or
contact them by email at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
