INTRODUCTION
TO ADVERTISING
CREATIVITY
               ADV 387, FALL 2019


                                                                         M/W 2-3:15 PM
                                                                      SEAN LABOUNTY
                                                      seanlabounty@utexas.edu
                                                                               4.208 BMC
                                                                            Office Hours
                                                                         GA: Willy Lamb
                                                             willylamb@utexas.edu
                                                           call/text 802-578-3438
PREAMBLE
Welcome to “The Creative Class.” Not this “class” here at the University, but a lucky and
select group of humans. People who get paid to create. Paid to think. Paid to make. This is a
relatively new phenomenon in the grand scheme of history. This new class of workers spans
the gamut of industries. As a friend once told me, “it’s a pretty good gig if you can get it.”
We, of course, will be discussing creativity within the realm of advertising. But more
importantly, we'll explore creativity in general. How to think, brainstorm, explore, and push
the boundaries in pursuit of that ever elusive and rare big idea.
Creative thinking is a conversation. A flow of ideas between you and others. Twisting and
stretching ideas until we find the answer. But not just any answer, THE right one. Ideas you
can be passionate about and excited to share with the world.
But at the end of the day it’s hard work that wins out, always. Talent can sleep away the day
never getting anywhere. Ideation is hard and takes time and effort to find something new.
Something bold. Something different.
If you do want to join the creative club, this class is your first step.


HOW
Think smart. Think weird. Invent. Explore. Share. You’ll attend two lectures a week and submit
lab assignments online. (You do not attend lab hours, despite what the course description
says.) Online video viewing and readings will be on Canvas. Expect to be graded on thought-
provoking (and fun) individual and group projects, an idea journal, and in-class exercises. In
addition, be prepared to live the creative life you’re studying, starting... now.
So, you have no desire to go into advertising? It doesn’t matter. All the theories and
techniques you'll learn are applicable to anything and everything that you do. We’ll...
• Talk about creative theories
• Learn about creative advertising people and perspectives from the old school
• Discuss general and advertising-specific ideation processes, tools, and products
• See industry movers and shakers
• Listen to strange and wonderful speakers who aren’t me
Project guideline sheets will be posted to Canvas prior to the discussion of each project.
MUSTS
TEXTS
HEY, WHIPPLE, SQUEEZE THIS: THE CLASSIC GUIDE TO CREATING GREAT ADS
(5th Edition) by Luke Sullivan and Edward Boches
Additional readings are posted to Canvas prior to discussion of that material.
SUPPLIES
A SKETCH BOOK TO JOURNAL IDEAS + MARKERS/COLORED PENCILS
Example: Moleskin, hardbound, 5 x 8.25 (Nothing smaller. No spiral bound. No lines or grids.
Okay, maybe grids.) The Department of Advertising at The University of Texas at Austin is
home to a world-class program for aspiring copywriters and art directors. Texas Creative
graduates can be found working across the nation and around the globe. The program is a
rigorous, fun, challenging, portfolio-building sequence of classes that will make you think in
ways you might never have thought, to produce smart, funny, engaging, relevant, jaw-
dropping advertising. Near the end of the semester, you’ll be given information on how to
apply. Your idea journal entries are taken into consideration as part of the application process.


REQUIREMENTS
DO NOT ___________:
• Skip class, be late, or leave early. The information you miss will ultimately be in the exam.
• Cheat and get caught. I take this university policy very seriously.
• Disrupt your classmates or me with things like talking, texting, emailing, surfing the web, etc.
You will be called out.
• Turn in assignments late. NO EXCEPTIONS. No really. Late = an automatic “0.” Make
arrangements with Willy to turn in assignments EARLY if you know you won’t make it to class. If
you're required to email or post online, the digital timestamp when you post the work will be
considered the time you handed it in. That item must be complete. Errors in uploading,
corrupted files, or missing emails are not excused. Technology can be a pain, so plan ahead, i.e.
DO NOT WAIT until the last minute or even hour. The work cannot be made up.
DO _________:
• Your best. I expect your work to be of the highest professional grade. Proofread, etc.
• Put your name and EID on everything you hand in. Or it will be incomplete.
• Participate in the discussion. The class will be better for it.
Student Responsibilities:
1. Students are responsible for all material covered in class, and all assigned readings and
viewings.
2. Students must complete readings and assignments by the times specified.
3. Check Canvas frequently, and make sure your email address is current with the University so
that you can receive emails sent through Canvas. It's the student’s responsibility to maintain
this email address and ensure that it is correct and able to receive messages. Check your junk
mail too.
4. This course upholds the values of the University Policy of Scholastic Dishonesty. Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more
information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php


RECCOS
BOOKS
FLOW: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF OPTIMAL EXPERIENCE by Csikszentmihalyi
THE CREATIVE PROCESS ILLUSTRATED by Griffin & Morrison
THE CREATIVE HABIT by Twyla Tharp
THE TIPPING POINT by Malcolm Gladwell
SUBSCRIBE / FOLLOW / BOOKMARK
ADWEEK
ADVERTISING AGE
CREATIVITY-ONLINE.COM
COMMUNICATION ARTS
LURZER’S ARCHIVE
GRAPHIS
HOW
THE ONE SHOW
D&AD
THEFWA.COM
ADSOFTHEWORLD.COM
ADLAND.TV
HEYWHIPPLE.COM
LIVE LIFE
Be a sponge. Get out there, observe, study, deconstruct, document, and then produce. And
repeat.


GRADES
Lab Assignments/In-Class Quizzes/Participation      20%
Mind Map                                            15%
Documenting Creativity Project                      15%
Branding Project                                    15%
Idea Journal                                        15%
Exam 1                                              10%
Exam 2                                              10%
Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum grade of C in
all communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major. If you earn less than a C
you will not be allowed to continue in the advertising program. A grade of B- or higher is required in order
to be eligible for acceptance into Texas Creative.
Final letter grades are calculated as follows:
A 93.5 and up A- 89.5 to 93.4 B+ 86.5 to 89.4 B 83.5 to 86.4 B- 79.5 to 83.4 C+ 76.5 to 79.4
C 73.5 to 76.4 C- 69.5 to 73.4 D+ 66.5 to 69.4 D 63.5 to 66.4 D- 59.5 to 63.4 F 59.4 and down
You have one week from the date a grade is announced/returned to you to contest it. No grade changes
will be made at any point after this period. A week is seven days. Not 10 days. Not 7 business days. No time
off for holidays. This is one place where creativity doesn’t work. Keep in mind that I reserve the right to
adjust your grade EITHER WAY if you contest it. You’re asking me to take another look. Sometimes I don’t
like what I see the second time. Pick your battles.
I curve, I drop the occasional quiz, and I round up final grades. Why? Because I’m a nice guy. That’s all the
help you get. There are no extra points given because you’re “SO CLOSE” to an A, or to passing, or to the
Dean of the department. So don’t ask.


INFO
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written
work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/
#universitycodeofconduct
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-232-2937 (video phone).
Scholastic Dishonesty Statement
The Department of Advertising has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the College of
Communication. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this
class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced.
Campus Policy on Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a


work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support
for your learning.
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
email address. You should check your email regularly and frequently—I recommend daily—to
stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You
can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at http://
www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Emergency Evacuation Recommendations
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
Office of Campus Safety and Security: 512-471-5767 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency/
Policy on Campus Carry
In the development of the policies adopted by President Fenves to comply with the law in a
way that prioritizes the safety of everyone on the campus, the concealed carry of handguns is
strictly prohibited in my office.


WHEN
While I'll make every effort to maintain this schedule, it's subject to change, depending on
class progress, unforeseen amazing opportunities, and other surprises.
MONDAYS                                                    WEDNESDAYS
                                                           28 AUG Introduction
                                                           4 SEPT Defining Creativity
09 SEPT Defining Creativity                                11 SEPT Creativity, Theories & Ideation
16 SEPT Creativity, Theories, & Ideation                   18 SEPT Theories & Ideation
23 SEPT Art+Copy Movie                                     25 SEPT Agencies, Players, & Creative
MIND MAPS DUE                                                Revolutions
30 SEPT Storytelling & Creative Concepts                   02 OCT Guest Speaker
07 OCT Copywriting                                         09 OCT Art Direction & Branding
14 OCT Exam Review                                         16 OCT EXAM 1
21 OCT Guest Speaker                                       23 OCT Team Pitches
                                                           DOCUMENTING CREATIVITY DUE
28 OCT Nontraditional Branding                             30 OCT New Media & Digital
04 NOV New Media & Digital                                 06 NOV The Edge Today
11 NOV The Edge Today                                      13 NOV BRANDING PROJECT DUE
18 NOV Client Pitches                                      20 NOV Guest Speaker
25 NOV Ethical Considerations                              27 NOV Creative Panel Discussion,
                                                           IDEA JOURNAL DUE
02 DEC Exam Review                                         04 DEC EXAM 2


WHO
SEAN LaBOUNTY
       seanlabounty@utexas.edu
       BMC 4.302
Education
       UT Austin, Texas Creative 1997
       NYU Film 2003
Dimassimo (DIGO)
1997-1998 Art Director / Crunch Fitness, Game Shark, Solgar Vitamins
Kirshenbaum & Bond
1998-2002 Art Director / Target, Sony, Hennessy, Moet, Olympics
NYU Film / Started Fashion Label / Freelance
2002-2004 Freelance A.D. for Cliff Freeman, Wieden and Kennedy, SS+K and EVB
Mohegan Sun, ESPN, Fathead, Michael Jordan
Hanft Raboy
2004-2006 Creative Director / Match.com, Hertz, Chemistry.com
Leo Burnett NY
2006-2007 VP / Creative Director / Global Samsung
Young & Rubicam NY
2007-2011 Creative Director / LG, Land Rover, Dell, Met Life
DDB
2011-2012 Creative Director / NY Lottery, NYC Ballet, Drugfree.org
GSD&M
2012-2014 Creative Director / Southwest, Seton, Jarritos, Walgreen’s, PGA
McCann
2014-2015 Creative Director / Cuervo, Bushmills, Microsoft, Nikon
Awards
       CANNES LIONS, D&AD, ONE SHOW, CLIOS, AICP, AICP NEXT,
       NEW YORK FESTIVALS, YGA
