              Syllabus: New Media & Entrepreneurialism
                  ADV 332C (05955), PR 332C (06485)
Day & Time Thursday | 12:30 – 3:30 p.m.
Location       BMC 2.106
Professor      Mark Bunting
               markb@skytv.net (Office hours in BMC 4.310 –appointment only)
Teaching Assistants
    ●  Robyn Archer
       robynarcher@utexas.edu | (713) 447 - 4886
    ●  Maris Moreno
       marismoreno@utexas.edu | (484) 798 - 2611
PLEASE CONTACT ASSISTANTS FOR ANY QUESTIONS CONCERNING ATTENDANCE, GRADES,
ET. Do not contact Professor Bunting directly for attendance and grading questions.
Enrollment Course is designed as an elective for students in the schools of
Business, Engineering, Liberal Arts and Communications
Facebook       UT AdTech https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech
The Course Disruption has dramatically redefined the delivery of content and the
financial models around it. This has created an abundance of opportunities for the
entrepreneur within traditional media and budding start-ups alike.
We will bring real-life experience/exposure for those who hope to enter this
important arena with a series of interviews with real-life practitioners from social
media, venture capital, and others with expertise in this important arena.
In addition, we will explore some important trends in digital content and the business
models they are creating. This is NOT a course focused on journalism but rather a
primer for those who wish to learn about entrepreneurialism, technology and its
intersection with media.
Taking a cue from Inside the Actors Studio, this weekly 3-hour class will include guest
speakers from a variety of disciplines. Professor Mark Bunting is the former television
host of many popular computer programs from CNBC, The Discovery Channel and
The Learning Channel,


                     https://www.linkedin.com/in/markbunting/.
As a serial entrepreneur in both technology and media, Mark will expose students to
a broad spectrum of speakers within the industry. Students will also have an
opportunity to meet each guest and “network” with these highly influential leaders.
Materials       Entrepreneurship Modules by G51 EDU ($99 online). You can sign up
at the URL below. If you have previously purchased an older version of G51 you will
receive ½ (50%) off (Please contact your Teaching Assistant if this applies to you).
Spring 2020 includes newer material not previously published. Students enrolled in
both of Bunting’s classes will be required to purchase separate licenses for each
course (It’s different material).
 https://g51edu.com/courses/new-media-entrepreneurialism/
Students must complete each module before their assigned classes, this includes
watching all 4 videos and reviewing all lesson slides. A completion report with the
time spent on each module will be sent to the Teaching Assistants at 6 a.m. CST the
morning after their due date. Incomplete work or work completed after the deadline
will not be accepted. NO EXCEPTIONS. Students are expected to be familiar with the
content before the class so they can contribute to the dialogue and ask the guest
speakers relevant questions. The material covered may be included in one or both
exams.
Grading
Attendance - 50%
Students are allowed ONE excused absence for the semester without penalty. Being           Commented [1]: We had this in the syllabus this past
                                                                                           semester, but we did not enforce it due to the 2
absent for classes will result in a significant reduction of your grade for the course. If absence rule...Should we enforce it for the 1 absence
a student misses a class for any reason, it is the student’s responsibility to be informed rule as a way for us to double check?
of the materials covered during the class. Absences beyond the 1 excused allotted will
affect your final grade as follows:
# of Absences          Points off Final Average
        2                      -3
        3                      -15
        4                      (failed)
This is a lecture and guest speaker heavy experience – your attendance is mandatory
and ONLY excused if it is recorded and excused by Student Services. NO EXCEPTIONS.
Students must be ON TIME for attendance to be counted. Any student that comes into
class 10 minutes or more after the official start of class (12:30) is considered LATE
and will not be given an attendance slip. Lastly any student caught cheating on
attendance will be treated under the Academic Dishonesty protocol.


Exams - 35%
There will be two closed-book exams during the semester according to the following
tentative schedule:
       Exam 1: March 26th
       Exam 2: May 7th
Each exam accounts for 17.5% of your class grade. The exams will be completed in
class on a laptop through Canvas and will consist of true/false questions, multiple-
choice questions and/or short answer questions based on course material covered
prior to the exam date.
Entrepreneurship Modules - 15%
Both modules must be completed by their respective deadline and date/time
stamped accordingly. NO EXCEPTIONS. Projects completed on time score 100%.
Projects completed after the due date score at 50%.
Enrollment Deadline: February 6, 2020
Complete Module 1: 6 Tenets of Entrepreneurship 11:59pm CST 2/12/2020
Complete Module 2: Unique Value Propositions 11:59pm CST 2/19/2020
Grading Schema
Attendance                       50%
Exams                            35%
Entrepreneurship Modules         15%
A = 90-100%, B = 80-89%, C = 70-79%, D = 60-69 %, F = below 60%. Fractions of
points will be rounded: .50 or higher upwards, .49 or lower downwards. Plus/minus
will not be assigned to the letter grades.
Course Procedures
1.     Canvas (http://courses.utexas.edu): Canvas and classroom announcements
       will serve as communication vehicles for this course. Please check Canvas for
       PowerPoint slides for a class session, as well as for other session-related
       materials. In order to ensure that you receive all information sent out through
       Canvas,     please     update     your     email     address    on    UTDirect
       (www.utdirect.utexas.edu). Tests will also be administered via Canvas, so
       please bring laptops to class on test days.


   2. Facebook:       Please      like    the    UT    ADTECH      Facebook      Page:
       www.facebook.com/UtAdTech. This source will list additional information
       such as blog posts, articles and other content which may be relevant to in-class
       discussion.
   3. In Class Conduct: NO ELECTRONICS - Use of laptop computers, cell phones,
       mobile tablets and other electronic devices during class session is prohibited.
       NOISE DURING LECTURES AND SPEAKERS IS HIGHLY DISRUPTIVE. Quiet is
       required!
   4. Academic Dishonesty: All students are expected to act within and uphold
       the UT Honor Code fully. You may access the General Information Catalog to
       review specific University policies on scholastic dishonesty or refer to the
       Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
       Any students caught cheating on exams or attendance will be dismissed from
       class under the authority of the Academic Dishonesty policies.
A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
