             ARCHAEOLOGICAL FIELD SCHOOL - BELIZE
                                   ANTHROPOLOGY 662
                                st
                    Summer (1 Session) 2019, Belize, Central America
Instructor*:            Fred Valdez                    471-0060 office
                        SAC 4.162                      471-5946 lab.
                        Hrs.: 24/7*                    fredv@mail.utexas.edu
Teaching Assts.*:       TAs = Patricia Neuhoff-Malorzo and Zachary Stanyard
                        TA contact information will be provided in the field.
                        * Please note that Prof. Valdez and the TAs are available on a 24-
                        hour basis in the field. We are with students each day & evening
                        during field time and at camp.
READINGS:               MAYA by M. Coe and S. Houston
                        Other readings and required lectures are provided in the field/camp
                        & based on the class/group’s progress.
COURSE CONTENT: The Belize Field School (ANT 662) is a practical course
providing direct/first-hand experiences for students in a field setting. Archaeological
methods/techniques are reviewed and practiced. Methods may include excavation,
survey, plan mapping, profile definitions, among other opportunities. Additionally, all
students have a lab rotation to learn laboratory processing and exposure to various
material culture (lithics, ceramics, etc.). These items are the placed into context of ancient
interactions between the Maya, Olmec, Teotihuacanos, and others. We review and put
into practice methods for handling ancient objects and the responsibilities of proper
curation and management of artifact.
All participants are assigned to a different archaeological site/activity each week to
provide students exposure to differing archaeological situations. Satisfactory completion
of the course/program includes camp chores, collaboration, and being good colleagues.
At the completion of the field program, each participant will have experienced many
facets of archaeological research, cultural awareness, and be significantly knowledgeable
of many logistical requirements for a field program… from working within our camp
group(s) to interacting with local communities (Mestizo, Mennonite, Creole, etc.).
Additionally, students are reminded of ethical concerns when working in a foreign setting
and the interaction with ancient materials/remains a well as with contemporary
communities.


                         ANTHROPOLOGY 662
                SUMMER 2018 -- SCHEDULE OF CLASSES*
Dates                 Topics and Subjects
May 26 – June 23      Introduction/orientation to camp and field life in
                      archaeological research.
                      History of the Programme for Belize Archaeological
                      Project (PfBAP), both field research & camp structure.
                      Brief background to Maya chronology & Mesoamerica.
                      Information about various cultural groups in Belize.
                      Practical archaeology – daily field research including
                      excavation techniques and proper archaeological recording.
                      Laboratory rotations, artifact processing, etc.
June 18               Last day in camp, clean-up, bar-b-que.
June 19-23            Four-day optional break (Cayes, Guatemala/Tikal, Local
                      Cultural Interaction(s), etc.).
June 23               Departure from Belize International Airport.
*This schedule is an approximation of dates for topics, activities, etc. Any
significant changes will be announced as early as possible. Included within the
schedule is the showing of films, slides, guest presentations, and any other
activities deemed appropriate for this course.
