                                      U. S. Immigration
                                     SOC f322U (83755)
                                    MAS f374 42 (82525)
                           Prerequisite: Upper division standing
                              The University of Texas at Austin
                                        Summer 2019
                                        June 5-July 13
Instructor: Professor Nestor Rodriguez
CLA 3.528, (nrodriguez@austin.utexas.edu), (512) 232-8072
Office hours: M-F, 12:00-1:00PM, and by appointment (please let me know if you are
coming to office hours)
Teaching Assistant: Elizabeth A. Mimmons
                                    I. Course Rationale
Immigration patterns have significantly affected the development of U.S. society since
its beginning. No country accepts more immigrants than the United States; yet, the
history of US immigration is dotted with policies to restrict immigration. In the 1990s,
the United States experienced a record number of new legal immigrants, breaking the
1900-1909 record, and in 2000-2009 the number of immigrants admitted again set a
record. At the same time, the United States deported record numbers of migrants. This
course uses a sociological perspective to gain an understanding of what social forces
drive immigration in the United States, how immigrants organize their migration, and
what impacts immigration has on US society. In addition, the course addresses current
policies affecting immigration patterns.
                              II. Course Aims and Objectives
Aims
 This course is designed to provide a sociological understanding of the composition and
dynamics of immigration in U.S. society, including an understanding of how immigration
affects large (macro) and small (micro) social units in the society, and especially to
emphasize the structural underpinnings of migration patterns.
Specific Learning Objectives
• Gain background information on the development of immigration patterns in U.S.
    society and discuss the social forces that affect these patterns from the perspective
    of historical and recent immigration trends.
•   Review and discuss different perceptions about immigration patterns.
•   Review and use government online sources concerning annual immigration numbers
    and characteristics.


                                                                                             2
•   Develop an awareness of the significance of immigration for the development of U.S.
    society.
•   Review major laws affecting migration patterns to U.S. society
Cultural Diversity Objective Flag:
“This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity
courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.”
                                 III. Format and Procedures
The course is designed with the expectation that it will follow an intertwined format of
lectures and class discussions. A key expectation is that students will come to class
prepared to discuss thematic issues covered in the class, or at least come to class with
a curious and critical predisposition to become intellectually engaged in the class. All
students are expected to contribute to class discussion, with a high regard for an open
academic dialogue, which values respect for the ideas, opinions, and views of others.
Class attendance is required but not graded.
                     IV. Assumptions about International Migration
Migration has been an indispensable resource for human development. My
assumptions about the nature of immigration in U.S. society is that it a) follows an
historical course, b) flows from the interaction between human agency and social
structures, c) takes normal paths of social division and degrees of social incorporation
and accommodation, d) is partly affected by social constructions regarding different
racial/ethnic and national-origin groups, and e) has its most profound significance within
the process of social reproduction.
                                   V. Course Requirements
1. Class attendance and participation policy
    Class attendance is required but not graded. To get the most out of this class you
    should attend all classes and arrive on time. Also, you should review previous
    lecture notes and bring questions to class about points you did not clearly
    understand—including points from the assigned readings. Please be attentive in
    class (turn off phones or set to vibration). You are greatly encouraged to participate
    in class discussion, and please do so in a manner that respects the rights of others
    to also participate. If you have a problem hearing the lectures and discussion, or
    viewing class presentations, please let me know immediately.
    Religious Holidays
    UT Austin policy requires that you notify course instructors at least 14 days in
    advance if you plan to be absent due to a religious holiday. You will be given an
    opportunity to make up activities (exams, assignments, etc.) that you miss because
    of your absence due to a religious holiday. You will be given a reasonable time to
    make up an exam or assignment after your absence.


                                                                                          3
2. Course Readings/Materials
     a) Required books/readings:
     •   Portes, Alejandro, and Rubén Rumbaut. 2014. Immigrant America: A Portrait.
         4th ed., Berkeley: University of California Press. (PR)
     •   Mobasher, Mohsen M. 2012. Iranians in Texas: Migration, Politics, and Ethnic
         Identity. Austin: University of Texas Press. (M)
3. Assignments, Assessments, Evaluation, Dates
a) Exams: The course contains two regular exams. Exams will consist of 50 multiple-
choice items. All exams must be taken on the dates specified; the only exceptions to
this rule are cases involving an emergency, as authorized by UT Austin. In such
exceptional cases, makeup exams must be taken within a week after the originally
designated dates in the specified sociology room for makeups. Makeup exams will
consist of essay questions only. Students who miss a scheduled exam must alert me of
the TA beforehand and consult with either me or the TA regarding the makeup. Regular
exams cannot be taken earlier or later than the dates and times specified.
b) Course Paper: Students are required to write a short paper discussing and
comparing two research journal articles with a minimum of 1,600 words of discussion
due on July 5. See Appendix below for paper instructions.
c) All dates specified in this syllabus for course topics, exams, and papers are subject to
change given unforeseen developments.
Use of Canvas: It is my intention to use Canvas to make announcements, distribute
information, communicate with students, and post grades. Students are encouraged to
use Canvas to communicate and share comments and information. Please check your
Canvas site regularly to look for communications from me or from other students in the
class. Support for using Canvas can be obtained from the following websites:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/welcome-to-canvas;
http://guides.instructure.com/m/4212.
                                          VI. Grading
a) Two exams of 50 multiple-choice items (100 points each).
    • 100 points per exam x 2 exams = 200 points
b) Paper requirement worth 50 points
Total possible points = 250
c) Letter grades based on percentage of points earned of possible 250 cumulative
points:


                                                                                             4
A = .93-1.00       A-= .90-.92
B+= .87-.89        B = .83-.86    B-= .80-.82
C+= .77-.79        C = .73-.76    C-= .70-.72
D+= .67-.69        D = .63-.66    D-=.60-.62
F= .59 or lower
                                  VII. Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code: "As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity."
All students in the course are expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code.
Students are encouraged to study together, but they must do their own work on the
research report assignments and on the exams. Students suspected of copying from
the work of someone else or of committing plagiarism, or cheating on exams, will be
reported to the Dean’s Office and other administrators of the University.
                        VIII. Other University Notices and Policies
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to
your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I
recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies
and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Also, you can find information about IT support at http://www.utexas.edu/its/helpdesk/;
please check the website for dates and hours.
Documented Disability Statement
If you require special accommodations, please obtain a letter that documents your
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement Call 512-471-6259, Videophone 512-410-6644, Email
ssd@austin.utexas.edu. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we
can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an
exam, you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more
information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
 Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
 behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
 of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
 Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
 Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


                                                                                          5
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and
assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please
be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
  • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
     Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you
     entered the building.
  • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
     class.
  • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
  • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
     Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
     office.
  • Students requiring assistance in evacuation need to inform the class instructor in
     writing of their needs during the first week of class. This information will then be
     provided to the Fire Prevention Services office by fax (512-232-2759), with "Attn.
     Mr. Roosevelt Easley" written in the subject line.
  • As part of the University’s emergency preparation, the University will have
     monthly emergency communications test (every first Wednesday at 11:50 a.m.))
     and the list of communications channels the university uses during emergencies.
  • Please review additional emergency information concerning means of
     emergency communication at the following website:
     http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/communication
  • Lockdown: The directive “Lockdown” is used to protect occupants in proximity
     of an immediate threat by limiting access to buildings and rooms. If no specific
     locations are given, all buildings should initiate lockdown procedures.
  • Shelter-in-Place:
     For weather:
     1. Go to the lowest level of the building if possible.
     2. Stay away from the windows.
     3. Go to interior hallways and rooms.
     4. Use arms to protect head and neck in a “drop and tuck” position.
     5. Monitor emergency communications for specific instructions (www.utexas.edu/
        emergency).
     For environmental incidents (chemical, biological, or radiological releases):
     1. Go inside the nearest building.
     2. Close all doors, windows, and other inlets from the outside.
     3. Shut down the fresh air intake or HVAC system if possible.
     4. Monitor emergency communications for specific instructions (www.utexas.edu/
     emergency).
     5. Please review the UT document “Emergency Terms”:
     http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/terms/.
     Further UT emergency information can be found at:
     http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/


                                                                                                     6
                                       IX. Course Schedule
  This syllabus represents the initial design of the course. Changes concerning specific
  substantive content and dates may have to be made to increase the class learning
  opportunity. Any such changes that are made will be communicated clearly and are a
  normal part of the management of a course.
  (PR = Portes and Rumbaut; M = Mobahser)
Week     Date     Topic                         Readings
1                                               PR-chap 1
         June
                  1) Introduction to course     M-chap 1
         6-13
                                                Research websites:
                  2) Update on immigration
                  issues affecting migrants     Migration Policy Institute:
                                                http://www.migrationpolicy.org/
                  3) Approaches to migration
                  research
                                                DHS/Immigration Statistics:
                                                https://www.dhs.gov/yearbook-immigration-statistics
                                                US Customs and Border Protection
                                                https://www.cbp.gov/newsroom/stats/sw-border-
                                                migration/usbp-sw-border-apprehensions
                                                Pew Research Center:
2        June     4) Cycles of migration        PR – chap 2-3
         14-20
                  5) Migration theories         M-chap 2
                  6) Mexican migration decline
                                                Recommended library readings:
                                                    •    Massey et al., 1993, “Theories of International
                                                         Migration: A Review and Appraisal,” Population and
                                                         Development Review, Vol. 19, No. 3, pp. 431-466
                                                    •    Erika Lee, “The Chinese Exclusion Example,”
                                                         Journal of American History, 21 (3), 2002.
                                                http://www.pewhispanic.org/2015/11/19/chapter-1-
                                                migration-flows-between-the-u-s-and-mexico-have-
                                                slowed-and-turned-toward-mexico/
3        June     6) Central American           PR-chap 4
         21-26
                  migration surge               M-chap 3
                  7) Surge of migrant children
                  and “family units”            US Census Bureau:
                  8) IIRIRA of 1996             https://www.census.gov


                                                                                                 7
                                               https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/trump-
                                               administration-new-indefinite-family-detention-policy
          June    Exam 1 (Exam on 28th)
          27- 28
4         July    9) Immigration Control       PR-chaps 5
          1-5
                  (DHS/ICE); Endgame           M-chap 4
                  10) Detention and            Border Control:
                  Deportation                  https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/trump-
                  Paper due (July 5)           administration-new-indefinite-family-detention-policy
5         July 8- 11) Gender in migration      PR- chap 7
          10
                  13) Immigrant Social         M-chap 5
                  incorporation                Policy changes:
                  14) Recent policy changes    https://www.migrationpolicy.org/research/immigration-policy-
                                               changes-two-years-trump-administration
          July    Exam 2 (Sat, July 13, 9:00-
          11, 13
                  10:30am)
                           Appendix: Research Paper Assignment
  The purpose of this short research paper (1,600 words minimum) is to give you an
  opportunity to extend your familiarity with published research materials—the journal
  research article—in the field of immigration/migration research. In the paper, please use
  double-space, 12-point font, with 1.0-1.25-inch margins, and number every page. You
  may print on the back side of the sheets, if you wish.
  Select two (2) articles to read and review on the same topic from research journals.
  Some suggested journals are the following: 1) International Migration Review, 2)
  Migration Studies, 3) Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 4) International Migration,
  5) Migration Letters, 6) Comparative Migration Studies, 7) Journal of Identity and
  Migration Studies, 8) Asian & Pacific Migration Journal, 9) International Journal of
  Migration and Border Studies, 10) Journal on Migration and Human Security, 11)
  Migraciones (Spanish), 12) hommes et migrations (French).
  For the paper-
  1. Describe the topic of the articles you selected to read and review. Explain why this
  topic is important.


                                                                                      8
2. Describe the argument or hypotheses introduced by the author(s) at the beginning of
each paper.
3. Give a detailed description of the research methods used in each paper. This
includes describing the research population and research site, and how the data used in
the paper were collected from the research populations.
4. Describe the papers’ research findings and the conclusions given by the authors in
each paper.
5. Give your own assessment/evaluation of the papers in terms of strengths and
weaknesses if they are present. Did you find that one paper was superior to the second
paper in some important respect? If yes, in what way? How would you have done the
research differently if you had been one of the authors?
