                      INTRODUCTION TO ARCHAEOLOGICAL STUDIES
                                                   ANT 304
                                                31480-31505
                                                 Spring 2019
                                  Lecture: GEA 105, M/W 9:00-9:50 am
 Labs: SAC 4.174: 31480, F 9-10 am; 31485, W 12-1 pm; 31490, M 2-3 pm; 31495, W 2-3 pm;
                                     31500, F 3-4 pm; 31505, W 4-5 pm
Instructor: Professor R. Alan Covey
         Office: CLA 4.406; E-mail: r.alan.covey@austin.utexas.edu; Phone: (512) 232-2084
         Office Hours: M/W 10-11 am and by appointment. Please schedule on Canvas!
TAs:     Julia Earle (Lab Sections 31459 and 31500)
                  Office: SAC 4.166; E-mail: jearle@utexas.edu
                  Office hours: Thursdays 12-2 pm, and by appointment
         Fatemeh Ghaheri (Lab Sections 31485 and 31505)
                  Office: SAC 5.114; E-mail: fatemeh.gh@utexas.edu
                  Office hours: Wednesdays, 3-4 pm, and by appointment
         Anya Gruber (Lab Sections 31480 and 31490)
                  Office: SAC 5.114 (Desk #14) E-mail: anyagruber@utexas.edu
                  Office hours: Tuesdays 1-3 pm, and by appointment
Table of Contents
 I. Rationale……………………….1                 VI. Course Requirements……….5         IX. Other University Notices and
 II. Course Aims and Objectives…2           • Attendance and participation Policies…………………….……8
      • Aims                                • Religious Holy Days               • Use of e-mail
      • Specific Learning Objectives        • Readings/Materials                • Documented Disability
 III. Format and Procedures………2             • Assignments/Assessments              Statement
 IV. Tentative Course Schedule.....2        • Use of Canvas                    • Behavior Concerns Advice
 V. My Assumptions……………..5              VII. Grading Procedures………..7              Line (BCAL)
                                        VIII. Academic Integrity…….….8          • Q-drop Policy
                                             • UT Honor Code
I. Rationale: Archaeology covers a critical part of the human past—from the cultural
development of our hominin ancestors to the invention of writing (and beyond). Overlapping
with the time scales of both geology and history, archaeology uses the material record to tell the
story of how we became human, and how human societies developed from small bands of mobile
hunter-gatherers into the states and empires we know from the historical record. Archaeology
explores the global human experience, and its core themes remain important to understanding
today’s world: human-environment dynamics, the social construction of inequality, and the
social and ecological impact of urban life. Understanding the human experience from the
archaeological viewpoint offers a deep perspective on the world that we live in today.
Global Cultures Flag: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
                                                        1


II. Course Aims and Objectives:
Aims: Required readings, lectures, and lab sections are designed to work together to achieve
several core aims. These include presentation of the basic facts of world prehistory, discussion
of key conceptual issues in archaeology, consideration of the methods that archaeologists use to
reconstruct the past, and the limitations of archaeological knowledge.
Real-Life Skills: This class focuses on developing basic skills that employers look for. Reading
assignments are designed to develop skills in rapid information processing and self-organized
work. The attendance requirement for lectures promotes consistent work performance. Lab
activities are designed to build team-based problem solving and data analytics skills.
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
         •   demonstrate mastery of the key facts of world prehistory by successfully answering
             multiple-choice questions drawn from required readings during lecture meetings.
         •   show a critical understanding of key issues in world prehistory by writing responses
             to a range of questions on long-term developments of human social organization.
         •   express a knowledge of important questions of archaeological methods and
             professional practice by successfully completing laboratory activities.
III. Format and Procedures: There are three important parts of this course: 1. Individual
preparation. Students are expected to come to lectures and lab sections having already read the
required reading for that day. 2. Lecture (M/W, 9-10 am) will present a global overview of
world prehistory and key concepts in archaeology. Lectures are intended to clarify student
questions about required readings and to frame them conceptually. 3. Laboratory sections,
focus on archaeological methods and professional practice. Students will engage in discussions
and will work together to complete short activities.
IV. Tentative Course Schedule: * Required article **This syllabus represents my current plans and
objectives. As we go through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class learning
opportunity. Such changes, communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
                                       WEEK 1: INTRODUCTION
Wednesday, January 23: Course introduction
LAB: NO LAB
                                             WEEK 2: ORIGINS
Monday, January 28: The Origins of Archaeology
         Readings: Scarre, Ch. 1 (Introduction)
Wednesday, January 30: Paleoanthropology and Early Human Dispersals
         Readings: Scarre, Chs. 2-3 (African Origins; Hominin Dispersals in the Old World)
LAB 1: Paleoanthropology Lab
                            WEEK 3: MODERN HUMAN MIGRATIONS
Monday, February 4: The Rise of Modern Humans
         Readings: Scarre, Ch. 4 (The Rise of Modern Humans)
                                                        2


Wednesday, February 6: Peopling of the Americas
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 5 (The Origins, Antiquity, and Dispersal of the First Americans)
LAB 2: Site Formation Processes and Regional Survey Lab
                        WEEK 4: ARCHAEOLOGICAL METHODS
Monday, February 11: Tools of the Trade: Archaeological Methods I
      Reading: TBA
Wednesday, February 13: Tools of the Trade: Archaeological Methods II
      Reading: TBA
LAB 3: Excavation Lab
                              WEEK 5: TRANSFORMATIONS
Monday, February 18: Holocene Transformations and Social Evolution
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 6 (The World Transformed); Gignoux et al. 2011*
Wednesday, February 20: EXAM 1
LAB 4: Relative Chronology Lab
            WEEK 6: TRANSFORMATIONS OF THE ANCIENT NEAR EAST
Monday, February 25: From Foraging to Farming
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 7 (From Foragers to Complex Societies in SW Asia)
Wednesday, February 27: Cities, States, and the Invention of History
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 13 (Peoples and Complex Societies of Ancient SW Asia)
LAB 5: Absolute Chronology Lab
        WEEK 7: EUROPE FROM COLONIZATION TO THE ROMAN EMPIRE
Monday, March 4: The Spread of Farming in Europe
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 12 (Holocene Europe)
Wednesday, March 6: Social Power and the Rise of Empire
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 14 (The Mediterranean World)
LAB 6: Artifact Analysis Lab (Lithics)
                     WEEK 8: EAST ASIA UNTIL THE HAN EMPIRE
Monday, March 11: Transitions to Agriculture in East Asia
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 8 (East Asian Agriculture and Its Impact)
Wednesday, March 13: Emergence of Urbanism and Statecraft
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 16 (Complex Societies of East and Southeast Asia)
LAB 7: Material Evidence of Social Organization
                   NO CLASS OR LAB MARCH 18-20 (SPRING BREAK)
                    WEEK 9: SOUTH ASIA AND HOLOCENE AFRICA
Monday, March 25: South Asia
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 15 (South Asia from Early Villages to Buddhism)
Wednesday, March 27: Holocene Africa
      Readings: Scarre, Ch. 11 (Holocene Africa), pp. 344-365, 375-387
LAB 8: Household Archaeology Lab
                               WEEK 10: ANCIENT EGYPT
                                              3


Monday, April 1: Ancient Egyptian Civilization
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 11 (Holocene Africa), pp. 365-375
Wednesday, April 3: EXAM 2
LAB 9: Mortuary Archaeology Lab
      WEEK 11: HUMAN COLONIZATION AND COMPLEXITY ACROSS OCEANIA
Monday, April 8: Colonization and Human Adaptation in Australia
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 9 (Sections on Australia and Tasmania)
Wednesday, April 10: Domestication, Social Complexity, and Migration in Oceania
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 9 (Sections on Melanesia and Polynesia); Denham 2011*
LAB 10: Campus Monumentality Lab
                         WEEK 12: NORTH AMERICAN PREHISTORY
Monday April 15: Peopling of North America
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 10 (Origins of Food-Producing Economies in Americas)
Wednesday, April 17: Domestication, Diffusion, and Social Complexity
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 19 (Complex Societies of North America)
LAB 11: Social Status Lab
             WEEK 13: MESOAMERICAN PEOPLES BEFORE THE CONQUEST
Monday, April 22: Origins of Mesoamerican Farming and Village Societies
        Readings: Review Scarre, Ch. 10; Neff 2011*
Wednesday, April 24: The Mesoamerican Civilizations
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 17 (Mesoamerican Civilization)
LAB 12: Public Archaeology Lab (Blanton Museum)
                     WEEK 14: THE RISE OF ANDEAN CIVILIZATIONS
Monday, April 29: Human Survival in the Andes
        Readings: Review Scarre, Ch. 10; Jolie et al. 2011*; Dillehay et al. 2012*
Wednesday, May 1: Andean Statecraft to Inca Times
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 18 (From Village to Empire in South America)
LAB 13: Human-Environment Interaction Lab
                            WEEK 15: THE FUTURE OF THE PAST
Monday, May 6: The Future of the Past
        Readings: Scarre, Ch. 20 (Retrospect and Prospect)
Wednesday, May 8: EXAM 3
LAB 14: Space Archaeology
V. My Assumptions
        I approach this course with the assumption that most students have no prior background
in archaeology, and that most are taking the course to fulfill a university curriculum requirement
or to explore a curiosity about archaeology. I try to teach with this in mind, so I focus the
content on basic facts and concepts, as well as a discussion of key sites and controversies. For
me, one of the most important things about archaeology is that the story of the human past is still
                                                 4


being discovered, so I try to teach this class in a way that helps students to know how we know
what we know, and how we might learn more in the future.
VI. Course Requirements:
         1.   Attendance and participation policy:
On-time attendance for the entire lecture is required, and is part of your course grade (see
section VII below). Class meetings will review required readings, present new information, and
evaluate student mastery of assigned readings. Lab attendance is required, and any student who
misses more than four labs, regardless of performance in the rest of the class, will automatically
receive an F in the class. Respect is a central expectation for lectures and labs. This means
appropriate use of technology and refraining from distracting or disruptive behavior. Laptops
and tablets are permitted in the lecture hall for note-taking and taking quizzes in Squarecap.
Please limit your device use to class activities. Mobile phones should be switched off or into
silent mode, and should not be used in the classroom. Appropriate use of technology
communicates respect for other students and for the instructor; failure to do so may result in you
being asked to leave the lecture.
         Religious Holy Days
         By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
         observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
         project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
         within a reasonable time after the absence.
         2.   Course Readings/Materials: Almost all course readings will come from two required
              books, which should both be available from the Co-op:
Scarre, Chris, ed. 2013. The Human Past, 4th edition. Thames and Hudson. This is a world
prehistory text that will be read alongside class lectures.
In addition to the required books, the following articles are required readings for the course.
These are freely available through UT’s electronic journals subscriptions, and if possible, a pdf
file of each reading will be placed on Canvas prior to the class meeting. Students are responsible
for accessing these readings.
         Denham, Tim. 2011. Early Agriculture and Plant Domestication in New Guinea and
Island Southeast Asia. Current Anthropology 52(S4):S379-S395.
         Dillehay, Tom D., Duccio Bonavia, Steve L. Goodbred, Jr., Mario Pino, Victor Vásquez,
and Teresa Rosales Tham. A Late Pleistocene Human Presence at Huaca Prieta, Peru, and Early
Pacific Coastal Adaptations. Quaternary Research 77(3):418-423.
         Earle, Timothy K., and Robert W. Preucel. 1987. Processual Archaeology and the
Radical Critique. Current Anthropology 28(4):501-538.
         Gignoux, Christopher R., Brenna M. Henn, and Joanna L. Mountain. 2011. Rapid,
Global Demographic Expansions after the Origins of Agriculture. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 108(15):6044-6049.
         Jolie, Edward A., Thomas F. Lynch, Phil R. Geib, and J. M. Adovasio. 2011. Cordage,
Textiles, and the Late Pleistocene Peopling of the Andes. Current Anthropology 52(2):285-296.
                                                            5


        Neff, Hector. 2011. Evolution of the Mesoamerican Mother Culture. Ancient
Mesoamerica 22(1):107-122.
        Smith, Michael E., Gary M. Feinman, Robert D. Drennan, Timothy Earle, and Ian
Morris. 2012. Archaeology as a Social Science. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 109(20):7617-7621.
        Wilmshurst, Janet M., Terry L. Hunt, Carl P. Lipo, and Atholl J. Anderson. 2011. High-
Precision Radiocarbon Dating Shows Recent and Rapid Initial Human Colonization of East
Polynesia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108(5):1815-1820.
Squarecap: This course will use Squarecap (www.squarecap.com) to administer in-class quizzes
and evaluate attendance. Each student will need to purchase a subscription by the end of the trial
period for the software. Students should report any technical problems with the software to a TA
at the end of the class when the issue arises.
        3.   Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
Lab Work: Because most lab work is collaborative, there are no extensions or make-ups for
missed labs. Students must protect lab equipment and teaching collections and use them
according to the rules that we will specify during the lab orientation. Labs are required to pass
the class.
Make-Up Exams: Ordinarily, there will be no make-ups for exams. If you anticipate missing a
class for a valid reason, it is your responsibility to speak with your TA or with the professor in
advance about making alternative arrangements. You should bring documentation of your
reason for missing class to your TA so that we can determine whether a make-up is warranted.
Please feel free to redact sensitive personal information (e.g., medical diagnosis, SSN) from your
documentation.
Final Exam: There is no final exam for this course
Grade Issues: If you feel that your work has been evaluated inaccurately or unfairly, it is your
responsibility to bring this to the attention of your TA within one week after your graded work is
returned to you or posted on Canvas. Please review your graded work when it is returned or
posted, and let us know if you feel that there are any problems.
        4.   Use of Canvas in class: This class uses Canvas for a number of Web-based course
             management functions. Canvas can be accessed at http://canvas.utexas.edu/. The
             university provides support and tutorials for interested students—it is your
             responsibility to learn and access the site in order to prepare for classes, labs, and
             exams. For this course, Canvas will be used primarily as a place to post the course
             syllabus, slides from lectures, exam review sheets, required journal articles, and lab
             assignments.
        5.   Use of Squarecap in class: This class uses Squarecap to administer and evaluate in-
             class quizzes and to assess individual attendance. Squarecap can be accessed via
             https://squarecap.com/, and you will need to purchase a subscription. You must be
             present in the lecture hall for your quiz performance and attendance to be counted.
             Using another student’s Squarecap account will be considered a violation of the
             Honor Code, and both students will be sanctioned.
                                                    6


VII. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
                  (a) Lecture Attendance (10%). On-time attendance is required at class lectures,
         and will be assessed using the Squarecap app. You need to be in the classroom and
         logged into Squarecap on the UT wi-fi, or you will be flagged as absent. Each student
         may miss three classes during the term without a deduction to the attendance grade.
                  (b) Lab Assignments (30%). Lab activities will include discussions, exercises,
         and mini-projects taking place across campus. Some work will be assessed based on
         individual performance, and other work will be graded based on group completion of an
         assignment. We will drop your lowest lab score when calculating your final lab grade.
                   (c) Exams (3) (20% each, or 60%). The course lecture will be organized into
         three units, each of which will end with an in-class exam. The exam will consist of
         multiple choice questions (n=30) drawn from the Squarecap quizzes administered at the
         start of each lecture, as well as two one-page written responses to questions presented in
         the lectures. A review sheet will be posted a week in advance with a list of possible
         written response questions.
Grade Scale:                          B-: 80.00-82.99                    D: 63.00-66.99
A: 93.0+                              C+: 77.00-79.99                    D-: 60.00-62.99
A-: 90.00-92.99                       C: 73.00-76.99                     F: Below 60.00
B+: 87.00-89.99                       C-: 70.00-72.99                    Note: Grades will not be
B: 83.00-86.99                        D+: 67.00-69.99                    rounded
   VIII. Academic Integrity
   University of Texas Honor Code
   Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
         “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of
         the University and uphold academic integrity.”
   This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless
   it is assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether
   collaboration is encouraged or not.
   Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used
   in previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
   subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
   You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at
   the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
   Lab Work: Students will work together on group projects during their lab meetings, and the
   group size and nature of the collaboration will be stated in the assignment. Students may only
   collaborate with members of their group on lab assignments, unless expressly granted permission
   to do otherwise by the TA. Copying lab work by members of other groups constitutes a violation
   of the Honor Code. Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another
   student and the student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for
   the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the
   course and University disciplinary action.
                                                   7


Study and Review: Students are encouraged to work in small study groups to prepare for class
meetings and to discuss course materials prior to exams. Students should prepare their own
notes and review materials, and may NOT use materials prepared by others. Notes may NOT be
circulated (via social media or other means) without prior permission from the professor.
Copying the notes or review materials produced by another student will be considered a violation
of the Honor Code by both students.
Exams: NO form of collaboration or copying is permitted during exams, and no outside
materials may be consulted during exams without the express permission of the professor.
Talking or discussion is not permitted during the examinations, nor may you compare papers,
copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any such behavior during the exam will result in a
score of 0 for the assignment, and may lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary
action.
IX. Other University Notices and Policies
Excused Absences for University Extracurricular Activities
Students participating in an officially sanctioned, scheduled University extracurricular activity
should be given the opportunity to make up class assignments or other graded assignments
missed as a result of their participation. It is the responsibility of the student to make
arrangements with the instructor prior to any missed scheduled examination lab for making up
the work.
 Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
    •   All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student
         notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to
         changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
         and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
         recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
         mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
         policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
         http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564.
Documented Disability Statement
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
•        Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
•        Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
accessible
•        Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                                                     8


  Q drop Policy
  If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
  drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
  only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
  information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop   
  Emergency Evacuation Policy
  The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
  Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
  Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
  buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
  and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
       •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
           building.
       •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
           the first week of class.
       •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
           not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
           Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
           Services office.
       •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
           procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                          v v v v
_____________________________________________________________________________
                                                     9
