                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                ACC F380K 12 - COMPUTER AUDIT AND SYSTEM SECURITY:
                       COMPLIANCE AND ADVISORY PERSPECTIVES
                                          Summer 2019
                                        Unique#: 71155
                                      VERSION: 6/11/2019
Instructor                    :     Hüseyin Tanriverdi
Class times                   :     Monday / Wednesday 1:30-5:30 p.m.
Class location                :     GSB 3.104
Instructor’s Office           :     CBA 5.208
Phone                         :     (512) 232-9164
E-mail                        :     Huseyin.Tanriverdi@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Hours                  :     By appointment
Teaching assistant            :     Natalie Zhou nataliezhou@utexas.edu
Course objectives:
This course makes an introduction to information technology (IT)-related risks and returns
of organizations. IT has become a critical enabler and transformer of business innovation,
growth, and profitability. IT has also exposed organizations to greater risks. Misalignment of
IT and business strategies, inadequate investments in IT, failures in IT implementations,
glitches in IT operations, IT security breaches can significantly affect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of information assets, disrupt business operations, lead to financial
losses, and cause damage to reputations of organizations. Digital transformation of business
increases such risks. The pervasiveness of IT systems and IT-enabled innovations across
value chains, business networks, and product and services of organizations increase the
importance of IT-related governance and controls. Various laws, regulations, and industry
standards such as the Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) regulation require executives of public
companies to be personally accountable for IT-enabled internal controls that affect financial
statements of their companies. Likewise, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) expects registrants to disclose information about their cybersecurity-related risks and
incidents. Emerging new technologies such as Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence
(AI), Machine Learning, Cognitive Computing, Blockchain, etc. offer new productivity,
profitability, and transformation opportunities. But they also create brand new security,
privacy, and ethical issues and biases. It is important for business leaders to understand
how they could institute governance and control mechanisms to minimize IT-related risks
and maximize IT-enabled returns of their organizations. This course aims to equip students
with such skills and knowledge by covering the following topics:
   Board of directors’ and top management team’s oversight of cyber risks
   Enterprise risk management and enterprise IT risk management
   IT governance and control frameworks
   IT general controls, IT application controls, identity governance and access controls, IT
    audit process, generally accepted IT audit standards and methodologies, and how they
    relate to financial audits
   Third-party risk management
   Organizational cybersecurity policies
   Organizational privacy policies
   Privacy, security, and ethical dilemma implications of emerging new information
    technology innovations such as Internet of Things (IoT), Artifical Intelligence (AI),
    machine learning, cognitive computing, Blockchain, robotics, big data and analytics, etc.
   Algorithmic biases, and governance and controls for minimizing them
                                                 1


Course delivery format:
The course material is delivered through lectures, case discussions, in class exercises, and
projects. Students are encouraged and expected to participate actively in class discussions
and presentations. They are expected to read and analyze assigned reading articles, cases,
and lecture and guest speaker notes in advance of class and come to class prepared for
discussions. Through participation in class discussions, students control and share the
responsibility for learning.
Course website:
Hosted on Canvas course management system: http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Login using your UT EID and select ACC F380K.12. Updates to this syllabus and other
course materials will be posted on this website. Please log on to the site before each class to
view the announcements and assigned materials.
Required cases and reading materials:
Required cases and reading materials for each session are listed in the course schedule
below and they are marked with (HP) or (Canvas):
       (HP): Harvard Business School cases and articles that we will use in this class are
        available in a digital Harvard Package (HP), which can be purchased online from
        Harvard Business School Publishing at https://hbsp.harvard.edu/import/629002
       (Canvas) Non-Harvard cases and readings will be posted on course website at
        Canvas: http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Grading
Contributions to in-class discussions                     :   10%
Case write-ups                                            :   50%
Team Project                                              :   40%
    - Project team midterm presentation (10%)
    - Project team final presentation (10%)
    - Project team final report (20%)
Total                                                     :   100%
Contributions to in-class discussions (10%). This class relies significantly on case
discussions. Students are expected to actively contribute to the learning of their peers by
sharing their perspectives on issues being discussed. Attendance is required, but it earns
only 20% of the in-class participation credits. The remaining 80% of the in-class
contribution credits can be earned by making contributions to discussions in the classroom.
There is no substitute or make-up for earning in-class contribution credits. Requests to do
extra work in lieu of in-class contributions will be automatically declined. If you miss the
opportunity to contribute to in-class discussions in a session, you can try to make up for it
by increasing your contribution levels in other sessions you are able to attend throughout
the semester. Your final in-class contribution grade will be assigned based on your
participation patterns throughout the semester.
Advanced preparation for in-class discussions is required to make substantive contributions
to in-class discussions. You are expected to read, analyze, and think about the assigned
readings, cases, and other lecture materials before coming to class. This preparation is
likely to increase your ability to make substantive contributions to in-class discussions and
earn participation credits.
                                                 2


Please consult the following note in the Harvard Package (HP) for guidance on how to
prepare for a case discussion: Ellet, W. “How to Discuss a Case” Chapter 8 of “The Case
Study Handbook: How to read, discuss, and write persuasively about cases. Harvard
Business Press,” Product#: 2450BC-PDF-ENG, Apr 17, 2007, pp. 1-12.
The following factors will contribute positively to earning in-class participation credits:
 Doing assigned readings and cases and coming to class prepared for discussing them
 Arriving before the start of class and staying until the end
 Listening actively to your peers, instructor, and guest speakers
 Asking relevant questions
 Linking and synthesizing topics covered throughout the semester
 Bringing to discussions examples and questions from your prior work experiences
 Synthesizing or reconciling issues being discussed
 Responding to questions
 Disagreeing with others constructively
 Neither dominating the conversations nor being too quiet
 Exhibiting a good sense of humor
Using a name card and sitting roughly in the same place each class will help instructor and
other students better recognize your contributions.
Case write-ups (50%): We will discuss a total of 9 cases throughout the semester. You
are required to submit write-ups for any five of them. You are welcome to submit a 6th case
write-up to substitute the lowest case grade. The weighted average of the top five case
write-up grades will make up 50% of the final grade. Cases are weighted equally, i.e., 10%
each. Case write-up questions will be posted on the assignments sections of the course
website on Canvas. Format, submission, and grading guidelines are posted on Files\Case
write-up guidelines section of Canvas. Your case analysis and write-up should address the
assigned questions posted on Canvas by utilizing course concepts and analyzing case facts
and issues. The managerial issues entailed in the cases are open ended. They can
potentially be analyzed and addressed in multiple different ways. Case write-ups are
INDIVIDUAL assignments. You should analyze the case yourself and develop your own
unique answers to the write-up questions. Submissions that indicate that the author
developed the answers in communication, cooperation, or collaboration with anyone else will
be subject to the scholastic dishonesty policies of the University referenced in the syllabus.
The case write-ups are due on Canvas by the beginning of class, i.e., 1:30pm, on the day of
the case discussion. Submissions after this deadline will not be considered. There will be no
make up for a missed write-up as we already offer a total of 10 case write-up opportunities.
Before you develop a case write-up, please do the assigned readings of the case day and
reflect on the course concepts covered to date to decide which concepts are most relevant
for developing your perspective on the case questions.
Team project (40%): You will do a team project on “algorithmic bias”, i.e., emerging
biases in algorithms that use big data, AI and machine learning types of techniques. The
main tasks and deliverables of the project are:
    1. Literature review on algorithmic biases: Review the algorithmic bias literature in
        academia and practice; and synthesize the findings to develop the following
        deliverable: A typology of different types of biases observed in algorithms.
    2. Literature review on potential solutions to algorithmic bias: Review the academic and
        practitioner literatures on potential solution approaches proposed for minimizing
        algorithmic biases; and synthesize the findings to develop the following deliverable:
                                                 3


          A conceptual framework of governance and control principles to enable
          developers to minimize biases in their algorithms.
    3. Application of the proposed conceptual framework to a set of biased and bias-free
          algorithms: Select two sets of real life algorithms from the same application context:
          one set is known to have exhibited biases while the other set has not exhibited any
          signs of biases yet. Use the principles summarized in your conceptual framework to
          evaluate how the respective developers of the two sets of algorithms applied the
          principles (or failed to apply them), and as a result, what kinds of biases have
          emerged (or not emerged) in their algorithms. The deliverable of this task is: A
          summary of the evaluation results of the two sets of algorithms; a summary of the
          lessons learned; and recommendations to developers of algorithms as to how they
          can learn from the lessons to minimize potential biases in their own algorithms.
The project has two graded deliverables:
        i.        Project team midterm presentation to class (10%)
                  a. Teams 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 present on 7/1 (slide deck due by 10am)
                  b. Teams 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 present on 7/3 (slide deck due by 10am)
       ii.        Project team final presentation to class on 7/10 (10%)
                  (slide deck due by 10am)
      iii.        Project team final reports due by 5pm on 7/13 (20%)
Each team must study unique sets of algorithms. To avoid any overlaps between algorithms
selected by different teams, each team should e-mail the instructor which sets of algorithms
they would like to study, and get approval to study them. First-come, first-served. Approved
sets of algorithms will be posted on Canvas for all teams to see. If a set of algorithms is
already taken by another team, instructor will ask the other teams to find another set of
algorithms that is not taken yet. Algorithms are being deployed in many industries: e.g.,
accounting, human resource management, real estate, law, health care, transportation,
social media, finance, etc. We prefer that each team focus on a unique application context.
Deliverables of this project must demonstrate that you understand and effectively apply key
course concepts to the context of the project. To earn an A on the project, you must also go
beyond the course materials and research the project domain to generate new insights and
actionable recommendations based on your independent research on the topic.
Some sources for making an introduction to the project topic:
    -     (HP). Li, M. (2019). “Addressing the Biases Plaguing Algorithms.” Harvard Business
          School Publishing Product #: H04Y85-PDF-ENG.
    -     (HP). Bogen, M. (2019). “All the Ways Hiring Algorithms Can Introduce Bias.”
          Harvard Business School Publishing Product #: H04X7X-PDF-ENG.
    -     (HP). Bajorek, J.P. (2019). “Voice Recognition Still Has Significant Race and Gender
          Biases.” Harvard Business School Publishing Product #: H04Y4X-PDF-ENG.
    -     (HP). Guszcza, J., Rahwan, I., Bible, W., Cebrian, M., and Katyal, V. (2018). “Why
          We Need to Audit Algorithms.” Harvard Business School Publishing Product #:
          H04NRY-PDF-ENG.
    -     (HP). Chowdhury, R., and Mulani, N. (2018). “Auditing Algorithms for Bias.” Harvard
          Business School Publishing Product #: H04M6A-PDF-ENG.
    -     (Canvas). IIA (2007). Artificial Intelligence - Considerations for the Profession of
          Internal Auditing: I, II, III.
                                                   4


Final letter grades: Weighted average of all grade components will be used in assigning
final letter grades. If the class average turns out to be below 90, letter grades will be
assigned based on a curve. The curve will not have predetermined percentages. Breaks in
grade distribution will be used in setting letter grade boundaries. If the class average turns
out to be 90 or above, the following table will be used in converting weighted grade
averages to final letter grades.
            Grade conversion table to be used if class average is 90 or above
                   Range of weighted grade average                   Letter grade
                                   95-100                         A
                                    90-94                         A-
                                    85-89                         B+
                                    80-84                         B
                                    75-79                         B-
                                    70-74                         C+
                                    65-69                         C
                                    60-64                         C-
                                    55-59                         D+
                                    50-54                         D
                                    45-49                         D-
                                    00-44                         F
ISACA (Information Systems Audit and Control Association). I encourage you to
become student members of ISACA. Joining ISACA will provide access to a wealth of
resources about the topics we cover in our class discussions. With student membership, you
will gain access to articles in the Information Systems Control Journal, various IT audit &
security toolkits, discounts on ISACA certifications (CISA, CISM), events, conferences, etc.
Joining ISACA will also open the door to making connections with people around the globe
who are currently working, and hiring for positions ranging from IT security, audit, control,
risk, privacy, compliance, and advisory services. To learn more, please check out
www.isaca.org/student
McCombs Classroom Professionalism Policy
The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the McCombs
community. The collective class reputation and the value of the Texas MPA experience
hinges on this.
Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and every
class session. Students are expected to be professional in all respects.
The Texas MPA classroom experience is enhanced when:
   Students arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and
    finish at the scheduled time. On time arrival shows respect for both fellow students and
    faculty and it enhances learning by reducing avoidable distractions.
   Students display their name cards. This permits fellow students and faculty to learn
    names, enhancing opportunities for community building and evaluation of in-class
    contributions.
   Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment
    improves when disruptions are limited.
   Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning in the Texas MPA
    program takes place during classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they
    cannot contribute to the overall learning process. This affects not only the individual, but
    their peers who count on them, as well.
                                                 5


   Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and
    debate are encouraged. Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.
   Laptops are closed and put away. When students are surfing the web, responding to
    e-mail, instant messaging each other, and otherwise not devoting their full attention to
    the topic at hand they are doing themselves and their peers a major disservice.
   Phones and wireless devices are turned off. We’ve all heard the annoying ringing in
    the middle of a meeting. Not only is it not professional, it cuts off the flow of discussion
    when the search for the offender begins. When a true need to communicate with
    someone outside of class exists (e.g., for some medical need) please inform the
    professor prior to class.
Academic Dishonesty
I have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts damage the reputation of
the school and the degree and demean the honest efforts of the majority of students. The
minimum penalty for an act of academic dishonesty will be a zero for that assignment or
exam.
The responsibilities for both students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are
described on http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-Code-of-Ethics.aspx. As the
instructor for this course, I agree to observe all the faculty responsibilities described therein.
During Orientation, you signed the Honor Code Pledge. In doing so, you agreed to observe
all of the student responsibilities of the Honor Code. If the application of the Honor System
to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification.
Students with Disabilities
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) is housed in the Office of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth floor
of the Student Services Building. Information on how to register, downloadable forms,
including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request letters, and releases of
information are available online at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/index.php. Please
do not hesitate to contact SSD at (512) 471-6259, VP: (512) 232-2937 or via e-mail if you
have any questions.
Religious holy days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Campus safety. Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency
evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
.. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.
.. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building.
.. Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.
                                                 6


.. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
.. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
.. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
.. Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                7


                                                  COURSE OUTLINE
   Readings marked with “(Canvas)” are to be posted on course website on http://canvas.utexas.edu/
   Readings marked with “(HP)” are available in a digital course package at Harvard. Please purchase them at
    https://hbsp.harvard.edu/import/629002
S#      Day       Topic                                                Readings / assignments
1       Jun10         Cyber Risk Oversight                                (Canvas) Course syllabus
                                                                           (Canvas) Cyber Risk Oversight Challenge.
                       Enterprise Risk Management                            Protiviti, 2018.
                                                                           (Canvas) Galligan, M.E. and Rau, K.
                       Case-1: Equifax                                       (2016). “COSO in the Cyber Age” pp. 1-18.
                                                                           (HP) Case: Srinivasan, S., and Pitcher, Q.
                                                                              (2017). “Data Breach at Equifax.” Harvard
                                                                              Business School, pp. 1-15.
2       Jun12          Organizational Cybersecurity Policies              (Canvas) NIST Cybersecurity Framework
                                                                           (Web link) Browse the Best Practices
                        By Geoffrey Banez, IT Advisory Services,              sections of the CIS website:
                        Weaver                                                https://www.cisecurity.org/cybersecurity-
                                                                              best-practices/
                       Case-2: TJX                                        (HP) Case: Nicole R.D. Haggerty,
                                                                              Ramasastry Chandrasekhar. (2008).
                                                                              “Security Breach at TJX.” Richard Ivey
                                                                              School of Business. Version: (A) 2008-03-
                                                                              12.
3       Jun17          IT controls and regulatory compliance              (Canvas) Protiviti. (2012). Guide to the
                       IT General Controls (ITGC)                            Sarbanes-Oxley Act: IT Risks and Controls.
                       IT Application Controls                            (Canvas) GAIT for IT General Control
                                                                              Deficiency Assessment - An approach for
                       Case-3: AlphaCo                                       evaluating ITGC deficiencies in Sarbanes-
                                                                              Oxley Section 404 assessments of internal
                                                                              controls over financial reporting.
                                                                           (Canvas) Case: Tanriverdi, H., Harrison, J.,
                                                                              Mesuria, K.S., Bertsch, J., Hsiao, P., and
                                                                              Hendrawirawan, D. "AlphaCo: A Teaching
                                                                              Case on Information Technology Audit and
                                                                              Security," The Journal of Digital Forensics,
                                                                              Security and Law (1:1) 2006, pp 35-61.


S# Day   Topic                                           Readings / assignments
4  Jun19     Organizational Privacy Policies                (Canvas) Data Privacy Maturity Audit.
               By Luis Castillo and Justin Turner,             Protiviti, 2018.
               Technology Consulting, Protiviti              (Canvas) Ethical decision making
                                                               frameworks (also see
              Case-4: Who is this guy?                        https://www.scu.edu/ethics/ethics-
              Case-5: Apple                                   resources/ethical-decision-making/)
                                                             (HP) Case: Brannen, D.E., Medcalfe, S.K.,
                                                               and Cousins, R.B. (2015). “Who is this guy?”
                                                               North American Case Research Association.
                                                             (HP) Case: McGee, H. Hsieh, N. and McAra,
                                                               S. (2016). “Apple: Privacy vs. Safety?”
                                                               Harvard Business School, 316069-PDF-ENG.
5  Jun24      IT Audits
               By Sean McAloon, Crowe LLP
              Blockchain: What are the implications of       (Canvas) Jehl, L.E., and Bartish, B. (2018).
               blockchain for the accounting profession?       “Blockchain ‘Smart Contracts’ – A New
                                                               Transactional Framework.” Baker &
              Case-6: Deutsche Bank                           Hostetler LLP, pp. 1-3.
                                                              (Canvas) KcKinsey. (2018). “Blockchain
                                                               beyond the hype: What is the strategic
                                                               business value.”
                                                              (HP) Case: Applegate, L.M., Beck, R., and
                                                               Muller-Bloch, C. (2017). “Deutsche Bank:
                                                               Pursuing Blockchain Opportunities (A).”
                                                               Harvard Business School.


S# Day   Topic                                             Readings / assignments
6  Jun26     Third-Party Vendor Risk Management:              (Canvas) SOC reports
               System & Organization Controls (SOC)            (Canvas) On the Road to SOC 2 Readiness,
               Reports                                           Protiviti, 2017.
               By Mark Knight and Joey LoSurdo, Holtzman
               Partners
              Algorithms: The good, the bad, and the           (HP and Canvas) See page 4 of the
               ugly                                              syllabus for a list of project-related articles
              How can accounting profession help                on algorithmic bias and auditing of
               minimize risks and maximize value of              algorithms for bias. Refresh your reading of
               algorithms?                                       those articles in preparation for this session.
              Case-7: Grow                                     (HP) Case: Bernstein, E.S., McKinnon, P.D.,
                                                                 and Yarabe, P. “GROW: Using Artificial
                                                                 Intelligence to Screen Human Intelligence.”
                                                                 Harvard Business School, 418020-PDF-ENG.
7  July1      Identity and Access Management                   (Canvas) Identity and Access Management
               By Collin Perry, SailPoint                        Guide, SailPoint.
              Project midterm presentations of teams 1,        Due: Slide decks due on Canvas by 10am
               2, 3, 4, and 5
8  July3      Project midterm presentations of teams 6,        Due: Slide decks due on Canvas by 10am
               7, 8, 9, and 10
              Cognitive analytics: Security, privacy, and      (Canvas) IIA (2007). Artificial Intelligence
               ethical dilemma implications of cognitive         – Considerations for the Profession of
               analytics.                                        Internal Auditing: I, II, and III (refresh your
              How can accounting / audit profession help        reading from the previous session)
               minimize risks and maximize value of             (HP) Case: Pah, A.R., Lazarowich, A.,
               cognitive analytics?                              Snyder, C. (2018). “Evaluating the cognitive
                                                                 analytics frontier.” Kellogg School of
              Case-9: Honeywell                                 Management, KE1046-PDF-ENG.


S# Day    Topic                                     Readings / assignments
9  July8      Surveillance capitalism                  (Canvas) Zuboff, S. 2015. "Big Other:
                                                           Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of
                                                           an Information Civilization," Journal of
                                                           Information Technology (30:1), pp. 75-89.
               Case-10: Facebook                       (HP) Case: Riedel, G.A., and Knoop, C.I.
                                                           (2018). “Facebook-Can Ethics Scale in the
               Project Q&A                                Digital Age?” Harvard Business School Case
                                                           #: 319030-PDF-ENG.
10 July10      Project team final presentations on Due: Project presentations of teams 1-7. Slide
                algorithm biases                    decks due by 10am on Canvas.
   July13      (Not a class day)                   Due: Project reports of teams 1-7 due by 5pm on
                                                    Canvas.
