                                                       1
                    AFR 304: Introduction to the Study of Africa
                                             Unique # 30515
                                                Spring 2020
___________________________________________________________________
Professor: Dr. A. A. Adelakun.
Email: adelakun@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Wed 10am -12noon (By Appointment)
                           COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
Who speaks for Africa and why? Discourses on Africa are animated and fraught with contradiction. At
once, it is a continent devastated by poverty, ethnic conflict, and human rights violation but it is also a
continent with robust economic futures, technological advancements, political promises and deep
histories. In the West, we highlight these complex characterizations of the continent routinely and in
almost every facet of our lives from media circuits to social media. But these ideas about Africa also
looms large among scholars and experts. What and how do we study to know Africa? This course seeks to
provide students with a history, politics, and culture of Africa. As a result of the lessons we will undergo
throughout the semester, students will become familiar with a wide range of disciplinary perspectives and
approaches to the study of Africa. These disciplinary tools will help them unravel the impact of these
representations to scholarship, international policies and political legislations, media representation and
popular consciousness.


                                                         2
By the end of this course, students would have:
• Acquired a basic knowledge of Africa’s history, culture, and politics.
• Place Africa and its historical, cultural, and political formations within a global frame to understand
relations of Africa with the world
• Analyze artistic and cultural expressions from contemporary Africa with a nuanced understanding of
African arts in the globalized world
• Build critical arguments on social and political issues around the world • Write reflectively on various
cultural phenomena
GRADES:
Grades in this course are assigned on a percentage basis. Your total score will dictate your final
grade. All grades will be posted on canvas as they are earned through the semester.
                    Requirement
                                                              Percentage of Grade
            Quizzes/Discussion Forum (2)                               10
            Class participation/Attendance                             15
                 Reflection Papers (2)                                 30
                  Group Presentation                                   20
                      Final Paper                                      25
                       TOTAL
                                                                      100
COURSE FLAGS
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present. This course also carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag
courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you
can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes
meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
DESCRIPTION OF ASSIGNMENTS


                                                         3
All assignments will be discussed on the first day of class. Please do not hesitate to approach your
instructor during office hours if you seek further clarifications regarding the assignments
Quizzes/Discussion Forum (10 percent)
Twice this semester, students will be paired into groups and they will jointly take a quiz using Google
Doc. The professor will supply a discussion prompt, and each student groups will “meet” on Google Doc
where they will debate their answers. After each group has settled on their response, they will send the
link to the professor to evaluate individual responders. Each student will use the period to highlight their
stances, thoughtfully, and with textual references that demonstrates their engagement with the materials
we have read in the class. Individuals in each group are free to disagree with each other’s positions but by
the end of the session, they should find a point of resolution so they can present a coherent answer for
their group. The goal of this assignment is to encourage students to think through what it means to engage
in discourse intervention, public advocacy, criticism, and reflection in responsible and provocative ways.
Please consider this assignment and its format as also a training ground for other future critical
engagements on important social and political issues of the day. The professor will monitor and
participate in these discussion threads from time to time. At the end of the semester, students will be
graded on the quality of their contribution to issues.
Class Participation/Attendance (15 percent)
African Studies is a broad subject and you may not always be familiar with its every aspect. This means
attendance at every class is among the minimum requirements for success in this course. Students who
miss at class at will are likely to be lost in the middle of the semester. You are therefore encouraged to
come to class prepared, prepare ahead by reading and engaging the materials, and actively participate by
posing relevant questions, provide comments, and feedback on the reading for each class period. In other
words, you must have an active voice in the class. Failure to prepare for class or to be an active
participant will result in a poor participation grade. The professor will take the attendance at the start of
every class. Students that arrive late will be marked either “late” or “absent.”
Note: You are allowed only two unexcused absences throughout the semester. Any further unexcused
absences will be penalized with a point reduction in grade. Students competing for the university on an
NCAA or club level team should notify the professor as soon as possible about any future absences.
Written documentation from the Athletic department will be required for accommodations to be provided.
Reflection papers (15 percent each)
This class will be divided into three sections. At the end of the first and second, students are expected to
submit a reflection paper that captures their thoughts on the topics that have been discussed in class
within the period. The reflection paper is expected to further analyze the topics and further expound on
other dimensions to the topic that reflect the resourcefulness and perspicacity of the student. Think of a
format like this:


                                                       4
Paragraph 1: What thematic position will you take from the readings we have done in this period? How
did you arrive at your position and what change do you hope to make in the world by taking the stance?
Paragraph 2, 3: An analysis of some/all of the texts for the period. What are their main themes and ideas,
and how do they correspond to your position?
Paragraphs 4, 5: Elaborate on your position by analyzing ongoing historical events around you or a
related history that enhances your point. Find texts that support or critique your stances.
Paragraphs 6, 7: Elaborate on your ideas, the weakness and the strengths of your position and what it will
mean if the world adopts your ideas.
Paragraph 8: Summarize your paper with an elegant and punchy finishing.
Note: The above is meant to be a guide and not a formula that you must absolutely follow.
This material is expected to be between 2-3 pages, typed in Times New Roman 12 font and in double line
spacing. These papers must be well-researched, show thoughtfulness, resourcefulness, and an ability to
re-conceptualize the theories and analyses discussed in class. The professor will provide regular
feedbacks on each paper to individual students. Please take the feedbacks seriously as they will aid you in
writing more polished papers in subsequent assignments. Students are expected to have a citation page
attached to their paper. Students who desire extra credit can choose to turn in one or two more reflections
papers.
Group Presentation (20 percent)
By mid-semester, students will be placed into groups where they will all work towards an analysis of as
aspect of contemporary African culture. The presentation can take any form and students are encouraged
to be as creative and original as possible. Students are encouraged to run their ideas with the professor
before the presentation dates. There will be ample time provided for students to meet and work on their
presentations.
Final Exam (25 percent)
Written Paper: This will be based on students’ reflection and analysis of contemporary issues around
black people in Africa and in the Diaspora. This material is expected to be between 5-7 pages with at least
five academic sources cited. The final paper is not supposed to merely regurgitate what we have discussed
but to show critical thinking and analysis, and an ability to independently formulate ideas and research
them. Students are encouraged to share their ideas with the professor to get a feedback on whatever they
have chosen to research.
  GRADING SCALE
  A       = 94-100
  A-      = 90-93
  B+      = 86-89


                                                        5
 B         = 80-85
 B-        = 74-79
 C+        = 70-73
 C         = 65-69
 C-        = 60-64
 D         = 55-59
 F         = 0-54
Course Activities
Class periods will include lectures (by the instructor and sometimes guest lecturers), screenings, active
class discussions, small group discussion, reflective writing, and digital media discussions.
         COURSE POLICIES AND POLICIES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Class Decorum:
The decorum policies of this class exist as an agreement between all of us in order to create a respectful
and productive environment for learning and dialogue. As such the following rules will be enforced:
    •    The use of electronic devices is permitted in class ONLY for note taking and with prior
         permission of the professor. Beyond that, you are not allowed to use electronic devices in class.
         Students who become disruptive with their devices will be asked to leave the class for the day and
         marked “unexcused absence.”
    •    Only productive discussion is allowed in class. This means talking must occur only in response to
         the subject of study that day. In order to facilitate this in an orderly manner I will act as a
         moderator. Students should raise their hands and wait to be called upon. Also, give others a
         chance to speak. And above all, BE RESPECTFUL.
    •    Students who repeatedly disrupt the class will be asked to leave and may fail the class.
Late Assignments
    •    All assignments are due by the date listed on the syllabus and in the class. Students with excused
         absence can email an assignment to the professor. Late assignments will not be accepted.
Attendance
    •    Students are expected to attend every class meeting and be prepared to participate. If you are
         absent for any reason – excused or unexcused – you are still responsible for all material covered
         in class.
    •    I may post PowerPoint presentations on Canvas under “Files” if the slides contain information
         students need but were unable to take as notes in class. Students who are absent should make
         arrangements to get notes from a classmate. I am happy to meet with you during office hours to
         discuss any questions you have about course material, but I will NOT simply “tell you what you
         missed.”


                                                         6
    •    Classes and assignments may only be made up in the event of an emergency (documented illness,
         death in the family, etc.), or a pre-arranged absence (religious holidays, athletic events,
         conferences, weddings, etc.). Absences due to religious holidays must be arranged in accordance
         with the University of Texas at Austin Student Handbook. All make-ups (including those due to
         illness) must be accompanied with appropriate documentation.
    •    Please note that traffic, car troubles, oversleeping, and missed busses are not excused absences
         and students who miss submitting as assignment for these reasons will not be allowed to make
         them up. Out of fairness to all students, no exceptions will be made to this policy.
    •    In case of a medical emergency, please contact your professor and be ready to provide
         supporting documentation.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to and from Students
    •    All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
         policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her
         e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to
         stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications
         may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice
         per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mailaddress are
         available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
    •    When using e-mail to contact us about the course, use your UT email address. Include “AFR 304”
         in the subject line. Your name and UT EID should be in the body of each and every e-mail you
         send regarding this course. Anyone who does not comply with these requests might not receive a
         response.
    •    Your course Instructor gets a lot of correspondence and therefore you should allow 48 hours for
         us to respond to your emails. If it has been 48 hours and you have not yet heard from me, feel free
         to send a cheerful reminder about your inquiry.
    •    A note about e-mail correspondence: The Internet has greatly changed the methods in which we
         communicate. The accessibility of modes such as e-mail has created additional labor for
         Professors, Instructors, and Teaching Assistants. BEFORE you contact me with a question, take
         the time to look for the information on the syllabus and the Canvas website. I promise to be
         diligent about posting important information and announcements for you, and ask that you respect
         that labor and time by not submitting redundant requests to us. If the information you seek is not
         available on the syllabus or the Canvas site, please see me before or after class, during my office
         hours, or, of course, send us an e- mail.


                                                       7
     •   If you have a question or concern about a grade, I ask that you observe the 24/7 Rule: wait 24
         hours to send the email or speak with one of use in person about the matter, and allow us 7 days
         to get back to you. Note that questions and/or concerns about grades will only be addressed
         within two weeks (or 14 days) of its posting. Once the grade has been available through the
         Canvas gradebook for two weeks, it is considered uncontested and final.
Use of Canvas in class
In this class we use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected access at
http://canvas.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post
grades, to receive assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys. You can find support in using
Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Feedback Loop
Throughout the semester I will give you individual feedback on your work. I also encourage you to visit
office hours to discuss your progress through the course material. I will also ask you to give me feedback
on your learning in informal as well as formal ways, including through a mid-semester survey about how
my teaching strategies are helping or hindering your learning. It is very important for me to know your
reaction to what we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these surveys. I also hope that you
will reach out to me during my office hours, with any questions or concerns you have regarding the
course material, the assignments, or your progress in this department and the university in general.
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work
submitted by a student in this course for academic credit should be the student's own work. We have zero
tolerance for plagiarism.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video


                                                        8
phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter
from SSD. Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
(e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
conversion, etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips
are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
transportation, site accessibility, etc.). Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice)
or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD).Call512-232-5050orvisit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                        COURSE SCHEDULE*
  WEEK TOPICS                            REQUIRED READINGS


                                            9
Section Chronicles of African History
   A
Week 1 Introduction to
        304
January                    Binyanwanga Wainana. “How to Write About Africa.” (Available online)
21
January                    Grinker, Roy Richard, Stephen C. Lubkemann, and Christopher B. Steiner, eds.
23                         (2010) Perspectives on Africa: a reader in culture, history and representation. Pg
                           21-28.
                           Watch: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jk3iOqKOD7g
Week 2 The World Vs.
        Africa
January                    Bulhan, Hussein A. "Stages of colonialism in Africa: From occupation of land to
28                         occupation of being." (2015).
January                    https://www.sahistory.org.za/article/history-apartheid-south-africa
30
                           https://flashbak.com/apartheid-south-africa-in-the-1960s-photos-of-the-black-
                           and-white-years-
                           8966/?utm_campaign=shareaholic&utm_medium=email_this&utm_source=email
Week 3 Histories of
        African
        Liberation
Feb 4                      Khapoya, Vincent. “African Nationalism and the Struggle for Freedom.”
                           (Excerpts)
Feb 6                      Gay Seidman (2001). “Guerrillas in their Midst: Armed Struggle in The South
                           African Anti-Apartheid Movement. Mobilization.”
Week 4 Fantasies of Re-
        Colonization
Feb 11                     https://www.currentaffairs.org/2017/09/a-quick-reminder-of-why-colonialism-
                           was-bad (Available online)
Feb 13                     Quiz/Discussion 1
Section Africa and the World
   B


                                         10
Week 5 Life after
        colonialism (1)
Feb 18                   Ayittey, George. Ayittey, George BN. Africa betrayed. New York: St. Martin's
                         Press, 1992.
Feb 20                   Magubane, Zine. "The revolution betrayed? Globalization, neoliberalism, and the
                         post-apartheid state." The South Atlantic Quarterly 103, no. 4 (2004): 657-671.
Week 6 Life after
        colonialism (11)
Feb 25                   Fieldhouse, David Kenneth. The West and the Third World: trade, colonialism,
                         dependence, and development. Oxford: Blackwell, 1999. (Excerpts)
Feb 27                   Easterly, William, and William Russell Easterly. “The White Man's Burden: Why
                         the West's efforts to Aid the Rest Have Done so Much Ill and So Little Good.”
                         DUE: Paper 1.
Week 7 Discourses of
        Re-colonialism
Mar 3                    Lumumba-Kasongo, Tukumbi. "China-Africa relations: A neo-imperialism or a
                         neo-colonialism? A reflection." African and Asian Studies 10, no. 2-3 (2011):
                         234-266.
                         Or,
                         Zheng, Liang. "Neo-colonialism, ideology or just business? China’s perception of
                         Africa." Global Media and Communication 6, no. 3 (2010): 271-276.
Mar 5                    Dambisa, Moyo. “Dead Aid.”
Week 8 Reforms and
        resistance
Mar 10                   Video: How to Rob Africa
                         Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G4c7l_CVwFc
Mar 12                   Quiz/Discussion 2
Week 9 Mar 16-20         SPRING BREAK!!
Section Africa and the Aesthetics of Self-Refashioning
   C


                                       11
Week     Art and Africa
  10
Mar 24                  Adesokan, Akin. “African Films.”
Mar 26                  Charry, E. “Hip Hop Africa: New African Music in a Globalizing World.”
Week     Faith and
  11     Politics
Mar 31                  Hanson John. “Religions in Africa.” Africa: Fourth Edition.
                        Wariboko, Nimi. “Prayer as Political Praxis.”
                        DUE: Paper 2.
 Apr 2                  Epprecht, Mark. “Heterosexual Africa?”
Week     Global
  12     Mobilities
 Apr 7                  Read: Ronald H Chilcote and Martin Legassick, “The African Challenge to
                        American Scholarship in Africa,” 4-11.
                        Arit John, "Why the All-Ivy League Story Stirs Up Tensions Between African
                        Immigrants and Black Americans,” April 1, 2014, The Wire: News From the
                        Atlantic (Available online).
 Apr 9                  Weber, Annette. "Abiy Superstar-reformer or revolutionary? Hope for
                        transformation in Ethiopia." (2018): 4.
Week     Meet the
  13     Professor
Apr 14                  Scheduled Meetings
Apr 16                  Scheduled Meetings
Week     Class
  14     Presentations
April 21                Group Presentation 1
April 23                Group Presentation 11
Weeks    Final Paper
 15-16
                        Final Due Date: May 8, 2020.
