                                        Advertising 377 [06665]
                                    Advanced Media Strategies
                                                  Spring 2020
Lisa Dobias, Associate Professor of Practice                  Dobias@austin.utexas.edu
BMC 4.360                                                     Office Hours: TTH 11:00 – 12:30
                                                                       & by appointment
Class Meetings: TTH 2:00 – 3:30 in CMA 3.124
There is not TA for this course. There are several critical out of class meetings required throughout the semester
per our schedule. Please plan accordingly in advance.
There is no final exam scheduled for our course.
Course Objectives
This is a TexasMedia cornerstone class and our objectives are simple – to transform you into sponges. The
outcome of this semester’s work will be to have you soak up as much information from as many perspectives
as possible across the worlds of communication, technology, and pop-culture. The more you experience, the
more flexible you are in your thinking, the smarter your ideas become, the better job you’ll get, the sooner
you’ll get the corner office, and so it goes… Understand from this point on you are a super sponge that can
never be too saturated.
Course Description
This class will immerse you in the many issues that comprise the media industry today on the road to fostering
your sense of independence in media analysis and recommendation. In here you will be put in the driver’s
seat where you are personally responsible for creating great media solutions. It is not enough to simply use
your “I’m a media person” brain. You must think about the various worlds in today’s communication,
entertainment, and business environments and attempt to craft ideas that bring these facets all together for
your clients in just the right way.
Let’s face it. No matter how you look at it, this is a highly competitive field you have chosen. You better know
as much as possible about using media as a competitive tool in business because this is what will show
immediately how you think – and ultimately – make it happen for you. This means you need to be able to
view each scenario you are dealing with from any of many angles. This fluidity of thought is only one of the
major things we will be working on.
Throughout the semester, you will be required to complete a number of different assignments that focus on a
wide variety of muscle groups in your brain. We will exercise you in large and small group environments as
well as individual experiences. You will read, write, and present. You will also be exposed to quick response
projects that mimic day-to-day industry demands as well as longer-term projects that allow more in-depth
research, analysis, and strategy development. Our goal is to put you into as many different situations and
push as many buttons as possible in 15 weeks that are both inside and well outside of your current comfort
zones.
                                Warning: This is an extremely hands-on class.
                                       Get ready to roll up your sleeves!
Course Design
This course has been designed as a seminar. That means that I don’t do all of the talking. Rather, we have an
ongoing exchange of ideas. Most class periods will be devoted to the discussion of selected topics as
indicated in your course schedule daily plan of attack. In-class activities will also keep things lively. Throughout
the semester, you will also be given class time to use as required agency breakout sessions.
We will complete a variety of work over the next 15 weeks to exercise many different brain muscle sets.
Specific logistical details [deadlines and expectations] will be provided for each project at the appropriate
time. What follows is a top-line summary of the work we will take on this semester. Please note, late work will
be critiqued, but will receive a grade of 0.


         • You, Inc. - At the beginning of the course, you will be subdivided into small groups and will be
asked to pull together a quick, yet professional document and presentation that is meant to jump start your
semester while creating maximum sponge potential.
         • Client #1 & Client #2 Insight & Communication Decks/Presentations – We will work on
developing your sense of business as well as of strategy and content development via two very extremely
diverse projects. As always, this semester will include a unique competitive twist for your teams. You will be
doing everything from a full digital media presence analysis, to creating media platforms portfolios that
center on all mass and niche media, including social, mobile, guerilla, and PR efforts. You will be exposed to
new resources and skill sets throughout this process. We will conduct all of this work under very strict non-
disclosure agreements, so please take this seriously.
         • Peer Ratings – Because team work is such a huge requirement in our industry, each student will be
given a detailed peer review at the end of each group project. A student’s combined reviews throughout the
semester will be used to generate their individual peer rating for the semester. Please note, a student earning
below an acceptable rating on their on-going peer reviews or not engaging in discussions, particularly team
mentoring sessions, is in danger of not being able to continue in TM&A courses in future semesters. In other
words, you are here because you want to be. If your performance and contributions indicate differently, this is
evidence that the program is not for you.
         • Self-Reflection – One of the best things you can learn to do for your growth and your career is to
be self-examining on a regular basis. We will have several activities throughout this semester with a
culminating activity near the semester’s end that will help you better understand your way of doing things and
how you can continue to grow more fully moving forward.
         • Regular Attendance - Yes, I’m one of those instructors who actually expects you to attend class and
to interact with us while you’re there. The reason for this is that our course is so discussion and project based
that you have to be present to grow with us. I will take role via a sign in sheet each day and not being
present will affect your grade. You must sign the roster each day for yourself (no friend sign ins) to get
recorded for attending. I will remind you, but I cannot be asked to “remember” you being there. The sign-in
sheet is the final say. Because life happens, two absences are excused. Each additional absence is a 5%
deduction.
Course Materials
Most of the materials you will need for this course will be provided on-line via Canvas.
You will also be responsible for covering the costs associated with producing materials for all of your class
assignments and presentations. Some semesters this will include any small costs that are incurred for travel to
and from client presentations.
You will also be required to sign up for free email updates from two of the following providers of your choice
and to regularly check the headlines to stay current:
Media Post - https://www.mediapost.com/register/
AdWeek - http://www.adweek.com/newsletter-signup
Ad Age - http://adage.com/help/emailprefs
PR News - http://www.prnewsonline.com/
Media Life Magazine - http://www.medialifemagazine.com/subscribe/
Online Wall Street Journal - http://online.wsj.com/news/technology
Communications
We will communicate regularly using the Canvas site for this class. I will also be glad to have conversations
with you via email, but will utilize a guaranteed 48-hour return email policy due to the heavy volume of
emails at certain times of the semester. I will not be able to use email to answer your questions regarding
projects or other detailed coursework because such questions are best addressed in a person before or after
class or during office hours.
Grades
Grades will be handed back with feedback in class per our schedule. Canvas will be used to post final course
grades. Grades will be assigned based on the following distribution.


Client 1 – Creative Collaboration            25%
Client 2 – National Client                   35%
You, Inc.                            15%
Peer Ratings                                 10%
Self-Reflection Activities                   10%
Regular Attendance                           5%
                                             100%
We are under the system of +/-. The following scale will be used to determine the general breaks for final
grades.
                      Proportion of Points              Letter Grade
                                92.5-100%                         A
                                89.5-92.4                         A-
                                86.5-89.4                         B+
                                82.5-86.4                         B
                                79.5-82.4                         B-
                                76.5-79.4                         C+
                                72.5-76.4                         C
                                69.5-72.4                         C-
                                59.5-69.4                         D
                                Below 59.4                        F
University of Texas Code of Conduct
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University of Texas Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
To make sure we are all on the same page, the following details UT’s policy on academic integrity:
“Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.”
What does this policy mean to you in this class? If you are caught cheating in any manner [including
plagiarizing work in your project], you will be significantly reprimanded in a manner that correlates with the
severity of the problem. This can range from being required to repeat the course, to expulsion from the
University. Please take this as seriously as we do!
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259
[voice] or 471-6441 [TTY].
If you have already made official arrangements with the Dean of Students office for approved
accommodations, please present your official letter of accommodation to me within the first two weeks of
class to allow time for us to set up your program of accommodation.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support:
- Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu


- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
- Brief assessments and referral services
- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors,
call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and genderbased discrimination, sexual harassment, sexu
al assault,sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational instit
utions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination
in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community,
the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
      harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “
Mandatory Reporters,” whichmeans that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee andmust report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on- one.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be
sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for
support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
 advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.
utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such
misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation,
gender identity, and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me
and I will report it.
     •    Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual
          misconduct and discrimination.
               o   File a report of discrimination via online form


              o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
    •    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
         The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing
         federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal
         financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under
         Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
    •    Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
         The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws
         that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected
         class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment
         Commission 800-669-4000.
Closing Thoughts
Please notify me in advance if you are having any difficulties with which I can assist. It is my job to make sure
that you have all the information and guidance you need to learn a great deal in this course. It is your job to
see that you take full advantage of all resources and put forth the effort needed to succeed.
This is what you’ve been waiting for guys!
Good Luck! And hold on. Here we go!
