David (D.S.) Cohen       ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu   Office Hours: Tues/Thurs 11am to 12:30pm       Spring 2020
                                                      (by appointment)
AET 119 - Focus on Careers Lecture Series - Spring 2020
Course Sections
 Instructor             TAs                    UID         Meeting Times                    Room
 David (D.S.) Cohen     TBA                    20751       Tues-Thurs 5p to 6p              RLP 0.126
Abstract
        A Lecture series focused on career building and strategies in the fields of Art and Entertainment
        Technology. Guest speakers will include industry professionals, hiring managers, studio heads,
        freelancers, and entrepreneurs discussing career opportunities in AET, identifying and meeting
        industry needs, personal branding, networking, job seeking, business planning, and more.
Learning Outcomes
        By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
              ●  Conduct research related to the job search and career development, using a variety of
                 resources
              ●  Develop a personal brand and online representation
              ●  Explore the opportunity and the operation of a freelance or entrepreneurial business
Required Equipment/Course Material
        All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of internet access, and running
        software tools such as Microsoft Office Suite, and Google Drive tools.
Prerequisites
        None
Assessment/Grading
        This course is participation and project based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on
        successful completion of project objectives, participation in assignments and forum discussions,
        professionalism, and attendance.
              ●  Attendance and professionalism is worth 50% of your grade
              ●  Assignments and Discussion Posts are worth 50% of your grade
        No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
        complete all work on time, attend class, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop
        before the deadline for doing so passes. (The last day to drop a class with is April 6​th​, 2020)
        Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
        fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
        will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
        grade of A+.
                                                                                                               1


      Letter grade equivalents:
        A = 94-100                        C+ = 77-79                        D+ = 67-69
        A- = 90-93                        C = 74-76                         D = 64-66
        B+ = 87-89                        C- = 70-73                        D- = 60-63
        B = 84-86                                                           F = 0-59
        B- = 80-83
Attendance/Absences
      ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of
      the class.
      For each unexcused absence after your first three, your final grade will be lowered by one letter
      grade.
      Seven unexcused absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
      Please be on time for class. Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class, leaving
      class without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy.
      Every two instances you are tardy will be counted as one time absent.
      Arriving within the last 20 minutes of class will be considered an unexcused absence.
      If you need to miss class for legitimate reasons it is your responsibility to ​contact your TA directly​.
      Sending a message by way of another student of an impending absence does not constitute a
      legitimate notification.
      Note: If you catch the flu, have a family emergency, or otherwise cannot attend class, please
      send an email to your TA and submit any class work as needed. Excused absences do not
      qualify for an extension in the assignment.
Religious Holidays
      Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
      classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
      day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
      may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
      an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
      University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to
      the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
      (from ​http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf​)
Professionalism
      Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students, instructor, and
      Guest Speakers. These will have an impact on your professionalism grade so it is important that
      you follow these guidelines...
      1) Be on time at the beginning of class. If you must come in late at the beginning of class, please
      enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible.
                                                                                                             2


      If you have a class beforehand that is on the other side of campus, you must inform your TA on
      the first day of class so adjustments can be made.
      2) Turn your cell phone off or on silent, and put it away. Looking at your cell phone during
      lectures, exercises and discussions is not acceptable. Use your computer for taking notes, not
      your cell phone.
      3) Computer use for notes is acceptable, but for no other use. Surfing the web, watching videos
      that are not part of the class, checking emails, sending messages, or other non-class note taking
      uses of your computer during class will impact your professionalism grade.
      4) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
      sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to
      loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, Sleep etc., please do so outside of the
      classroom, not during class time.
      5) Headphones and sunglasses are not allowed to be worn during lectures, exercises or
      discussions. Even if your headphones are not playing music, they should never be in your ears
      during these times.
      6) Arrive to class prepared, with your required equipment (IE: Computer), assignments completed,
      and reading/tutorials reviewed and ready to discuss.
      7) Be prepared and willing to participate in class discussions and present your work (in progress
      or completed) when called upon.
      8) Be polite and considerate to others. Insults, bullying behavor, and discrimination will not be
      tollerated.
      9) Do not fall asleep in class.
File Format and File Naming Convention:
               Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, concept art, etc. File Format: PDF;
               Game Builds – File Format: Executable file (PC and Mac) with supporting files.
      File Naming Convention:
               If submitting as an individual…
               FirstInitialLastname_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
               Example: dcohen_project01_07042018
      IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it may not
      read correctly.
      REQUIRED File Format:
      Both Windows and Mac builds must be submitted for all digital games. It is important to test your
      builds before submitting.
      Documentation and images must be submitted as a single PDF per each assignment.
      See individual assignments for additional details of required file formatting.
                                                                                                        3


Classroom Policy
     Devices
         ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
              this with me prior to class).
         ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media (unless related to
              class activities)
         ● Do not take a call, chat, or respond to emails during class time.
     Food/Drink
         ●    Food is not allowed in class, unless for medical reasons. If for medical reasons you must
              provide an accommodation letter from Services for Students with Disabilities
              (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone
              512-471-6644).
         ●    Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
              when not in use. You spill it, you clean it up.
Use of Class Materials
     The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
     assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
     violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
     Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor
     may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
     which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading
     class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
     students. For more information, go to:
     https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Management+of+Course+Materials%3A+Copyrig
     hts+and+Class+Recordings
Q Drop Policy
     The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
     reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
     institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
     dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
     higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Academic Integrity
     The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
     abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to
     maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken
     at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other
     scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
         ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
         ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
              assistance in preparing them;
         ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
              academic discipline; and
                                                                                                         4


           ●   avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
               student.
               (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic Dishonesty
   ●  In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
      dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
      such as:
           o Cheating
           o Plagiarism
           o Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
           o Falsifying Academic Records
           o Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
               extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
           o M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
               without authorization to do so)
           o Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
           o (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)
           o Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
               penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
               University.
               (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism
      Plagiarism is a serious crime. According to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, to plagiarize
      means:
      1) to steal and pass off (the ideas or words of another) as one's own
      2) to use (another's production) without crediting the source
      3) to commit literary theft
      4) to present as new and original an idea or product derived from an existing source.
      Plagiarism is a serious crime. According to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, to plagiarize
      means:
      “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
      obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
      including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
      and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
      conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
      http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-con
      duct/).
      "Self-plagiarism":​ it is an offense against University rules to turn in the same work for credit more
      than once unless all involved instructor's consent in advance. (from
      https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/ams/about/academic-integrity.php).
                                                                                                           5


Copyright and Fair Use
       Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers.
       Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the
       doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright
       holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will
       discuss these issues during the semester as needed, but when you have questions about
       whether or when you can appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K.
       Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
       Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
       students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
       current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
       communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
       minimum, twice per week.
       It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
       in his or her official e-mail address. Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with “User
       Unknown” is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable
       messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered
       without further action required of the University or instructor. For further information, go to:
       http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy​.
Religious Holidays
       Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
       classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
       day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
       may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
       an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
       University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to
       the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day. For more
       information, go to:
       https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/​.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
       for qualified students with disabilities. Please provide documentation of your needs during the
       first week of class, if possible, so that the necessary accommodations can be made promptly. For
       more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259,
       ssd@austin.utexas.edu​,​ ​http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/​, or videophone 512-471-6644).
Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
       harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
       funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
       environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
       community, the university can:
                                                                                                             6


          1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
          2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
              have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
          3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
     “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
     Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents
     that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty
     or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
     employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official
     report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting
     options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
     titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Student Support Services
     There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
     include (but are not limited to) the following:
          ●   Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333,​ ​utexas.edu/finearts/careers​) provides a full
              range of services and resources to support students and alumni.
          ●   The Undergraduate Writing Center (512-471-6222,​ ​uwc.utexas.edu​. helps students with
              every phase of writing assignments for their courses.
          ●   The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614,​ ​utexas.edu/ugs/slc​) provides study skills,
              time-management, and note-taking courses.
          ●   University Health Services (512-471-4955,​ ​healthyhorns.utexas.edu​) provides medical and
              health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
              officially enrolled in certain University programs.
          ●   The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515,​ ​cmhc.utexas.edu​) helps students
              with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
     Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
     is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
     Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
     Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Procedures
     Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide
     students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security
     of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff
     of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have
     the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of
                                                                                                          7


        users subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
        https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
        (adapted from
        http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf
Overview of Schedule
        Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be
        altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design
        program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be
        announced via Canvas.
        Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas.
                                                  Calendar
Note – The outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
Schedule will be updated regularly with guest speakers and subject to change based on speaker, needs
of the course, or at the instructor's discretion.
 Week 1               ●   Course Introduction: Introduction                     Career Goals Assignment
 Thurs: 1/23          ●   Discussion Post: Career Goals                         (Due 2/13 11:59pm)
 Week 2               ●   Career Options
 Thurs: 1/30
 Week 3
 Thurs: 2/6
                      ●   Career Planning, Strategizing, and Paths to Success
 Week 4
 Thurs: 2/13
 Week 5                                                                         Personal brand
 Thurs:2/20                                                                     assignment (Due March
                      ●   Marketing Yourself                                    5th at 11:59pm)
 Week 6
                              ○ Representing you, your work, and getting
 Thurs: 2/27
                                  yourself known
 Week 7
 Thurs: 3/5
 Week 8               ●   Entrepreneurship and Freelancing                      Business Plan
 Thurs: 3/12                                                                    Assignment (Due April
                                                                                2nd at 11:59pm)
 Week 9:                  SPRING BREAK NO CLASS
 Thurs: 3/19
 Week 10              ●   Entrepreneurship and Freelancing (Continued)
 Thurs: 3/26
 Week 11
 Thurs: 4/2
                                                                                                         8


Week 12     ● Making Connections, maintaining connections Networking Assignment
Thurs: 4/9    and Networking                              (Due April 30th 11:59pm)
Week 13
Thurs: 4/16
Week 14     ● The Job Hunt
Thurs: 4/23
Week 15
Thurs: 4/30
Week 16     ● Where do we go from here
Thurs: 5/7
                                                                                   9
