                           Department of Accounting
      ACC 152 – Distinguished Speaker Lyceum (unique # 02395)
                                   Spring 2019 Syllabus
Course Description
The MPA Distinguished Speaker Lyceum, at The University of Texas at Austin is a hallmark of
the MPA Program. Its purpose is to develop leading professionals by integrating graduate
accounting studies with current issues in accounting practice, business, and society.
Course Requirements
Students are required to attend eight professional speaking events this spring and, on one typed
page, submit via Canvas, a summary of the discussion at each talk you attend (themes, speaker’s
points, etc.) within one week of hearing a speaker. It is each student’s responsibility to select
and attend the talks.
Not all of the talks you might attend are published at this time, but they will start appearing on
the web as the spring semester gets under way. Likely talks include those in the McCombs VIP
Distinguished Speaker Series, the Faculty Research Series for students sponsored by the
Undergraduate Council, and talks sponsored by other groups around McCombs or on campus –
for example, the Energy Management and Innovation Center will have talks, as will
sustainability, computer and other groups in McCombs and around campus. Of course, the talks
you select should be related (or relatable) to business in some way.
Grading
This is a pass/fail course. Grades will be determined based on satisfactory completion of the
course requirements.
E-mail and Canvas
The use of email and Canvas are required for this course. I will communicate with the class with
announcements and guidance and I will answer questions via email. I will check e-mail each
weekday and somewhat less regularly over weekends. I will use the email addresses on Canvas.
They are the email addresses that you have given the University for directory purposes. If you
need to update your email address with the University go to your UT Direct page and, under
personal info/all my addresses, change your email address. It is your responsibility to regularly
check both your e-mail and the class website on Canvas.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must inform
students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster: Web-based,


password-protected class sites are available for all accredited courses taught at The University.
Class e-mail rosters are a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names
included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of
the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html.
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. If you have any concerns, please
contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from view of other
students.
Dropping the Course
Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who stops
attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a failing grade. Consult the Academic
Calendar on the Registrar’s website (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for specific deadlines.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to
observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed
to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, https://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
                                                   2


       Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
       Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing
        during the first week of class.
       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
       Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
        Services office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                  3
