 AET 319 Course Syllabus Syllabus
                                         Digital Musicianship
                                                  AET 319
“My kind of composing is more like the work of a gardener. The gardener takes his seeds and scatters them, knowing
what he is planting but not quite what will grow where and when - and he won't necessarily be able to reproduce it
again afterwards either.” – Brian Eno
                                              Fall 2018, DFA 4.126
                                           MW, 11:30 am – 12:45 pm
 Instructor:                  Jack W. Stamps, DMA
 Office Hours:                TBA
 Email:                       jstamps@austin.utexas.edu
 I.       Rationale:
 This course was created out of a need to teach basic musicianship skills as they relate to making
 music in a digital audio workstation. An essential understanding of the language of music is key to
 making better musical choices. Understanding the basics of compound meter helps to inform a
 better hip-hop composition. The application of the basics of melody helps in the composition of a
 more memorable game music experience. The digital musician must learn the fundamental rules
 of music and musicianship before he or she plans on breaking them, or expanding them to better
 express themselves as composers.
 II.      Course Aims and Objectives:
 By the end of this course, students will:
     •   Understand the principles of rhythm and meter.
     •   Understand the principles scales and harmony.
     •   Understand the principles of melody.
     •   Understand the principles of harmonic progression.
     •   Think critically about how, why and where music technologies are deployed within a theoretical
                                                         1


AET 319 Course Syllabus Syllabus
       context.
    •  To compose music in a series of genres, ranging from game music to songwriting to film music and
       more.
    •  Apply the basics of musicianship in the analysis of popular music styles.
III.     Assessment Model:
         Daily Attendance: 10%
                  Daily attendance is essential to the successful completion of the course. Please do everything you
                  can to attend all classes.
         Weekly Class Quizzes 25%
                  Quizzes are administered through Canvas and will usually be assigned on Wednesdays for
                  completion by the following Monday.
         Text-based Theory Assignments: 35%
                  The online text comes with lots of suggested assignments. I will be pulling assignments from
                  these the aggregate of which will equal 35%.
         Final Composition: 30%
                  Absolutely no late submissions will be accepted.
         Letter Grade Policy:
         To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
         will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
         Thus, the conversion from percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
         A = 94 – 100
         A- = 90 – 93.999…
         B+ = 87 – 89.999…
         B = 84 – 86.999…
         B- = 80 – 83.999…
         C+ = 77 – 79.999…
         C = 74 – 76.999…
         C- = 70 – 73.999…
         D+ = 67 – 69.999…
         D = 64 – 66.999…
         D- = 60 – 63.999…
         F = 0 – 59.999…
IV.    Academic Integrity
                                                            2


AET 319 Course Syllabus Syllabus
Cheating and Plagiarism
By enrolling in this course, you agree to abide by the student Honor Code and Academic Integrity policies as outlined
by the Office of the Dean of Students here. Infractions of this policy will be severely penalized. We have uncovered
evidence of students cheating on quizzes or caught plagiarism on creative projects red-handed in the past. In such
cases, failing the course, suspension from school, or even expulsion are all penalties that may be applied at the
discretion of the Office of the Dean of Students. Academic Dishonesty may ruin your grade, academic career, and
can stain your reputation for decades to come.
Academic Dishonesty
“Academic dishonesty” or “scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the
student or the attempt to commit such an act. In AET 319, this includes but is not limited to:
         1) Submitting all or part of someone else’s work as your own, without properly crediting your
              sources (this especially applies to creative projects)
         2) Sharing answers to quizzes or assignments with other students
         3) Using forbidden aids like internet searches on quizzes or theory assignments
V.        Course Schedule
  Unit      Date                  Class Session                                  Assignments and Comments
            8/29    Introduction, Syllabus                   Read Introduction and Chapter 1: “Pitch”
             9/3    Labor Day Holiday: NO CLASS
    I.                          Pitch & Rhythm
             9/5    Staff, notes, piano roll, middle C       Chapter 1 (Pitch Quiz 1)
            9/10    Clefs, Alphabet, lines & spaces, ledger
                    lines
            9/12    Sharps and flats, Intervals: semi and    Chapter 1 (Pitch Quiz 2) & Theory Assignment
                    whole tones                              Chapter 2
            9/17    Measures and Beats, Time signatures
            9/19    Simple and Compound Meter                Chapter 2 (Rhythm Quiz 1)
            9/24    Tempo, Notes and Rest Values             Chapter 2
            9/26    Practice: Rhythm Basics                  Chapter 2 (Rhythm Quiz 2) & Theory Assignment
    II.                        Advanced Rhythm
            10/1    Polyphonic Rhythm, Basic Drum            Chapter 3
                    Patterns
            10/3    Syncopation & Compound Meter             Chapter 3 (Advanced Rhythm Quiz 1)
            10/8    Ties & Extended Notes                    Chapter 3
           10/10    Triplets and Tuplets                     Chapter 3 (Advanced Rhythm Quiz 2) & Theory Assignment
                    Practice: Rhythm Basics
   III.                    Scales and Harmony Basics
           10/15    Key, Major Scales, chord types           Chapter 4
           10/17    Major Harmony                            Chapter 4 (Major Scales Quiz)
           10/22    Key, Minor Scales, chord types           Chapter 5
           10/24    Minor Harmony                            Chapter 5 (Minor Scales Quiz)
           10/29    Minor Harmony II                         Chapter 5
           10/31    Mid-Term Analysis                        Chapter 4 & 5 (Theory Assignment)
                                                            3


AET 319 Course Syllabus Syllabus
 IV.                         The Basics of Melody
          11/5     Arpeggiation and Intonation     Chapter 6
          11/7     Text Setting and Contour        Chapter 6 (Melody Quiz)
   V.                        Harmonic Progression
         11/12     Basics of Harmonic Progression  Chapter 7
         11/14     Inversions, Form                Chapter 7 (Harmony Quiz)
         11/19     Form, Melody and Harmonic       Chapter 7 (Melody and Harmonic Progression Quiz)
                   Progression
         11/21     NO CLASS: Thanksgiving
  VI.              Genre-Based Composition Theory
         11/28     Game Music                      Chapter 8 (Game Music) (quiz)
          12/3     Song Form                       Chapter 9 (Song Form) (quiz)
          12/5     EDM, etc                        Chapter 10 (EDM, other forms) (quiz)
         12/10     Film and TV Music               Chapter 11 (Film and TV Music) (quiz)
                                                   Open Lap times: TBA
                                                   Final Composition Due: December 18, 1pm
                                                  4


AET 319 Course Syllabus Syllabus
VII. Course Requirements
          1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                     (a) Attendance—and attentiveness—is essential and required. Attendance is facilitated
                         through the LAITS broadcast stream in Canvas and assessed by Instapoll and discussions.
                     (b) If one must miss a class session and desires to ask for an excused absence, it is the student’s
                         responsibility to let the TA team know by email in advance of the absence. We do not
                         guarantee an excused absence will be granted if you notify us only after missing a class
                         session. It is the student’s responsibility to catch up with material or class activities missed
                         due to the absence—the TA team will not necessarily remind the student of what needs to
                         be made up from the class session missed.
                     (c) Instapolls and Attendance can be excused, but other in-class activities—Quizzes and Topical
                         Discussions—must be made up or they will receive zeroes. There is a narrow window of time
                         after each missed in-class activity within which make-up submissions will be accepted, so
                         contact the TA Team ASAP after the missed class session (or preferably, before) to receive
                         instruction on how to make up the assignment.
                     Religious Holy Days
                     By UT Austin policy, you must notify the TA Team of your pending absence at least fourteen
                     days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
                     examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, we will
                     give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
                     absence. With advance notice, we are happy to accommodate religious holy days.
          2. Required Course Materials:
                     Required Textbook: Digital Musicianship; A Theory and Practice of Popular Music, by Dr. Jack
                     W. Stamps. Kendall Hunt Publishing (Dubuque, IA: 2018):
                     https://he.kendallhunt.com/product/pixels-samples-lumens-illusion-foundations-art-and-
                     entertainment-technologies
                     The textbook is online only and contains many supplemental materials including links to videos,
                     websites, music tracks, and more. Being able to access these online supplemental materials will
                     be essential to success in the course. Buying a used textbook may result in having an access
                     code that has already been used once and is thus invalid.
VIII. Other University Notices and Policies
 Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
 All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It
 is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail
 address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
 current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be
 time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
 complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
 http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty:
Details of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition
                                                            5


AET 319 Course Syllabus Syllabus
or diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.)
    •   If you require accommodations on completing assignments and quizzes/exams, please bring your
        accommodation letter from SSD to Dr. Stamps during office hours as early in the semester as possible. We
        will be happy to provide accommodations as specified in the accommodation letter from SSD.
    •   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
        instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
        conversion, etc.).
    •   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips
        are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
        transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
    •   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
        phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
 to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
 partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
 Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
 5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
   undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
   dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
   than that number.”
                                                         6
