                                        SYLLABUS
                      ANT 350C – PRIMATE SENSORY ECOLOGY
                                    Spring Semester 2019
PROFESSOR:           Dr. Chris Kirk
                     Office: SAC 5.154
                     Email: eckirk@austin.utexas.edu
                     Office hours: Wednesday 1:00 - 3:00 PM
CLASSES:             Tues. and Thurs. 9:30 - 11:00 AM     SAC 5.172
PREREQUISITES: ANT 301, or consent of instructor
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
     Ecology is the study of how organisms interact with their environment.
     Sensory ecology is the study of how organisms acquire and respond to information about
     their environment.
     Primate Sensory Ecology is a course designed for advanced undergraduates in
     biological anthropology and the biological sciences. This course provides an opportunity
     for detailed study of primate sensory systems from an ecological and comparative
     perspective.
     The core topics covered in this course are the special senses of vision, hearing, and smell,
     with a particular emphasis on the adaptive and ecological significance of primate sensory
     adaptations. For each of these senses, lectures and readings will review all or some of the
     following concepts: 1) general and comparative anatomy and physiology, 2) evolutionary
     history, 3) development, 4) neural pathways and central processing, 5) psychophysics,
     and 6) behavioral ecology.
     In studying each sensory system, an emphasis will be placed on the relationship between
     variant morphologies and behavioral capabilities. This dual focus on morphology and
     behavioral ecology will provide students with an explicit understanding of the effect that
     the functional anatomy of a sensory system has on an organism's niche. All information
     will be presented within a comparative phylogenetic framework, so that evolutionary
     novelties can be understood in terms of the macroevolutionary processes responsible for
     the novel feature's appearance and subsequent modifications.
                                                                                                1


READING ASSIGNMENTS:
    There is no textbook or course pack for this course. Readings of review articles and
    research papers will be made available online through Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/).
    In general, reading assignments will cover some (but not all) of the material presented in
    class.
    PDF files of lecture slides will also be posted on Canvas. Be advised that past
    performance in this course is closely tied to attendance - YOU ARE STRONGLY
    ENCOURAGED TO ATTEND CLASS.
GRADING & EXAMS:
     There will be three non-cumulative exams during the course of the semester. Exam
     questions will be taken from lectures and assigned readings.
     DO NOT MISS AN EXAM. Make-up exams will be given ONLY when medical or
     family emergencies can be documented.
     Exam scores will not be curved during the term. If you have any questions about your
     grade on an exam, I will be happy to recheck your whole exam. Simple errors of grading
     (e.g., incorrect addition) will be corrected immediately. More complicated issues should
     be addressed in writing within 3 days after the return of exams. Please include the exam
     with your request. You have 3 days after the exams have been returned to you to notify
     me of any errors or disagreements. After that, grades are final.
     Exams 1 & 2 each count as 35% of the final grade each; Exam 3 counts as 30% of the
     final grade. All exams are non-cumulative.
     THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM FOR THIS COURSE.
     Final Grade Ranges:
     A = 100-90; B = 89-80; C = 79-70; D = 69-60; F = 59 and below
CHEATING POLICY:
     During exams, students will not be permitted to use electronic devices of any kind.
     Without exception, any student found cheating on an exam will receive a grade of zero
     for the exam and will be referred to the dean's office for further disciplinary action.
SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS:
     If you require special accommodations for exams (e.g., a reduced-distraction
     environment or extra time), you must contact Dr. Kirk at least 7 days in advance of the
     exam in order to discuss the necessary arrangements. Proof of qualification for
                                                                                               2


        accommodations from the UT Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) office must
        be provided. Each time a student wishes to use an approved accommodation for an exam,
        it is the student’s responsibility to notify and make advance arrangements with Dr. Kirk.
        A student is free not to use an approved accommodation. However, if a student opts out
        of an accommodation for one exam and then decides to use it for another exam, it is the
        responsibility of the student to make advance arrangements with Dr. Kirk.
COURSE OUTLINE**
22 Jan (Tu)      Introduction
24 Jan (Th)      Eye
29 Jan (Tu)      Retina
31 Jan (Th)      Activity Pattern 1
5 Feb (Tu)       Activity Pattern 2
7 Feb (Th)       Visual Acuity 1
12 Feb (Tu)      Visual Acuity 2
19 Feb (Tu)      Visual Fields
21 Feb (Th)      Color Vision 1
26 Feb (Tu)      Color Vision 2
28 Feb (Th)      EXAM 1
5 Mar (Tu)       Balance & Vestibular Apparatus 1
7 Mar (Th)       Balance & Vestibular Apparatus 2
12 Mar (Tu)      Hearing 1
14 Mar (Th)      Hearing 2
18-22 Mar        Spring Break
26 Mar (Tu)      Cochlear Function
28 Mar (Th)      Auditory Efferent System
2 Apr (Tu)       Auditory Ecology 1 – Localizability
4 Apr (Th)       Auditory Ecology 2 – Transmission
9 Apr (Tu)       Auditory Ecology 3 - Noise
11 Apr (Th)      EXAM 2
16 Apr (Tu)      Introduction to Olfaction
18 Apr (Th)      Main Olfactory System
23 Apr (Tu)      Accessory Olfactory System
25 Apr (Th)      Primate Variation
30 Apr (Tu)      Pheromones
2 May (Th)       Scent Marking 1
7 May (Tu)       Scent Marking 2
9 May (Th)       EXAM 3
**Note: Subject to Revision
                                                                                                  3
