                             D e s i g n       S k i l l s      L i g h t i n g    F a l l    2 o 1 8
           TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
      “I, by profession, am a designer of light. Lighting for performance and place requires an invisible intuition into the
    nature of the human experience. We must see light where there is emotion. We must craft shadow from conflict and
     we must make epic the mundane. We shape, we carve, we reveal and we hide. We give glimpse to matter. We give
         meaning to that which is present before us. We create a reality, which simultaneously is both true and false.”
                                                            Michelle Habeck
   Associate Professor Michelle Habeck
   Office Winship Building 2.142a
   Hours by appointment
   mhabeck@austin.utexas.edu
   Class Location Winship Building 2.138
   Class Meeting Time: Tuesday & Thursday 12:30pm – 2:00pm
   *Class Flag: Independent Inquiry
   This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you in the
   process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation
   of a question, problem, or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
   grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
 I. Course Description:
               The class will introduce the student to the fundamentals and skills of design thinking, critical observation,
   communication and reflection as a part of the in depth process path of contemplation, to research, to application.
   Students will be exposed to lighting practices, terms, and standards expected in the professional practice. The class
   will help to expand the student’s ability to successfully communicate, collaborate and participate in many creative
   based environments.
II. Course Aims and Objectives
      Course Aims
      •     To introduce and explore lighting design with an emphasis on the application of various skills, procedures and
            techniques involved in contemporary lighting practices.
      •     To introduce the student to systematic approaches, basic nomenclature and organizational structures used in
            the physical articulation of lighting for performance, installation, exhibit, event and media.
      •     The process of design requires a deep and exhausting exploration into text and/or creative origin. Our
            approach to design will evolve through the study of textural, musical, and spatial analysis, observation studies,
            historical research, light as it exists in natural and in man-made environments, and the study of the ways in
            which light may signal and/or alter our perception time and space.
      •     Assignments may be indivually focused and/or developed through collaborative project based works.
      Course Objectives
      •     Students will practice the art of skilled of observation and seeing; both of which are primary to the study and
            craft of design.
      •     Students will practice the art of communication via written, visual, verbal and physical methods.
      •     Students will learn to prepare, format and organize the materials and information necessary to the
            documentation of a production or lighting event.
      •     Students will practice the skills that allow one to explore strong and purposeful choices.
      •     Students will practice techniques that teach the value of team collaboration
   Course Format and Procedures:
               Class format
                    •     The class is a combination of application, lecture, presentation, discussion, critical response,
                          personal reflection. The pace is robust and the rhythm of assignment is orchestrated as a catalyst
                          to activate creative thought.. Attendance is crucial but surely not enough to fully integrate you
                          into the class community. Active listening and generous participation in class discussions is
                          expected and encouraged.
                    •     This course serves as an upper level course of study for the undergraduate student. This course
                          requires a serious commitment to yourself, your personal growth and to the coursework
                          presented.
               Class participation is expected and includes:
   2o18 version 1.o                                                  1


                       D e s i g n       S k i l l s    L i g h t i n g         F a l l     2 o 1 8
       TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
              •     Speaking up in class and taking leadership in exercises
              •     Playing the role of the “audience” during class and taking initiative to actively listen to materials
                    presented
              •     Listening to other opinions and allowing others space to express themselves
              •     Incorporating materials discussed in class into the exercises and projects
              •     Being supportive of your classmates and working as a “team”
         Course Code of Conduct:
              •     The culture of this course is determined by the conduct of its members. Therefore, all members of
                    this course have responsibilities to uphold and protect the learning environment, professional
                    education, and integrity of a degree awarded from the University of Texas at Austin. To that end,
                    all members of this course should..
              •     Be familiar with course expectations listed in this syllabus.
              •     Actively promote and maintain professional conduct, and adhere to the same standards they
                    expect others to follow.
              •     All cell phones, paging and digital playback devices are to be turned OFF
                    and put away during class. Text messaging, taking phone calls and/or
                    messages are not allowed during class time.
              •     Members of this course shall show respect for themselves and each other as colleagues. Actions
                    are considered unacceptable if they are intended to insult or stigmatize an individual or group on
                    any basis. Actions are considered unacceptable if they exhibit conduct which is lewd, indecent, or
                    obscene, or which is patently offensive to an individual, academic community or clinical practice
                    setting.
              •     All communications involving members of this course will be respectful and courteous. Verbal,
                    written and electronic communications must be free of material that is harassing, profane,
                    intimidating, or inappropriate.
              •     All members of this course should enjoy an opportunity to take part in the learning process.
                    Members shall not disrupt instructional sessions, administrational activity, or other related
                    events. Special attention should be paid to common etiquette such as the following:
              •     Members of this course should arrive on time (late attendees should be discreet)
              •     Members of this course should be attentive rather than disruptive (do not eat, sleep, etc.)
              •     All comments should be on topic and respectful of everyone in attendance
              •     Members of this course should dress appropriately for the occasion
              •     Members of this course shall not steal, damage, destroy or endanger physical or intellectual
                    property belonging to the college, a member of the college or a location affiliated with the
                    college. This course and its members have invested a great deal of time and resources and
                    deserve the respect of others.
              •     Members of this course must always represent themselves truthfully. Falsely representing oneself
                    or another is unacceptable.
         Feedback:
              •     During this course I will be asking you to give me feedback on your learning. It’s very important for
                    me to know your response so that we together we can create an environment effective for
                    teaching and learning.
         Course of Study – Design Skills
              PRINCIPALS OF LIGHTING DESIGN
              Included is a study of the properties of stage lighting, the objectives of stage lighting, optics, the
              handling light and color, topography of the theatrical space and basic light board programming. Also
              covered in this section are observations of weather conditions and the atmosphere’s play with light,
              lighting in the natural world, interior and exterior artificial light, light on stage and light as a sculptural
              element. Exercises might include: a written journal focused upon the observation of interior and
              exterior environments and color analysis. Applied practical programming of a light board and a project
              which explores place- space - time – movement and scale. Projects (group and solo) may require the
              use of basic digital video equipment, digital editing software and digital image manipulation devices.
2o18 version 1.o                                             2


                        D e s i g n       S k i l l s    L i g h t i n g       F a l l   2 o 1 8
       TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
              INTRODUCTION TO LAYOUT AND DOCUMENTATION
              This is the study of communication and documentation materials relative to lighting design. There is an
              exploration of basic nomenclature and organizational structures used in the physical articulation of
              lighting for theatrical productions. You will study the use of the light plot and lighting paperwork for
              proper technical and design communication required throughout the lighting design process. Proper
              drawing and lettering skills will be introduced and practiced. Also covered in this section are
              observations of collaborative communication and listening skills necessary throughout the design
              process, organizational techniques and layout modification processes for the lighting designer.
              Exercises might include: Lettering, line work and the drawing of the human form, the creation of a
              production cue sheet, channel hookup, instrument schedule, magic sheet and the creation of a visual
              research morgue and/or a visual storyboard. An introduction to and the proper drawing and drafting of
              a light plot, lighting section and relative plot communication drawings.
              COLLABORATIVE APPLICATION OF ART FORM IN PRACTICAL DESIGN
              The class will design lighting for supervised studio projects. The goal is to provide a laboratory to
              exercise the skills of clear communication, creative thinking, practical application, advanced technique,
              time management and collaborative development.
              This is not a lighting technology class. If you are unfamiliar with lighting fixtures and the basic lighting
              technology, I suggest you purchase and read the following. This is an upper division design course and
              thus it is your responsibility to make yourself familiar with basic lighting technology.
IV.      My Assumptions
         •    I base my pedagogy methods on the assumption that you are in school to pursue a course of rigorous
              personal investigation and growth. All assignments exercises, discussions and lectures point to that
              result and support the prediction of a successful outcome. I anticipate the highest level of
              commitment to your work at UT. Your growth as a student and an artist is my goal for this class and I
              pledge to participate in that growth to my fullest ability.
V.       Course Requirements
       A.     Attendance
              •     Attendance is mandatory for all students.
              •     Tardiness and absence for this course will cause your total grade to fall. Lighting Design is an art
                    form of collaboration and participation with fellow artists. Your inability to attend and participate
                    will be viewed as a failure to complete an important facet of this course. Attendance is taken at
                    each class.
              •     Absences in excess of ONE UNEXCUSED absence will result in the student's final course grade
                    being reduced by one full letter grade for each excessive absence.
              Excused absences include
              •     Absences documented in advance in writing with my prior approval (no third party advocates i.e.
                    “Lou is sick, he told me to tell you he wouldn’t be here”).
              •     Illness excused with a note from the doctor or infirmary
              •     Death of a close relative (funeral notice required)
              Tardiness Policy
              •     Tardiness will be penalized. Our class time is valuable and I will begin class on time. A tardy
                    penalty is given to any student arriving 10 minutes late to class without written medical or other
                    written official university notice. Three tardies will equal one unexcused absence.
         ❖    Policy on Absence for Religious Holidays
         •    By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
              date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment,
              or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
              missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. For religious holy days that fall within the
2o18 version 1.o                                              3


                       D e s i g n        S k i l l s     L i g h t i n g      F a l l     2 o 1 8
       TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
              first two weeks of the semester, notice should be given on the first day of the semester.
       B.     Course Readings/Materials
              •      The Dramatic Imagination, Reflections and speculations on the Art of the Theatre by Robert
                     Edmund Jones, ISBN-10 0878301844, ISBN-13 978-0878301843
                          o Other readings and media matierals will be made available on course Canvas site
              •      Class Materials
                     •    Newspring Pad 18”x24”, make sure that the paper is not smooth and glossy, an ebony pencil,
                          kneaded erasure, and vine or willow charcoal.
                     •    Beginners drafting Kit - A Field Lighting Template 1/4”=1’0” scale, Architect’s scale rule,
                          pencil, drafting erasure, 24” roll of trace paper, drafting tape and a circular (360 degree)
                          protractor.
              •      Computer programs
                     •    All students will need access to the following programs. Each of these programs; Microsoft
                          Word, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft powerpoint or like programs Mac pages, Mac numbers,
                          Mac Keynote. The student version of Vectorworks and demo version of Lightwright 5.
              •      Computer Access and technology requirements
                     •    It may be necessary to have access to a computer, a scanner, a copier, and a printer for
                          duplicating research and sketches. Faulty equipment is not an excuse. Practice good e-habits
                          and save or store your work so a quick transfer to another piece of equipment after system
                          failure will not be traumatic.
                     •    All reading, research and homework assignments must be completed before the beginning of
                          each class period. Follow the class schedule for these due dates.
                     •    Neatness, scholarship, and presentation all count towards your final grade. Communicating a
                          design clearly is a part of the process.
              •      Handouts, & Texts
                     •    Texts should be brought to class.
                     •    Materials may be given out in class or via blackboard on occasion. You should bring these
                          materials with you to each class. Much of the information taught in this course references
                          upon future and past discussion. Each student will need these materials to reference
                          throughout the semester long teaching sessions.
2o18 version 1.o                                              4


                        D e s i g n       S k i l l s    L i g h t i n g      F a l l    2 o 1 8
       TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
C. Assignments, Assessment and Evaluation
          Assignments are located on the course Canvas site.
Work & Project policy
•   All work and projects are due at the top of the class meeting time. If you cannot attend class, you must find a
    way to get your materials turned in to me on time.
•   LATE WORK WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED.
•   You are responsible for making up missed work for excused absences. It is your responsibility to obtain
    assignments and lecture notes from one of your classmates.
•   This course is an upper division course and the workload will prove a challenge. In class discussions, readings,
    project and critique deadlines frequently overlap. One must invest in a continuous commitment to the course
    and the course work to succeed.
•   You will be expected to attend class with all necessary tools and materials. This includes your text and all related
    deisgn and technical documentation.
•   You will be required to dress properly for technical and working sessions. This means no open toed shoes. This
    means no skirts as we may be working in the catwalk. You must arrive to class dressed to work. Shorts under a
    skirt is acceptable attire.
•   All written materials must be turned in typed with your name, course number, date and title of assignment
    and/or observation title noted at the top of each page. Pages will be numbered. Text will be single spaced 12
    point ariel font. Materials must be stapled in the top left corner of the page.       Failure to follow any of the
    above listed instruction may result in a loss of graded points.
•   All materials turned in must clearly state, your name, course number, date and title of assignment on and inside
    the front cover.
•   All drafting in this class will be hand drafted. Neatness counts. Organization of materials in an orderly and clearly
    communicated fashion or lack there of will be reflected in your graded points.
•   Completed projects are expected. You will lose graded points for work unfinished.
•   You will lose points for incorrect spelling and grammar.
Use of Canvas in Classes
•   Canvas is a Web-based course management system with password-protected access to communicate, distribute
    course materials, share resources, collaborate, post grades, submit assignments, and to give online quizzes and
    surveys.
VI.       Grading Procedures
          This breakdown is relevant to all graded segments of the class.
          Points Grade
          94-100 A
          90-93      A-
          87-89      B+
          83-86      B
          80-83 B-
          77-79 C+
          73-76 C
          70-72 C-
          67-79 D+
          60-66      D
          0-59 F
          A=Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work completed on time, with a
          consistently high level of quality exhibited. An evidence of significant development should be demonstrated
          across all dimensions of learning (research, drawing, communication, compositional choices, script analysis,
          conceptual and abstract thinking). The result at this level demonstrates activity that goes significantly
          beyond the required course work in one or more course elements.
2o18 version 1.o                                             5


                       D e s i g n        S k i l l s     L i g h t i n g       F a l l    2 o 1 8
        TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
          B=Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with
          consistently high quality in course work. Strong evidence of marked development across all
          dimensions of learning.
          C=Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with generally good
          quality in course work. Evidence of some development across all dimensions of learning.
          D=Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work completed, with
          inconsistent quality in course work. Evidence of development across all dimensions of learning is unclear.
          F=Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned work completed, or very
          low quality in course work. Development evidence is not available.
VII.      Academic Integrity
          University of Texas Honor Code
          The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
          opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
          integrity, honesty, trust, fair-ness, and respect toward peers and community.
          Policy on Academic Integrity
          Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
          the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
          individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly
          enforced. For further information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site:
          http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
VIII. Other University Notices and Policies
          Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
          Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
          University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
          recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. Regular e-mail management
          will also minimize the risk that the inbox will be full, causing the e-mail to be returned to the sender with an
          error. Undeliverable messages returned because of either a full inbox or use of a "spam" filter will be
          considered delivered without further action required of the
          University.http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
           Drop Courses
           Drop courses on your own using registration before the 12th day of class.
           Q Drop; schedule and appointment with your advisor to discuss and pick up the drop form. Get your
           professor’s signature on the form. Bring the form back to your advising office by the Q-drop deadline.
          Documented Disability Statement
          The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
          qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at
          471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
         Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
          Are you worried about a student in your class, bothered that your roommate has been acting differently, or
          concerned about the behavior of a co-worker? Do you have concerns but are not sure what to do? If so,
          contact the Behavior Concerns Advice line at 512-232-5050
          UT Counseling and Mental Health Center
          SSB 5th Floor 512-471-3515
          Hours: Mon. - Fri., 8 a.m. - 5 p.m.
          Emergency Information Quick reference
2o18 version 1.o                                              6


                       D e s i g n       S k i l l s     L i g h t i n g        F a l l  2 o 1 8
       TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
          http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/quickref/
 Helpful Safety Resources
                   ▪     Austin Emergency 911
                   ▪     UTPD 512-471-4441
                   ▪     UT FIRE 512-475-3511
                   ▪     Sure Walk 512-232-9255
                   ▪     Campus Emergency Information 512-232-9999
                   ▪     University Health Services 512-475-6877
                   ▪     24 hour telephone counsiling 512-471-2255
                   ▪     Behavior concerns advice line 512-232-5050
                   ▪     Emergency preparedness webisite
                                ▪   http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                   ▪     Sign up for campus security text alerts
                                ▪   Https://utdirect.utexas.edu/emer_notify/index.WBX
 Emergency Evacuation Policy
          Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire
          alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
          evacuation:
                   ▪     http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                   ▪     http://www.utexas.edu/emergency/
                   ▪     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
                         nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
                   ▪     If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
                   ▪     In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-
                         enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
                         Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
2o18 version 1.o                                              7


                         D e s i g n       S k i l l s    L i g h t i n g        F a l l   2 o 1 8
        TD354T Unique Number #26125 / TD 388L Unique Number #26 270 / AET339 Unique Number #2099 4
Gun Policy Statement
As of 1 August 2016 license to carry holders (LTCH) are allowed handguns in most parts of campus. All UT policies and
information around this law can be found at https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/ (All quotations here are from that web
page).
          • The LTCH is solely responsible for following both the law and UT policy. That policy states: “Students who
          do not follow UT policy are subject to discipline by the Dean of Students.” Additionally, “accidental
          discharge of a handgun by any...student may be cause for disciplinary action, up to and
          including...expulsion....”
          • “Although you can carry in many places on campus, you cannot carry everywhere or when engaged in
          activities that make carrying a handgun impossible.” This course will at many times during the semester be
          one of those places.
          • This class will have many class sessions where the activities will make it impossible for a LTCH both to
          carry legally and participate in required class work. A refusal to participate will be recorded as an absence
          for that day.
          • If a gun is seen in class the instructors reserve the right to call UTPD. A LTCH who does not follow state law
          and UT policy will automatically fail the course.
          • There is a great deal of research that indicates carrying a firearm (concealed or not) does not make a
          person safer. In fact, being armed can make a situation much more dangerous, even lethal. For articles that
          detail this research see:
*Evan Defilippis and Devin Hughes, “Gunfight or Flee: New Study Finds No Advantages to Using a Firearm in Self-
Defense Situations,” The Trace, 14 July 2015.
https://www.thetrace.org/2015/07/defensive-gun-use-armed-with-reason-hemenway/
*Evan Defilippis and Devin Hughes, “Gun-Rights Advocates Say Places That Ban Guns Attract Mass Shooters. The Data
Says They’re Wrong,” The Trace, 18 June 2015. https://www.thetrace.org/2015/06/gunrights-advocates-say-that-
places-that-ban-guns-attract-mass-shooters-the-data-says-theyre-wrong/
*Timothy Egan, “Myth of the Hero Gunslinger,” The New York Times, January 20, 2011.
http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/01/20/myth-of-the-hero-gunslinger/?_r=0
*Matt Valentine, “The Myth of a Good Guy with a Gun,” Politico Magazine, 5 October 2015.
http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2015/10/oregon-shooting-gun-laws-213222
*Gabrielle Canon, “Study: People Are Quicker to Shoot a Black Target Than a White Target: Shooter bias increases in
states with lax gun laws,” Mother Jones, 1 September 2015. http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/08/study-
shows-racial-bias-shootings
*More articles, studies, and data may be found at http://gunfreeut.org/
My office is a gun-free zone. Those who cannot attend office hours because of this may email me to schedule an
alternative.
To reiterate: every LTCH is responsible for obeying the law and UT policy. A failure to do so will result in penalties
from being assigned an absence for the day to failing the class to expulsion from UT.
2o18 version 1.o                                               8
