                                                                                     Fall 2018
                                                                 Latina/o/x Spirituality
                                                                (40575/31215/43259)
                                                                       MWF 1:00-2:00pm
                                                                                  GWB 1.130
                                       Dr. González-Martin
                                 Department of Mexican American
                                        & Latina/o Studies
                                         Office: 2.314 GWB
                               Contact: rvgonzal@austin.utexas.edu
                               Office Hours: Fridays 9:30-11:30am
Course Description: This course introduces students to the religious and spiritual
practices of diverse Latina/o populations living in the United States. Students will work
with primary and secondary texts, to examine the diverse ways in which Latina/o
communities’ create spiritual meaning in their lives. It will examine the religious and
spiritual practices from the vantage point of transition and change as a way of
understanding larger aspects of cultural and social change within 21st century U.S. Latina/o
publics. It will expressly look at cultural productions from the vantage points of gender and
race politics, and incorporate the spiritual tradition of women, queer communities, and
various “othered” Latina/o identifying community members.
    By the end of the course, students will be able to:
        1. Identify major themes in the study of Latina/o spiritual practice in the US.
        2. Evaluate cultural studies and adjacent disciplinary texts to understand how
                  studies of patterns of shared belief form strategies of self-hood in
                  multicultural contexts.
        3. Critically, and creatively assess the value and purpose of various research and
                  presentation methodologies in circulating knowledge in academic contexts.
This course holds 3 Flags:
    • Cultural Diversity (content). This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the
        United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity
                                                  1


        with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should
        therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments
        covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that
        has experienced persistent marginalization.
    •   Writing (assignments). This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses
        are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In
        this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete
        substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you
        improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more
        assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You
        should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
        written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of
        Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility,
        established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
              v Students will receive weekly feedback from the professor to help support
                  the refinement of their written work.
    •   Independent Inquiry (research methods). This course carries the Independent
        Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you in the process
        of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the opportunity for
        independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major.
        You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the
        independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
Required Text:
    1. Gonzales, Patrisia. Red Medicine: Traditional Indigenous Rites of Birthing and Healing
        (2012).
    2. Lomas Garza, Carmen. In My Family/ En Mi Familia (2000)
    3. Murphy, Joseph M. Botánicas: Sacred Spaces of Healing and Devotion in Urban
                 America (2015).
    4. Romberg, Raquel. Witchcraft and Welfare: Spiritual Capital and the Business of Magic
                 in Modern Puerto Rico (2003).
 *All other readings can be found on CANVAS.
Classroom Expectations:
Students will…
        1) Arrive to class on time and prepared to contribute to class discussion.
        2) Complete all assigned readings before class.
        3) Communicate with instructor regarding absences, questions, problems, or
        concerns.
        4) Cultivate a respectful classroom environment.
Attendance Policy: Attendance is required. If an unplanned absence causes you to miss an
assignment or in-class quiz or test, you must bring in official documentation of your absence
(by a doctor, lawyer, civic-authority, etc.) to justify earning credit for work submitted after
                                                 2


the due date.
Classroom Engagement: Engagement is worth 20% of your course grade. Our classes are
fueled by both lecture and group discussion. It is vital that every student engages and
actively contributes in every class meeting. In order to do so successfully, you must do the
readings, and be prepared to discuss them. Students are responsible for checking their
email and class-based discussion threads before our class meetings.
Accommodations: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.
              http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/accommodations-and-services/
Academic Integrity: All students are responsible for reviewing and understanding the
University’s guidelines on academic dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
in the course and/ or dismissal from the University. For further information about what
constitutes academic dishonesty on the UT campus visit:
                   http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
UT Honor Code: As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
                        of the University and uphold academic integrity.
Assignments: Students will have a variety of writing and participatory assignments over
the course of the semester including:
Weekly Reading Responses (15%): These are 1-2-page reading reflections that students
question and comment upon a weekly reading assignment, while supporting their ideas
with textual evidence. Students will consult and utilize MLA style citation guidelines for
formal writing. Grades will be based on content as well as writing style.
Research Journal (7%-included in Research Portfolio Grade): Students will be divided into
research groups to help plan and execute a chosen final research project and presentation.
Each week, students will write a 1-page summary of their group meeting as it relates to the
development of their personal research progress. These will be submitted each Monday
following a Friday, in-class group meeting. These entries will be formally written, but need
not cite external sources. These are places to share ideas and questions about different level
of the research process. Student will collate entries, and submit them as part of the final
research project.
Research Portfolios (35%): Students will plan and execute an original research project
thematically tied to the theory or content discussed in class. Students will work
collaboratively to decide on an original method of research presentation. Students will have
the opportunity to present their research results in creative (non-written) forms. Finalized
research portfolios will include:
                                                3


         Research Proposal (8%): 1 page write up of Research Question and
          Thesis/Hypothesis Statement
         [Research Journal: 7%]
         Annotated Bibliography (10%): 5-7-source bibliography of academic theoretical
         support.
         Research Methods Statement (Draft 5%, Final 20%) 3-5-page statement of
         chosen research methodology.
         Final Creative Submission (30%): Variable.
         Group Research Presentation (20%): Students will illustrate the productivity of
         having multiple approaches to one shared topic/theme.
Midterm Exam and Final Exam (15% x 2): Students will have two short in-class exams that
will selectively cover course reading and lecture.
Total Grade Rubric:
         Engagement: 20%
         Research Portfolio: 35%
         Reading Responses: 15%
         Exams: 30%
                                      Class Schedule
**= Research Journal due on Monday
Week 1: 8/29-8/31
Introduction to Course and Expectations
Readings: Syllabus
Friday Discussion: Research Groups Introductions & Topic Assignments; Project-
STEP 1
Week 2**: 9/5-9/7(Monday =Labor Day Holiday)
Theoretical Approaches to Latino Spiritualties
Readings: Parkin. “Practice Theory.” In The Dictionary of Anthropology; Aponte.
“Exploring Spanglish Spirituality.”
         Supplemental Reading: Espinosa. “History and Theory in the Study of Mexican
         American Religions.” In Mexican American Religions: Spirituality, Activism,
         and Culture; Ortner.“Practice Theory.” In Making Gender: The Politics and
         Erotics of Culture.
Friday Discussion: Class does not meet; Project-STEP 2 (external meet-ups)
                                               4


Week 3**: 9/10-9/14
Reading Response #1
Readings: Lomas Garza. Family Pictures “The Curandera”. Aponte. Introduction and
Chapter 1: “Contexts for Spirituality” & “Santo and Spirituality”.
Wednesday: Research & Writing Day
        Supplemental Reading: McDowell. “Corridos of 9/11: Mexican Ballads as
        Commemorative Practice.”
Friday Discussion: Project-STEP 3; Reading Response #2
Week 4**: 9/17-9/21
Indiginisma / Reclaiming Histories through Spiritual Practice
Readings: Broyles-González. “Indianizing Catholicism: Chicana/India/Mexicana
Indigenous Spiritual Practices in Our Image”; Lomas Garza. Family Pictures “
Friday Discussion: Peer-Review; Research Proposal Due
Week 5: 9/24-9/28
Institutional Hispanic Catholicism
Readings: Sandoval. “Journey to the Center of the Church: A Timeline of Hispanic
Catholics in the U.S.”; Sanchez Korrol. “In Search of Unconventional Women:
Histories of Puerto Rican Women in Religious Vocations Before Midcentury.”
        Supplemental Reading: Ferrari. “Religiosity and Personality Traits of Hispanic
        and Non-Hispanic Catholic Deacons Machismo or Caballerismo?” Levitt. “Two
        Nations under God?: Latino Religious Life in the United States”.
Friday Discussion: Media; Reading Response #3
Week 6: 10/1-10/5
Popular-Catholicism
Readings: Cantañeda-Lilas. “Our Lady of Guadalupe and the Politics of Cultural
Interpretation.” In Mexican American Religions
        Supplemental Reading: Garcia. “Religion and the Chicano Movement:
        Católicos Por La Raza.; Espinosa. “Brown Moses: Francisco Olazábal and
        Mexican American Pentecostal Healing in the Borderlands.” In Mexican
        American Religions. Bowen. “U.S. Latina/o Muslims Since 1920: From “Moors”
        to “Latino Muslims.”
Friday Discussion: Project -Step 4; Reading Response #4
                                            5


Week 7**: 10/8-10/12
Bruja Feminism: Astrology & Self Determination
Readings: Lara. “Bruja Positionalities”; Flores. “ Why Young Makers are Proudly
Reclaiming Bruja Feminism”
<http://remezcla.com/features/culture/bruja-feminism-culture-makers-latinx/>
Wednesday: Research & Writing Day
       Supplemental Reading: Lucero. “Art of the Santera.” In Chicana Traditions.
       Aponte. “Rituals in the Passage of Life”; Performing Indigeneity in a South
       Texas Community: Los Matachines de la Santa Cruz”;
Friday Discussion: Media; Reading Response #5
Week 8: 10/15-10/19
       Midterm Exam Review
       Midterm
       Research and Writing Day (No Class)
                     Spirituality, Commerce & Social Status
Week 9: 10/22-10/26
Diasporas and Faith Systems
Readings: Romberg. Witchcraft and Welfare.
       Monday: Introduction & Chapter 2
       Wednesday: Chapter 3.
Friday Discussion: Project-Step 5; Reading Response #6
Week 10**: 10/29-11/2
Readings: Romberg. Witchcraft and Welfare.
       Monday: Chapter 4
       Wednesday: Chapter 5.
Friday Discussion: Media; Reading Response #7
Week 11: 11/5-11/9
Healing in Diaspora
Readings: Murphy. Botánicas.
       Monday: Introduction & Chapter 1, 2
Wednesday: Research & Writing
       Supplemental Reading: Marton. “Remembering America: A Powerful and
       Cariñosa Daughter of Yemaya and a Maestra de las Ciencias Oculta.”
                                           6


Friday Discussion: Project- Step 6; Annotated Bibliography Due
Week 12**: 11/12-11/16
Healers in Situ
Readings: Murphy. Botánicas.
      Monday Chapter 3: “Consultation: People, Problems, Descriptions”
      Wednesday: Chapter 5: “3 Santos”
      Supplemental Reading: Vidaurri. “Las Que Menos Quería el Niño: Women of
       the Fidencita Movement.” Aponte “Rhetoric and Traditions”; Romano.
      "Charismatic Medicine, Folk-Healing, and Folk Sainthood”; Green. “Saints
      (Santos) in Celebrating Latino Folklore; Martín. Borderlands Saints: Secular
      Sanctity in Chicano/a and Mexican Culture.
Friday Discussion: Media; Reading Response #8
Week 13: 11/19 (Thanksgiving)
Healing Spaces as “Places”
Submit Draft Methods Statement
Readings: Murphy. Botánicas
      Monday: Chapter 4.
      Supplemental Reading: Flores-Peña. “‘Candles, Flowers, and Perfume’: Puerto
      Rican Spiritism on the Move”; Aponte. “Sacred Places and Spaces”; Viladrich.
      “Welcome to El Barrio: An Afternoon in the Company of a Latina Folk Healer.”
Week 14**: 11/26-11/30
Gender and Power: Botanicals
      Readings: Gonzales. Red Medicine
      Monday: Introduction & Chapter 1
      Wednesday: Chapter 5
      Supplemental Reading: Turner. “Voces de Fe: Mexican American Altaristas in
      Texas”; Van Ham. “Barrio, Borderlands, and Beyond: Folk Religion and
      Universal Human Rights at Tucson’s El Tiradito Shrine.”
Friday Discussion: Project-Step 7
Week 15: 12/3-12/7
Gender and Power: Making Your Own Medicine
Reading: Gonzales. Red Medicine
                                         7


       Monday: Chapter 2
       Wednesday: Chapter 8
Friday: Final meeting with group.
Week 16
12/10
In-Class Group Presentations
Final Portfolio & Creative Submissions due day on the last day of class (12/10)
                         Final Exam: December 9th at 12noon.
                                           8
