                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                    Department of American Studies
                             AMS 311S: Vice in American Culture
                                       Fall 2019 | Unique 30519
                                       M/W/F 9:00am-10:00am
                                               BUR 436A
Instructor:       Judson Barber
Email:            jgbarber@utexas.edu
Office:           Burdine 404
Office hours:     M/W: 10:00am – 11:30pm (and by appointment)
Course Description
Catalog course description:
This course examines the definitions of and cultural responses to “vice” as it has been constructed
and reconstructed throughout American cultural history to define the boundaries between moral and
immoral behavior. Social issues pertaining to the consumption of alcohol, drug use, gambling,
idleness, and sexual behavior are among the many we will investigate as they have emerged and
submerged from the colonial era to the present.
Expanded course description:
The regulation or eradication of certain individual actions has been an issue of primary importance
to American society since the earliest colonial arrivals in the 17th century. Though the boundaries of
what behaviors have been considered “vices” continually changes over time, responses to those
behaviors provide an insightful glimpse into the priorities of American culture as it has evolved from
the 1620s to the present.
In this course we will examine the interplay between vices, their prohibition, and their
consequences—looking across an array of public debates, legislation, and popular culture to explore
issues including (but not limited to) idleness, gambling, drug use, alcohol consumption, and
sexuality. In addition to relying upon both primary and secondary historical texts, we will look to
popular media such as film, television, and literature, to understand the ‘culture of control’ that
pervades across traditional divisions of race, class, and gender in America.
Organizing our investigations into different times and places throughout the semester will be the
central theme of Americans’ obsession with deviance. In other words, we will be focused on how and
why dominant American culture defines propriety, virtue, and normalcy through an inverse
relationship with immorality, hedonism, and all things vicious. We will observe how the nation and
its peoples’ very identities are formed in opposition to such deviance. In other words, this is a class
about how, why, when, and where certain human behaviors become marked as vices, and the ways
in which those who engage in them are forced to navigate society.
As we explore those limits and boundaries of what is socially acceptable, this course will take us
through a vast array of topics, such as: the formation of a virtuous society; ‘Crises’ of labor, self-
efficacy, morality, and public health; the cultural work of immigration policy and racialized ‘others’;
heterosocial mixture in the urbanizing world; youth and autonomy; and economic interests
embedded within vice industries.


As demonstrated in the Course Outline, the class is divided into three thematic sections, each
dealing with particular kinds of vices and their varied social responses: 1) health and wellness,
including (but not limited to) the consumption of alcohol, tobacco, and illicit drugs; 2) propriety
and sexuality, with a focus directed to the sexual behaviors sporadically and routinely marked as
undesirable and punished accordingly; 3) productivity and accumulation, in particular the
behaviors and economies of gambling, wagering, as well as more patterned behaviors of general
idleness that has been both actively and passively policed at different times and in different places
historically.
This is a seminar course and your active participation and engagement with both the reading
materials and class discussions is integral. Students who complete the assigned readings, attend class
regularly, and contribute frequently to our discussions (including Structured Group Debates)
routinely gain more from this course than those who take a more passive approach to the material
and class sessions. Though they will frequently diverge, many of the class discussions will focus on
the material of our readings specifically, so it important to bring your books and articles to class on
those days as outlined in the course schedule. Each assignment in this course, both reading and
writing, is designed to encourage your own, independent, critical, and original thought—not just to
restate the authors’ and my own words on these matters.
Required Reading:
    1) Philippe Bourgois & Jeffrey Schonberg, Righteous Dopefiend (2009)*
    2) Hannah Webster Foster, The Coquette (1797), available on Canvas
    3) Mireille Miller-Young, A Taste for Brown Sugar (2014), available as eBook through UT Library
    4) Alan Wolfe & Erik Owns (editors), Gambling: Mapping the American Moral Landscape (2009)*
    5) Shane White, Playing the Numbers (2010) available as eBook through UT Library
    6) Other required course readings will be made available on the course Canvas website.
*these texts are available for purchase through online vendors and at the Co-Op.
Expected Learning Outcomes:
    1) Become interdisciplinary historical analysts of primary and secondary sources: specifically,
         integrating concrete case studies drawn from the readings and lectures with broader
         contextual material to make insights into historical causation and cultural change.
    2) Understand how culture and policy inform one another and how that cyclical relationship
         often targets the behaviors of raced, gendered, and classed populations, specifically with
         regard to the processes of identity formation, constitutive otherness, and national political
         formation.
    3) Hone ability to critically analyze primary sources and construct original arguments about
         vices, their function, and status as a focal point in constructing American culture and society.
         Students should complete the course well-equipped to analyze the social world and produce
         historically grounded and logically sound arguments about morality, behavior, propriety, and
         culture as these things change over time.
Grading Scale:
I use the University’s plus-minus grading system.
A: 93-100; A-: 90-92; B+: 87-89; B: 83-86; B-: 80-82; C+: 77-79; C: 73-76; C-: 70-72; D+: 67-69; D:
63-66; D-: 60-62; F: 0-59


Course Requirements:
Regular attendance is an essential component of this class. As previously stated, your completion of
the readings will also be crucial to your success on the written assignments. Those assignments will
be FIVE reading responses, TWO short essay assignments, and ONE final research paper. The
percentage points are broken down for these assignments as follows:
                                       To earn full participation points, a student may have no more
                    Attendance /
                                       than three unexcused absences and must participate in class
      15%           Class
                                       discussions (including Structured Group Debates) and
                    Participation
                                       thoroughly engage with the assigned material.
                                       Throughout the semester students will be asked to respond to
                                       the week’s assigned text in approximately 400-550 words.
                                       These brief responses will include critical analysis of the
                    Reading            material from the student’s own perspective. Students will
      25%
                    Responses          complete five responses of their choice during the semester,
                                       though at least one response needs to be completed for each
                                       unit. These responses are due by 8pm the night before we
                                       discuss the assigned readings.
                                       Students will complete two short essays (3-5 pages) in which
                    Short Paper        they will both synthesize and quote directly from course texts
      30%
                    Assignments        to provide an original interpretation or argument about
                                       assigned topical vices.
                                       Students may revise both of their short essays, incorporating
      -%            Essay Revisions    instructor feedback. The grade for the revised paper will
                                       replace the original grade.
                    Final Paper        A proposal of the final paper topic and research plan. 1-2
      5%
                    Proposal           pages plus an annotated bibliography.
                                       7-9 double-spaced pages on a topic relating to any of the vices
                                       which have been subject to regulation or prohibition in the
                                       United States, either historically or at present. Students will
      25%           Final Paper
                                       use the analytical tools they have developed in the class and
                                       apply them to a topic that expands the scope of what we have
                                       covered as a group. More details will be forthcoming.
Structured Group Debates:
For this exercise, students will come to class having prepared a written (250–500 word) argument on
an assigned moral/legal issue. With argument(s) in hand, students will divide into groups of five or
six, where each group is comprised of people who have defended the same position, as assigned by
the instructor. Each group member will present their reasons for holding the position that they do,
and the group will synthesize each person’s arguments into a single argument. We will then
reconvene as a class and hold the debate where each group will present and defend its position.
There will be two such exercises: September 27 and October 25. In each case, students will hand in
their written arguments, which will be graded. The total grade for each assignment will be based on
students’ written arguments and their verbal contributions to in-class group debate.


Extra Credit:
There will be a two-point extra credit opportunity during the semester. More details to come.
Lateness Policy:
Failure to submit any of your writing assignments within the given window on Canvas will result in a
penalty of five points for every hour that your paper is late—unless you have made prior
arrangements with me.
Civility Code:
I expect everyone to be attentive, respectful, and polite to one another during class. All cell phones
and hand-held electronic devices must be silenced and stowed during class. People who fail to pay
attention to the lectures often fail the class. You may use a laptop computer or tablet for taking
notes or reading the material at hand. However, if I find that use of laptops becomes disruptive to
class in any way (including chatting, surfing, etc.), I reserve the right to make individual exceptions
to this policy. Lastly, please try to save bathroom visits for before or after class. Do not leave class
early or arrive late, as our time together is limited. Moreover, those students who leave early after
signing in will be counted absent. Pursuant to UT policy, please ask me about my policy regarding
armaments in my office.
Students with Disabilities:
Any student with a documented disability that requires academic accommodations should contact
the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) through the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement at: 471-6259 (voice), or 471-4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as
soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. Please submit
this official letter to me within the first two weeks of class. If you require testing onsite at the SSD
office, you will need to fill out an SSD Test Reservation Form at least 10 business days before each
exam. You will need to provide me with the Instructor Portion of the form, as well. For more
information regarding onsite testing at SSD, please see: http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/adaptive-
testing/
For all other SSD information, please see: http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Gender-neutral writing:
Gender-neutral writing in the humanities is an accepted and recommended practice. The words
“man” and “mankind” do not refer to humanity; phrases such as “everyone has a right to his own
property” contain a faulty pronoun reference (substitute ‘abortion’ for ‘property’ to see why).
Appropriate language use includes, for example: “humanity,” “humankind,” “her/his/their,” or
simply the gender nonspecific “their,” when referring to populations or subjects that should not be
singularly gendered. When quoting writers who utilize non-inclusive language, leave their words in
the original. Gender specific language is, of course, appropriate when referring to a gender such as
“men” or “women.” In any event, specific individuals should be addressed by their preferred
pronouns. Students are strongly encouraged to read “Guidelines for Non-Sexist Use of Language”
(on Canvas) by Virginia L. Warren, originally published in the Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association in February 1986 (Vol. 59, No. 3, pp. 471-484).
Academic Integrity and Plagiarism:
Intellectual honesty is a foundational feature of all academic and scholarly work. All written work
submitted for this course is presumed to be the sole work of the individual student submitting it.
Academic dishonesty includes but is not limited to cheating on examinations or assignments,


unauthorized collaboration, plagiarism, falsification/fabrication of university documents, any act
designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the
instructor), assisting or allowing any of these acts, or the attempt to commit such acts.
Plagiarism is defined as the act of taking the work (words, ideas, concepts, data, graphs, artistic
creation) of another whether that work is paraphrased or copied in verbatim or near verbatim form
and offering it as one’s own without giving credit to that source. As students in this course, you will
be learning about other people’s ideas in course texts, your instructor’s lectures, in-class discussions,
and when doing your own research. When you incorporate those words and ideas into your own
written work, it is of the utmost importance that you give credit where it is due. When sources are
used in a paper, acknowledgment of the original author or source must be made through appropriate
citation/attribution and, if directly quoted, quotation marks or indentations must be used. If you use
an Internet source, you must include the web address (URL) at top of the webpage. Improper
acknowledgment of sources in exams, essays, papers, or presentations is prohibited. Plagiarism,
intentional or unintentional, is considered academic dishonesty and all instances will result in a
failing grade on the assignment and will be reported directly to Student Judicial Services and the
Office of the Dean of Students. Please contact us if you have any questions regarding the definition
of plagiarism. Further, please visit the Student Judicial Services website for additional information:
www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/
Title IX:
The University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining learning and working environments
that are free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. As required by Title IX, the University
does not discriminate on the basis of sex in its education or employment programs and activities,
and it encourages any student or non-student who thinks that he or she has been subjected to sex
discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence), or sexual misconduct by another
student, member of the faculty or staff, or campus visitor or contractor, to immediately report the
incident to any of the individuals or offices listed below. http://equity.utexas.edu/policies/title-ix/
Your instructors (including myself) are mandatory reporters, meaning we must report to the Title
IX office anything you share with us along these lines.
Campus Resources:
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation,
and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal
growth and well-being. https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services (SES) helps students and their families during difficult or emergency
situations. Assistance includes outreach, advocacy, intervention, support, and referrals to relevant
campus and community resources. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
The University Writing Center (UWC) is located in the UT Learning Commons at Perry-Castañeda
Library (PCL 2.330). http://uwc.utexas.edu
Sanger Learning Center (SLC ) provides academic support for all UT Austin students. Each year, we
help more than 20,000 students achieve their academic potential with our free services.
https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc


                                     Course Schedule
Wed. 8/28 Introduction to the Course and Syllabus: What/When/Where is Vice?
Fri. 8/30 American Dichotomies: Civility-Savagery / Progress-Declension
Mon. 9/2  NO CLASS – LABOR DAY
Wed. 9/4  American Morality / Ethics / Virtues
          In class: Tools for close reading texts - TAPS
Fri. 9/6  Useful Deviants and Biopower
          Michel Foucault, “11 January 1978” from Security, Territory, Population
          In class: “Biopower and You: A General Summary”
                             UNIT I – Health and Wellness
Mon. 9/9  Drinking and Drunkenness in Colonial/Early America
          Susan Cheever, “America’s Drunk History” Op-ed for The LA Times (2015)
Wed. 9/11 From Social Lubricant to Vice – 19th Century Turn
          Anthony Comstock, “Rum Traps” in Traps for the Young pp.50-54, 1883
          Neal Dow, “The History of a Neighborhood: A True Tale,” 1854
          Michael Lerner, Introduction to Dry Manhattan
Fri. 9/13 Temperance, Teetotalism, and Prohibition – 20th Century to 21st
          Lisa McGirr, The War on Alcohol (Preface, Ch, 1, & Ch. 7)
Mon. 9/16 Tobacco
          Begin reading Righteous Dopefiend
Wed. 9/18 Opium and the Formation of Moral Geographies
          Continue reading Righteous Dopefiend
          Nayan Shah, Contagious Divides (pp. 20-44 & 90-97)
          Jacob Riis, “Chinatown” from How the Other Half Lives
Fri. 9/20 Marijuana: The 1930s
          Continue reading Righteous Dopefiend
          H.J. Anslinger, “Marijuana: Assassin of Youth”
          “Marihuana Tax Act of 1937”
          In class: Reefer Madness
Mon. 9/23 Marijuana/Cannabis: Today
          Continue reading Righteous Dopefiend
           “Marijuana won’t be legal in Texas anytime soon”
          “Texas will legalize marijuana in 2019”
          “When will marijuana be legal in Texas? Maybe not until 2023”


Wed. 9/25  Cocaine: From Medical Marvel to Modern Menace
           Continue reading Righteous Dopefiend
Fri. 9/27  Structured Debate #1: Substance Control
Mon. 9/30  Amphetamines, Opioids, Prescription Drugs
           Finish reading Righteous Dopefiend
Wed. 10/2  Short Essay #1 Discussion
Fri. 10/4  Addiction, Pathology, & Responsibility
           Short Essay #1 Due at 11:59PM
                             UNIT II – Propriety and Sexuality
Mon. 10/7  Vice in Colonial New England
           Lisa Lauria, “Sexual Misconduct in Plymouth Colony”
Wed. 10/9  Sin & Propriety: Controlling Women’s Bodies
           Begin reading The Coquette
Fri. 10/11 Victorian Era: Purity, Piety, Domesticity, Submissiveness
           Selections from Godey’s Lady’s Book
           Continue reading The Coquette
Mon. 10/14 Pornography and Obscenity in a Changing America
           Giesberg, Sex and the Civil War (Intro & Chapter 1)
           Continue reading The Coquette
Wed. 10/16 Case Study: “The Old West” – Frontiers and the Difficulty of Moral Enforcement
           Continue reading The Coquette
Fri. 10/18 Prostitution and Sex Work in the 20th Century
           White-Slave Traffic Act (Mann Act) of 1910
           Finish reading The Coquette
Mon. 10/21 The Rise of Playboy & The Sexual Revolution
           Mary Eberstadt, “Is Pornography the New Tobacco?”
Wed. 10/23 The Information Age
           Mireille Miller-Young, A Taste for Brown Sugar (Chapter 3)
Fri. 10/25 Structured Debate #2: Regulation/Criminalization of Sex Work
Mon. 10/28 Sex Work and the Economies of Vice
           Mireille Miller-Young, A Taste for Brown Sugar (Introduction & Chapter 6)
Wed. 10/30 Short Essay #2 Discussion


Fri. 11/1  Deviance, Reproduction, and Sex Economies
           Short Essay #2 Due at 11:59pm
                       UNIT III – Productivity and Accumulation
Mon. 11/4  Protestant Work Ethic: Marking Idleness as Vice
           Max Weber, “The Spirit of Capitalism” in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
           Capitalism (Chapter 2)
Wed. 11/6  The Worst Idleness: Gambling
           Michel Marriott, “Fervid Debate on Gambling: Disease or Moral Weakness?” from
           The New York Times (1992)
           William Safire, “Gambling Fever,” essay for The New York Times (1995)
           In class: The Twilight Zone episode, “The Fever”
Fri. 11/8  Gamblers, Problem Gambling, & Pathological Gambling
           Wolfe & Owens, Introduction to Gambling: Mapping the American Moral Landscape
           Marc Potenza, “Gambling and Morality: A Neuropsychiatric Perspective” in
           Gambling (Ch. 7)
           In class: Louis Theroux – Gambling in Las Vegas
Mon. 11/11 Luck in America: Cultures of Chance and Control
           Jackson Lears, Something for Nothing: Luck in America, Intro: Gambling for Grace
Wed. 11/13 Cultural Meanings of Gambling
           Jackson Lears, “Beyond Pathology: Cultural Meanings of Gambling” in Gambling
           (Ch. 13)
           Shane White, Playing the Numbers (Prologue, Introduction, Chapter 1)
Fri. 11/15 Politics & Vice: What and Where can/do Americans Acceptably Idle?
           Jackson Lears, Something for Nothing: Luck in America, Epilogue
           William Safire, “Investigate Gambling” essay for The New York Times (1995)
Mon. 11/18 Casino as Moral Hellscape: Where Vices Collide
           William Safire, “Now: Bet While You Booze,” essay for The New York Times (1993)
           William Safire, “Gambling Fever,” essay for The New York Times (1995)
Wed. 11/20 Social and Economic Impacts of Casinos: Who wants them and Who doesn’t?
           Rachel Croson et al., “Behavioral and Brain Measures of Risk-Taking” in Gambling
           (Ch. 5)
           John Dombrink, “The Unproblematic Normalization of Gambling in America” in
           Gambling (Ch. 8)
Fri. 11/22 Gaming Indian: Sovereignty, Policy, and Neoliberal Economies of Chance
           Michael Nelson, “The Politics of Sovereignty” in Gambling (Ch. 2)
           William Safire, “The Wigwam Casino,” in The New York Times (1991)


Mon. 11/25    Gaming Indian II: Self-Determination and Proliferation
              Rand & Light, “Negotiating a Different Terrain: in Gambling (Ch. 3)
              William Safire, “Tribes of Gamblers,” in The New York Times (2002)
Wed. 11/27    NO CLASS – THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
Fri. 11/29    NO CLASS – THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
Mon. 12/2     Are Americans Vice-Prone?
              Final Paper Proposal Due
Wed. 12/4     Sports Betting & Daily Fantasy – A Gamble?
              William Safire, “Losers Weepers,” in The New York Times (1997)
Fri. 12/ 6    Gaming, eSports, and Vices in Digital Entertainment
              Reading TBD
Mon. 12/9     Final Paper Discussion/Workshop
Wed. 12/11    No Class Days
Fri. 12/13    No Class Days
Mon. 12/16    Final Paper Due by 5:00pm on Canvas
This Syllabus and Course Schedule is subject to change during the course of the semester, if
                                           necessary.
