Reality Capture for Architecture                                                                                           1
Instructor:      Robert Stepnoski, RP rob@austin.utexas.edu
                 Larry Kleinkemper, AIA
                 Office Hours: Tuesday/Thursday SUT 1.120
                                            Selection of Historic Landmark Examples
catalog description
This class instructs students on the technologies of Reality Capture, 3D Modeling, and their application to Architecture.
Students will capture a historic landmark in Austin with multiple technologies (LiDAR and Photogrammetry) and create a
computer model of the environment. The class will contrast the technologies to help students understand when and how
to use them for architectural projects.
pedagogic objectives
• Teach students about 3D Laser Scanning
• Instruction on photogrammetry
• Allow students experience with UAVs (drones) for photogrammetry
• Expose students to a variety of methods that can be used in professional practice.
• Develop skills of criticism through the identification of underlying assumptions about the technologies.
skills to be developed
• Students will demonstrate competence in using point clouds from LiDAR and Photogrammetry.
• Students will understand how to use reality capture systems to create fast / accurate computer models of existing
  structures
• Students will be able to select the proper technology to suit a project’s needs.
• Students will gain understanding of how to use a computer model to better understand a historic structure.
meetings & time commitment
The class meets Tuesdays and Thursdays from 2:00–5:00 pm unless otherwise arranged. It is expected that a minimum
of 4 - 6 hours outside of the regularly scheduled class meeting time will be necessary to prepare and complete the
assignments.
requirements and grading
• class participation [25% of course grade]
  Each student is expected to participate actively in the discussion of the required readings each week. You should
  expect to be called upon to state opinions and ideas about every reading. Occasional in-class opinion surveys of will be
  given and the results discussed among seminar participants. Readings should be completed two days before class to
  allow time for reflection.
• 3D Laser Scanning Model [25% of course grade]
  Creation of a computer model from LiDAR. Additional handout to be given.
• Photogrammetry Model [25% of course grade]
  Creation of a computer model from photogrammetry. Additional handout to be given.
• Interpretation and comprehension for historic preservation [25% of course grade]
  Students will work in pairs to create a presentation of what they learned about their historic structure from the different
  technologies and to make recommendations about how to best preserve and develop the site. Additional handout to be
  given.


Reality Capture for Architecture                                                                                   2
schedule
It is recommended that readings are done in the order given. The schedule is subject to minor revision to accommodate
guest lecturers, weather events, etc.
    Class          Date        Day    Topic
                                      Course Introduction: Orientation and
              June 6, 2019
       1                        TH    Goals.
                                      Discussion of the technologies to be
                                      used.
                                      Selection of Students Historic landmark. Possible Examples:
       2     June 11, 2019      TU    Planning and preparedness - What should you do prior to a site visit.
                                      Understanding the historical significance of the site.
                                      Field Work - Each student to spend 1.5 hours
                                      Scanning Class - Targeting, scanning exterior of the site
                                      UAV Class - Setting targets, understanding limits, flying the site
       3     June 13, 2019      TH    Field Work - Each student to spend 1.5 hours
                                      Scanning Class - Targeting, scanning exterior of the site
                                      UAV Class - Setting targets, understanding limits, flying the site
                                      Photography - Understanding camera settings
       4     June 18, 2019      TU    Field Work - Each student to spend 1.5 hours
                                      Scanning Class - Targeting, scanning exterior of the site
                                      UAV Class - Setting targets, understanding limits, flying the site
                                      Photography - Understanding camera settings
       5     June 20, 2019      TH    Class Work - Processing the field collected data.
                                      Autodesk Recap - Registering 3D point clouds.
                                      Pix4D - Processing Photogrammetry.
       6     June 25, 2019      TU    Class Work - Understanding 3D point clouds.
                                      Importing 3D point clouds into Revit and 3DS Max
       7     June 27, 2019      TH    Class Work - Creating computer models.
                                      Understanding and interpreting data.
                                      Class Work - Creating a presentation with the data from field
               July 2, 2019
       8                        TU    work
                                      Understanding and interpreting the data
       9       July 9, 2019     TU    Class Work - Fine tuning the presentation
                                      Working with computer models to create documentation.
                                      Organizing data to be coherent for presentation.
      10      July 11, 2019     TH    Student Presentation of work, findings, and interpretations


Reality Capture for Architecture                                                                                           3
software: Download and install the lab versions of Revit 2019 and 3DS Max 2019 (if your video card will run it) on to your
own computer. These programs are available from Autodesk students at no charge.
hardware:
You should have a laptop capable of running at the minimum Revit 2019 and 3DS Max 2019. If you do not, there are lab
laptop computers for check out and the computer labs in WMB.
software:
Download and install the lab versions of Revit 2019 and 3DS Max 2019 (if your video card will run it) on to your own
computer. These programs are available from Autodesk students at no charge.
progress:
Everyone is starting out at differing levels of proficiency therefore your grade will be based on relative progress.
attendance:
With the exception of faculty exemption or an excused absence, class attendance is mandatory. Students with two [2]
unexcused absences may be dropped from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than two [2]
unexcused absences is a full letter drop in the final grade for the course. Students should contact the instructor prior to
class if they expect to be absent or late.
Absences based on religious observances must be arranged fourteen [14] days in advance. Any work missed during that
time must be turned in within one week [7 days] of the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the
time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Attendance is expected for all lectures, field trips, studio sessions, and discussions. If a class meeting has to be
rescheduled, it will be done in a timely manner, with the intention of accommodating the majority of the course
participants' schedules.
grade scale
Final grades will be computed in accordance with School of Architecture and University Academic Policies as follows:
  grade    work quality    performance level                                                          points
  A        excellent       project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness,                     4.0
                           appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft,
                           and personal development. Student pursues concepts and
                           techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
                           complete on all levels.
  A-                                                                                                    3.67
  B+                                                                                                    3.33
  B        good            project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and                 3.0
                           successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
                           presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
                           Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
                           excellence.
  B-                                                                                                    2.67
  C+                                                                                                    2.33


Reality Capture for Architecture                                                                                           4
 C         required        project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in                    2.0
                           class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete
                           in one or more areas.
 C-                                                                                                      1.67
 D         poor            project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-           1.0
                           making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
                           appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill
                           and knowledge base.
 D-                                                                                                       .67
 F         unacceptable    project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met.                         0.0
                           Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
                           assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
 X         excused         issued only in the case of compelling, nonacademic circumstances
           incomplete      beyond the student's control. Simply not completing work on time is
                           an inadequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be
                           used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with
                           an agreement as to a new completion date. According to School of
                           Architecture policy, studio work must be completed before the
                           second week of the next design semester in which the student is
                           enrolling.
Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the grade to be reduced,
remain unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an individual basis, not as a comparison with other
students' grades.
coursework availability
Course material that is submitted for evaluation will be retained by the Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture for
the purpose of professional accreditation. Material that is not necessary for accreditation purposes will be returned to the
student within one academic semester.
reading and writing skills
As a seminar, this course is discussion and writing intensive. Students are expected to participate actively in all
discussions. If you are not confident in your English language skills, it is recommended that you go to the University's
International Office and meet with someone in ESL Services to discuss classes or workshops that can help you. The
office Graduate Writing Services can provide assistance with the final paper.
academic integrity
Plagiarism or violations of academic integrity in any form will be handled according to measures as outlined by the
General Information catalog and the University. All course related work submitted for evaluation is to be original and
prepared without unauthorized assistance. Work that is supplemented from ideas not originating from the student should
clearly cite the parent source.
Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action, including the receipt of a
failing grade for the course, and possible dismissal from the University. Since such infractions harm the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.


Reality Capture for Architecture                                                                                         5
accommodations
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical need. You will be
requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate accommodations
can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for Students with Disabilities
Office [512.471.6259 or 512.471.4641 http://www.deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/].
university of texas honor code
The core value of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honest, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
documented disability statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-232-
2937 (video phone).
use of e-mail for official correspondence
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university in
formed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which can be time critical. You can find UT Austin's policies and instructions
for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
religious holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will have the opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
behavior concerns advice line (bcal)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
phone your concerns about another individual's behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
faculty contact information
office location: Sutton 1.120
office hours:     Tuesday and Thursday
email:            rob@austin.utexas.edu
Office hours will be maintained at stated times, as well as by appointment, in order to discuss issues related to the
schedule, evaluation, coursework, etc. Please do not hesitate to notify the instructor of impending schedule conflicts with
other classes.
Concerns may also be directed to the Program Director.
