                   ACCT 384.2 – Taxation of Entities I
                           Spring 2020
                           Unique Number 02625
             Instructor Donna Johnston-Blair
                  Office GSB 5.126F
          Office hours T 12:30-1:30pm
                           W 10:00am – 12:00pm
                           TH 12:30-3:30pm
                           (I am generally in my office W and F afternoons but confirm if needed)
                           Email questions are also encouraged and office appointments can be set up via email.
                  e-mail Donna.Johnston-Blair@mccombs.utexas.edu
                     TA    Nicole Vu
                  Office   CBA 4.304A Unit G
          Office hours     MW 11:00-12:30pm
                  e-mail   nvu3069@gmail.com
 1 Learning objectives
Most individuals working in public accounting or for a corporation will encounter corporate tax issues. To
successfully resolve those issues, a solid foundation in the calculation of the corporate tax liability and an
understanding of the tax law that affects the transactions that take place in the life of a C corporation are required.
Therefore, my goals in this class are
     −  to facilitate your understanding of the fundamental concepts governing the taxation of corporations,
     −  to facilitate your understanding of the fundamental concepts governing the taxation of corporate-
        shareholder transactions, and
     − to enhance your ability to read, interpret and apply tax law to corporate operations and transactions
        involving a corporation and its shareholders.
 2 Materials
Text: South-Western Federal Taxation 2020: Corporations, Partnerships, Estates and Trusts, 43rd Edition,
Hoffman/Raabe/Maloney/Young/Smith. You can purchase the custom ebook for the course for $35.
ISBN: 978035739150.:http://www.cengagebrain.com/course/preview/3767154
Supplements
    ▪ Canvas Website
    ▪ Certain Homework Solutions (will be made available on Canvas)
    ▪ Instructor PowerPoint Slides (will be made available on Canvas)
    ▪ Additional required readings will be posted on Canvas or provided in class.
                                                                                                        1 | Spring 2020


      Tax Research Services: To access readings not posted to Canvas or to undertake tax research, all University
      of Texas students have access to three electronic tax research libraries - CCH, RIA Checkpoint, BNA and
      Westlaw – via the University Library’s webpage.
  3 Class Protocol
If you are running late, do not feel you should skip class. If you must leave class early, please tell me before
class starts.
If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to ensure that you obtain any handouts or assignments and
understand the material covered in the class missed.
If you wish to use a computer during class for any purpose other than note taking/PowerPoint reference, or plan
to use your phone for any purpose, please sit at the back of the class to prevent distraction to other students and
me.
  4 E-mail, Canvas and class notes
I will communicate with you regularly via e-mail; you are responsible for the content of these messages. I will
use the e-mail account that appears in the class roster to create a class mailing list. This e-mail address is the one
that appears with your name in the UT Directory. If you have changed your e-mail in the recent past you should
verify, via UT Direct, that the e-mail specified is the e-mail you use. If you need to update your email address
with the University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal info/all my addresses, change your email
address.
The Canvas page maintained for this class provides useful course information. To access
this page you will need a UT-EID. You should access this page on a regular basis to ensure you
are up to date and aware of what is going on in ACC 384.2. Before each class, I will post on
Canvas any PowerPoint slides I intend to use. At the beginning of each week I will also include a
weekly coverage overview. It is your responsibility to regularly check both your e-mail and the
class website on Canvas. You will find the tax return project information here, as well.
I may narrate some of the PowerPoints and post to Canvas. The materials covered in these
narrated PowerPoints may not be lectured on in class. You are responsible for these lectures as
well as the in-class lectures.
  5 Evaluation
A rigorous academic environment will be maintained in Accounting 384.2. Grades are earned based on your
  5
performance   on the following:
               Midterm exam                                                                 150 points
               Homework, Cases and lab assignments                                          150 points
               Tax return project                                                           200 points
               Final exam (comprehensive)                                                   200 points
               Maximum possible points                                                      700 points
                                                                                                       2 | Spring 2020


Tax return project: The tax return project will require you to complete a corporate tax return in four parts
during the semester. The due dates for the different parts of the project appear in the Course Outline.
You may work in groups on this project. A group should consist of no more than 4 people. You can
choose your own group at the beginning of the term and you will work with that group throughout the
semester. If you have trouble finding a group, please let me know. Each group should complete their
own project. At the end of the semester you will be allowed (not required) to submit a peer review of
your group. Any submitted peer review may have an impact on your final Tax Return grade.
Late assignments: If you hand in an assignment after the due date, you will lose 5 points for every day
the assignment is late. After the assignment is discussed in class or returned (whichever is earlier), I will
no longer accept the assignment for a grade.
Midterm and final exam: This course has a midterm exam and a comprehensive final exam. You are
required to take both of these exams. There are no make-ups for any exam. Each student is responsible
for managing his/her own personal schedule to be present at these exams.
Unexcused absence from any examination will result in a score of zero. If you miss an exam due
to an illness or other emergency reason, you should notify me as soon as possible and provide me with
written documentation (e.g., a note from the attending physician) after you return. I have final
authority to determine if your absence should be excused and if I can give you a make-up exam. If you
have an excused absence from a mid-term exam and I cannot give you a make-up exam, you will
receive extra weight on your final to compensate for the missed examination.
 6 Course outline
The course outline details daily topic coverage, assigned readings and homework due dates.
 7 Grading Questions or Appeals
Do not wait until the end of the semester to question or appeal grade components other than the final
examination.
If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the grade components, or if you feel you need to bring
to the attention of our Teaching Assistant or me other facts or circumstances that might affect the grade
for that item, you will have ONE WEEK from the date the grade is posted on Canvas to take such
action and have the matter resolved.
Beginning in the Fall 2009 semester the University of Texas at Austin instituted plus/minus grading for
all students. Department of Accounting policy requires that a grading scale including pluses and minuses
be used for all Accounting classes. Note that for MPA students, a grade point average of 3.0 is required
to successfully graduate from the University of Texas at Austin.
                                                                                             3 | Spring 2020


  Dropping the course
The course catalogue details both add and drop date deadlines. Students enrolled in graduate classes, at
the discretion of the instructor, are allowed to drop the class up until the last day of the term without
academic penalty. Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who
stops attending without notification or without the submission of a drop form will automatically earn a
grade of “F” for the semester.
    Academic misconduct
Academic misconduct includes (but is not limited to) cheating, fabrication, facilitation of academic
misconduct by others, and plagiarism, and is a serious academic offense. Neither the Department of
Accounting nor I will tolerate academic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty
with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the department’s Policy Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all of the
faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe
all of the student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that policy statement
to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Application of departmental policy to assignments in this course
Graded assignments (e.g., Tax return projects, homework problems): Each group’s solution should be
independently prepared. Groups should not refer to other students’ or other groups’ solutions. All
questions about the tax return project are to be directed to me or to the TA for this class. Violation of
these policies will be treated as an act of scholastic dishonesty. Evidence of non-independent work will
be forwarded to Student Judicial Services with a recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the
course.
Exams: Each student is expected to independently complete an exam during the designated exam period.
No student should refer to other students’ exam solutions or discuss the exam with other students during
the exam period. Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of scholastic dishonesty. Evidence of
non-independent work will be forwarded to Student Judicial Services with a recommendation that a
grade of “F” be assigned in the course.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must inform students in
advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster: Since Fall 2001, web-based, password-
protected class sites have been available for all accredited courses taught at The University of Texas. Class e-
mail rosters are a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic
class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For
information on restricting directory information see:
 http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html
Privacy in Canvas
                                                                                                      4 | Spring 2020


Information in Canvas is protected by your UT-EID login. If you have any concerns, please contact the ITS
Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from the view of other students.
Religious Holy Days
If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably
expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with
any concerns
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If academic accommodations are available to you, please provide me with
your authorization letter as soon as possible.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of Campus
Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
     •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
         buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
     •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
     •   If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
     •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     •   Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
     •   In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                      5 | Spring 2020
