                                                 Supervised Teaching
                                                  ANT 398T Spring 2019
                                                         Unique 31885
Course Meets Wed 9-12 in WCP (Formerly SAC) 5.124.
Instructor Dr. Denné Reed
office hours: Wed 3-5 or by appointment
office: WCP 4.148
e-mail: reedd@austin.utexas.edu
phone: (512) 471-7529
Course Description This course provides graduate students an introduction to the theory and practice
of teaching at the college and university level. The course covers pedagogical theory, instructional
methods, and active learning strategies, which provide the broader context for teaching in higher
education. The course covers the practical aspects of designing and implementing a course including:
curriculum development, organizing a syllabus, classroom management, lecturing and presenting
material, problem-based learning, student engagement, course assessment, and developing a personal
teaching philosophy articulated in a written teaching statement. Students will also have the opportunity
to practice teaching and to receive feedback on their teaching methods. This course fosters
introspection, organization and communication – skills that that are widely valued.
Main Learning Objectives
 •   Pedagogical theory for higher education
 •   Curriculum and course design
 •   Effective presentation and educational engagement
 •   Course evaluation and improvement
Expected Learning Outcomes
 1.   Understand  and  articulate  various  pedagogical  strategies  in  higher  education  
 2.   Empathize  with  the  challenges  undergraduate  students  face  in  the  classroom  
 3.   Feel  confident  developing  a  curriculum,  syllabus  and  course  schedule  
 4.   Be  able  to  employ  a  variety  of  teaching  strategies  and  methodologies  in  the  classroom  
 5.   Write  a  teaching  statement  that  expresses  your  pedagogical  philosophy  and  personal  vision  
Course Structure The course is organized into three sections. The first part of the course introduces
students to the background and theory of effective pedagogy. This part emphasizes readings and
discussions. The second part of the course examines the common workflows and activities involved in
organizing a course including developing the curriculum, organizing the syllabus and planning out the
semester. The final part of the course emphasizes practical teaching through practice lectures,
discussions and in-class activities. Here students have the opportunity to practice a variety of
classroom techniques and to receive feedback from their peers.
Required Materials
K. Bain (2004). What the best college professors do. Cambridge: Harvard U. Press.
K Lewis and M Sweet (2007) Teaching Pedagogy 3e. University of Texas (pdf available on Canvas)
ANT 398T Spring 2020                                               1                                         Reed


Recommended Materials
McKeachie, W. (2013) McKeachie’s Teaching Tips 14th ed.
Classroom Protocol. Civil and courteous behavior is expected during lectures and labs (It’s a good
idea outside of class too). Cell phone ringers must be turned off prior to the beginning of class.
Attendance Students are expected to attend all classes.
Assignments This course features four assignments:
Assignment 1 Teaching Statement and Job Packet:
It is common when submitting applications for faculty position to include a teaching statement (2-4
pages) that articulates your philosophy on teaching, your beliefs about the role of higher education,
student learning and your role as an educator. For this course you will prepare a draft of your teaching
statement along with a CV and Research Statement.
Assignment 2 Course Design:
Select a topic in your area of expertise and design a syllabus and schedule for a standard 15-week
semester. Students will provide detailed lesson plans for two class sessions that include:
  •   Learning objectives
  •   Active learning strategies
  •   Instructional methods
  •   Classroom Assessment Techniques
Assignment 3 Lecture observation and peer review
Students will identify an undergraduate class they can attend and evaluate, either a large-format class
or a small discussion class, and submit a brief ethnographic report about the classes.
Assignment 4 “Mini” lecture:
Prepare and teach a 25 minute lecturer for one of the detailed topics in your syllabus. You are
encouraged to prepare a presentation, use classroom technology and other tools to make the lecture
as engaging as possible. Following the lecture, your peers and I will provide constructive feedback.
Grading This course is offered on a credit/no credit basis. Students will receive credit fi they complete
all the necessary assignments, participate in class, and demonstrate competency in each of the main
learning objective.
ANT 398T Spring 2020                                 2                                              REED


Course Schedule
 Week 1
 Jan.    22    Course Introduction          Introductions, syllabus, writing exercise
 Week 2
 Jan.    29    Ideas on teaching.           Teaching Pedagogy (TP) Chapter II Effective
                                            Teaching pp 29-38.
               Introduction to pedagogical
               theory.                      Gannon, Kevin. Radical Hope: A Teaching
                                            Manifesto, July 6, 2016.
                                            http://www.thetattooedprof.com/archives/624#more
                                            -624
                                            Montell, Gabriela, "What's Your Philosophy on
                                            Teaching, and Does it Matter?" The Chronicle of
                                            Higher Education. March 27, 2003.
                                            http://chronicle.com/jobs/news/2003/03/200303270
                                            1c.htm
                                            Bain, Ken. (2004). What the best college teachers
                                            do. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                            eBook available through UT libraries. Chapters 1-2
 Week 3
 Feb     5     The modern university.       Arum, Richard and Josipa Roksa. Academically
                                            Adrift: Limited Learning on College Campuses.
               A look at how universities   University of Chicago, 2011. eBook available
               are changing and the role of through the UT libraries. Chapters 1,5
               higher education in society.
                                            View Documentary
                                            Starving the Beast: the battle to disrupt and reform
                                            America’s public universities.
ANT 398T Spring 2020                               3                                            Reed


 Week 4
 Feb.    12    Students and learning.         TP Chapter III Getting to know your students. Pp.
                                              40-52.
               Understanding and
               empathizing with the           Chapter IV Developing authority as a teacher 53-
               student experience and         70.
               differences in how people
               learn.
 Week 5
 Feb.    19    Course Development             TP Chapter V Instructional Design pp. 71-90
               Writing a syllabus and         Assignment 1 – revised draft due for peer review.
               course schedule: require-
               ments, recommendations.        Suggested websites on how to write a teaching
                                              statement.
                                              http://www.princeton.edu/mcgraw/library/for-grad-
                                              students/teaching-statement/
                                              http://www1.umn.edu/ohr/teachlearn/tutorials/philos
                                              ophy/index.html
                                              and the UT guidelines for creating a syllabus
                                              https://facultyinnovate.utexas.edu/effective-syllabus
 Week 6
 Feb.    26    Lectures and                   TP Chapter VI Lecturing and Giving Presentations
               Presentations
                                              TP XIII Using Instructional Technology.
               How to deliver an engaging
               presentation and the bene-     Bains, Chap. 5 How do they conduct class? Pp. 98-
               fits (and distractions) of us- 134
               ing classroom technology.
ANT 398T Spring 2020                                4                                             REED


 Week 7
 Mar     4     Guiding Discussions    TP Chapter VII Questions and Questioning
                                      Techniques. Pp. 106-124
               Leading smaller
               discussions, promoting Chapter VIII Leading Discussions pp. 125-137
               student participation.
 Week 8
 Mar.    11    Guiding Discussions    TP Chapter IX Assessing Student Learning
               Leading smaller        TP Chapter X Student Learning and Study Skills
               discussions, promoting
               student participation.
 Week 9
 Mar.    18    NO CLASS
 Week 10
 Mar.    25    Professional
               Development
 Week 11
 Apr.    1     Classroom Ethnography
 Week 12
 Apr.    8     Practice Makes Perfect TP XIV Microteaching
               Micro-teaching         Mini lectures
               presentations
 Week 13
 Apr.    15    AAPA Meetings          No class
ANT 398T Spring 2020                        5                                        Reed


 Week 14
 Apr.       22     Practice Makes Perfect            Mini lectures
                   Micro-teaching
                   presentations
 Week 15
 Apr.       29     Practice Makes Perfect            Mini lectures
                   Micro-teaching
                   presentations
 Week 16
 May.       6      Closing remarks and
                   evaluations
Religious Holidays If you will not be able to attend class due to religious services, let me know at least
a week ahead of time. We will make every effort to help you keep up with course assignments in such
situations.
Canvas In this class we use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-
protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu—to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys.
You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m.
to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students. E-mail is recognized as an official mode of
university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your e-mail for university and
course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed
about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—we
recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions
for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
Academic Integrity Please pursue rigorous honesty in everything you do, including your work for this
class. It will serve you well in life, and in this class as well since we report all cases of suspected
academic dishonest to the dean of students. Each student in the course is expected to abide by the
University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the
core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at
UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
ANT 398T Spring 2020                                      6                                             REED


class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the         University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php. Dishonesty will result at least in a failed grade
for the assignment and perhaps also for the course. For more info, see
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism. You are encouraged to work
together in study groups and often in lab exercises, however the work you submit (unless otherwise
indicated) must be your work.
Q drop Policy. Texas law limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six. Senate Bill
1231 says: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.”
Important Dates (2018)
•   4 Sep. - Fourth class day; Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in
     registration may require the approval of the department chair and usually the student's dean.
•   14 Sep. - Twelfth class day; Last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare
     and extenuating circumstances. Last day to drop a class for a possible refund.
•   25-26, 29-31 Oct. - Academic advising for continuing and readmitted students for the spring
     semester.
•   1 Nov. - Last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval, withdraw from the
     University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons. Last day an
     undergraduate student may change registration in a class to or from the pass/fail basis.
•   19 Dec. – Default final exam date.
Disability Services Students with documented disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
with Disabilities, 471-6259. Please let me know about any arrangements we can make that will assist
you in your learning.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL). If you are worried about someone who is acting differently,
you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin. The University of Texas has numerous resources for
students to provide assistance and support for your learning.
•   Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
•   Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
•   Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
•   Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
•   Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ANT 398T Spring 2020                                    7                                            Reed


Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free
from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:
             1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2.   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
                  or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu
Emergency Evacuation Policy. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to
evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be
aware of the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the
classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first
week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
ANT 398T Spring 2020                                     8                                           REED
