                Introduction to Advertising/PR Research 309
                                       Summer 2020
Instructor
Matthew S. Eastin, PhD
Professor
Office hour location https://utexas.zoom.us/j/99001t01746 (Links to an external site.)
Office Hours: Tuesday 9 am - 10:30 am | Wednesday 9 am to 10:30 am
Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Teaching Assistants
Daniela De Luca
Office hours location: https://utexas.zoom.us/j/372321193 (Links to an external site.)
Office Hours: Monday 3 pm - 5 pm | Thursday 9 am - 11 am
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Required Resources
Davis, J. J. (2012). Advertising Research: Theory and Practice, 2nd Ed. Saddle River, NJ:
        Prentice Hall.
Buy ONLINE – eBook – wherever you can get it and in whatever form you desire, just be sure to
get the 2nd edition.
Course Goals
From a media and advertising perspective, this course will cover essential statistical analyses
needed for basic advertising research. Quantitatively, within the context of advertising examples,
this class will cover sampling, descriptive statistics, variable development and measurement,
probability, group comparisons, and relational and predictive testing. Again, each of the topics
will be advertising-based in example and context.
Flagged Course
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed
to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments
you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-
world problems.


Lectures
All lectures will be posted to CANVAS. Students can view lectures at any time prior to taking
the exam. Lectures may be in video, audio or presentation format (although most are video).
Assignments will be covered in lecture. Students can follow up with the instructor or TA during
their online office hours or by appointment. Due to the nature of this online class, all material
needed for exam 1 will be posted by June 4th, 2020. Following exam 1, all material needed for
exam 2 will be posted. Following exam 2, all remaining materials will be posted.
Grading
Grading breakdown is as follows:
Individual Assignment (x3 – 10% per)           =      30%
Exam 1 and 2 Flashcards (5% per)               =      10%
Exam 1                                         =      15%
Exam 2                                         =      20%
Exam 3 (cumulative)                            =      25%
Total                                                 100%
Grade Breakdown
 93-100 = A     87-89 = B+         77-79 = C+         65-69 = D+
                                                                         59 and below = F
 90-92 = A -    83-86 = B          73-76 = C          60-64 = D
                80-82 = B -        70-72 = C –
Individual Assignments
There will be three individual assignments. TWO of the assignments will require you to interpret
and write-up data using SPSS output provided by Professor Eastin. More information/examples
will be presented in class on the date indicated on the course schedule below.
Exams
There will be three exams throughout the semester. Exam #3 will be cumulative so make sure
you go back and review early class content. Make-up exams will be given only in instances of
excused absences. Furthermore, you must notify me beforehand about an excused absence for an
exam. On the scheduled exam days, the exam will be available online from 5pm to 9pm. You can
take the exam at any point during this time period. However, once you start you will need to


finish the exam. All exams will be timed and will end at their designated time allotment.
Meaning, at 9pm the exam will close.
Make-up Policy Exams must be taken during the scheduled exam time. A make-up exam can
only be taken if the student presents proof of a valid medical excuse or extenuating circumstance.
Medical excuses and extenuating circumstances will be verified and judged as warranting a
special case by the course instructor. ALL class assignments must be turned in by the posted
day and time. No late work will be accepted.
Communicating with the Instructor
Feel free to contact me via e-mail (USE the email given above) or in-person (by appointment). I
check e-mail regularly and will do my best to respond as soon as I can; however, do not expect a
response immediately, during the weekend, or at midnight before the test—simply stated, plan
ahead and give me time to respond. For quickest response, please put "ADV 309R" in the subject
heading.
        Piazza
        For most questions related to course material or class administration, please post your
        question to Piazza. This is the most efficient way for us to share knowledge among the
        entire learning community. Never doubt the value of your questions – if you are
        wondering about something, at least a few of your classmates are wondering the same
        thing!
        This semester, we will be using Piazza as a class-wide discussion forum. If you have
        questions or topics that you'd like to discuss with your classmates, this is the place to do
        it. The system is highly catered to getting you help fast and efficiently from classmates,
        TAs, and instructors. Rather than emailing questions to the teaching staff, we encourage
        you to post your questions on Piazza.
Academic Dishonesty
Any form of academic dishonesty, including plagiarism, manufacturing quotes or sources, using
another’s reporting, research or quotes without giving proper attribution, will result in an
automatic grade of “F” for your assignment, possibly the course and possibly worse. If you’re
ever unsure whether you’re crossing the line, ask – that’s what good practitioners and good
journalists do. Here’s the basic university policy on academic dishonesty:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html (Links to an external site.)
Special needs
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512)
471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please see me at the
beginning of the semester if you have special needs or require alternative testing.


Tentative Nature of this Syllabus
This syllabus represents a contract in the works. Events that transpire during the semester may,
in rare circumstances, require me to modify the syllabus. I will announce the modification on
Canvas. Ultimately, it is your responsibility to keep up with any such modifications and be aware
of current policies, deadlines, etc.


Course Schedule
     SUGGESTED         Topic(s)         Reading(s) Assignment Recommended
        Timeline                                   Due Dates
 June 4th – 5th        Sampling         Chapter 4
 June 8th – 12th       Measurement      Chapter 11
                       Descriptive      Chapter 15
                       Statistics
                                                   Exam 1
 DUE Jun 12th                                      Flashcards
                                                   Due –
                                                   Canvas
                                                   5pm
 June 15th             Exam 1
                                                              Gary Wilcox
 June 16th – June 19th Data             Chapter 14            and
                       Visualization    Chapter 16            Chein Yang
                       and
                       T-test/Analysis
                       of Variance
                                                   Assignment
 DUE June 2nd                                      1 – 5pm
                                                   Canvass
                                                   Submission
                       Correlation/
 June 22th – 26th      Regression and   Chapter 16
                       Factorial Design
                                                   Flashcards
 DUE June 26th                                     for Exam 2
                                                   Due –
                                                   Canvas at
                                                   5pm.
 June 29th             Exam 2
                                                   Assignment
 DUE July 1st                                      2 – 5pm
                                                   Canvass
                                                   Submission
 July 2nd – 3rd        Segmentation     Chapter 17
                       Biometric
 July 6th – 8th        Research and     Chapter 9


          Ad Metrics/
          Digital Metrics
                          Assignment
July 9th                  3 – 5pm
                          Canvass
                          Submission
July 10th Exam 3
