                         Black Television Comedy, Summer 2020 (Web-Based)
Course Instructor:                       Adrien Sebro, Ph.D.
Email:                                   asebro@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant:                       Daelena Tinnin
Email:                                    daelena.tinnin@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant:                       Lily Kunda
Email:                                    lilykunda@utexas.edu
Course Description:
         For cultural critics to ignore television’s potential as a forum of resistance is to misread levels
of vernacular meaning inherent in many Black television texts. Often viewed as a medium of
buffoonery or harsh stereotyping, situational and variety comedies that focus on Black communities
have in fact had a crucial role in political progress, activism, and evolving social conditions in the
United States. With close attention to themes such as socioeconomics, gender, religion, and politics,
Black sitcoms address American social injustices in ways that other sitcoms simply are unable to.
This course will chronicle a history of American Black comedy on television over time, that worked
to respond to their political moment and have radically transformed television as a space for
pedagogy. It is important to mention, that this course’s focus on the comedy genre is deliberate.
Comedy can be read to help lay bare the mores, images, ideals, prejudices, and ideologies in its
topical moment. Surveying histories of television comedy in general offers a unique history of what is
understood as national American humor. American humor in general, and Black humor specifically,
began as a “wrested freedom,” the freedom to laugh at that which was unjust and cruel in order to
create distance from what would otherwise obliterate a sense of self and community. In this course,
students will watch, read, and discuss popular themes and trends in Black comedy over time (1950s
to the present). Through these efforts they will be encouraged to understand the representations of
Black communities in television comedy beyond the often-popular discussions of their stereotyping
and buffoonery. Rather, we will help them to read these art forms as narratives of Black agency and
resilience within an established racial and social order. Ultimately, we aim to use this course to help
students understand how television continues to redefine the ontological status of Blackness. In
addition, this course will introduce students to basic theoretical concepts fundamental to
understanding social conditions and social change including, power, ideology, hegemony,
institutions, etc.
This course will often discuss readings and view screenings that address gender, sexuality, race,
religion, socioeconomics, etc. This classroom will be a safe space for these conscious discussions
and opinions. Any prejudices, bigotry, transphobia, homophobia, etc. will not be allowed. Every
student’s discussions and opinions can of course be challenged but must be done respectfully.
*All readings will be available via PDF on the course website*


Overall Class Grade Breakdown:
1.   Attendance 10%
2.   Weekly Reading Responses (4, 10 points each) 40%
3.   Thesis Statement Submission 20%
4.   Final Research Project (at least 10 ppt or google slides) 30%
Attendance
Attendance is required on one Live ZOOM a week (Mondays 12PM-1:30PM, Weeks 2-5)
Weekly Reading Responses
From Weeks 2-5 (On Fridays), you must complete FOUR 1 Page double spaced responses to one of
the week’s readings in conversation with a screening. Due by 5PM on Fridays.
Thesis Statement Submission
Week 4 June 24th, each student is required to submit a rough thesis statement and bibliography (at
least 2 from course readings) for their final project. These statements will help with the direction,
clarity, and organization for your final research project.
Final Research Project
The seminar final project is due digitally on July 9th (at least 10 ppt or google slides)
Project: Discuss popular themes, cultural impact, and/or critical reception of a single Black sitcom
and/or its producers/actors. Textual analyses of select episodes is strongly encouraged.
*If you are interested in a project that doesn’t fall within these categories, we can discuss this
possibility.
Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with
respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual
orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor
with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name
or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
Services for Students with Disabilities: Upon request, The University of Texas at Austin
provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Students
with physical or learning disabilities should provide the professor with a letter requesting
reasonable academic accommodation, and work directly with the professor to determine what
accommodations are needed. This letter can be obtained from Services for Students with
Disabilities, located in the Student Services Building. For more information, contact the Office of
the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY, or visit their website.
   Please inform me within the first three weeks of class if you have a physical, learning, sensory,
   or psychological disability and need accommodation to take part in or to complete the required
   work for this course.


University Resources for Self Care: Taking care of your general well-being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or
anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support, Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p |
SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
    •   CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    •   CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
            o M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is
                unavailable)
    •   FREE Services at CMHC include:
            o Brief assessments and referral services
            o Mental health & wellness articles -cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
            o MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
            o Classes, workshops, & groups -cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow
students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050.
Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns


*All screenings are subject to change*
Week 1: Introduction (June 4th)
Screening: Marlon Riggs’ Color Adjustment
Readings:
• Hilmes, Michelle, “Chapter 7: At Last Television 1945-1955” in Only Connect: A History of
  Broadcasting in the United States 4th Edition, pp.166-191.
Week 2: Finding a Space On-Screen, 1950s; Quality vs. Quantity and Sketch, 1960s (June
8th-June 11th)
Clips from: Beulah, and Amos N’ Andy, Julia, The Flip Wilson Show
Readings:
• “What Is U.S. Television Now?” Author: Amanda D. Lotz Source: The Annals of the
  American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 625, The End of Television? Its
  Impact on the World (So Far) (Sep., 2009), pp. 49-59.
• “What is this ‘Black’ in Black Popular Culture” Author: Stuart Hall pp. 1-9.
• Hamamoto, Darrell. Nervous Laughter: Television Situation Comedy and Liberal Democratic
  Ideology pp. 1-15.
• McDonald, Fred J., “Part 1: The Promise” in Blacks and White TV: African Americans in
  Television Since 1948.
• Bodroghkozy, Aniko. “Is This What You Mean by Color TV? Julia” in Equal Time: Television
  and the Civil Rights Movement pp. 180-202.
• Phillip Brian Harper “Extra-Special Effects: Televisual Representation and the Claims of the
  ‘Black Experience’” in Sasha Torres Ed. Living Color: Race and Television in the United
  States pp. 62-78.
• Acham, Christine. “What You See is What You Get. The Flip Wilson Show” in Revolution
  Televised: Prime Time and the Struggle for Black Power pp. 66-84.
Week 3: Revolution Televised, 1970s; Respectability Politics, 1980s (June 15th-19th)
Screenings: Sanford and Son, Good Times, The Jeffersons, The Cosby Show, A Different World
Readings:
• Acham, Christine. “This Ain’t No Junk, Sanford and Son and African American Humor” in
  Revolution Televised: Prime Time and the Struggle for Black Power pp. 85-109.
• Bodroghkozy, Aniko. “Prime Time, Good Times” in Equal Time: Television and the Civil
  Rights Movement pp. 203-224.


• Arlen, Michael, “The Media Dramas of Norman Lear”
• Acham, Christine. “Respect Yourself, Black Women and Power in Julia and Good Times” in
  Revolution Televised: Prime Time and the Struggle for Black Power pp. 126-142
• Means-Coleman, Robin. “The Cosby Show” in African American Viewers and the Black
  Situation Comedy: Situating Racial Humor pp. 199-209.
• Palmer, Gareth. “The Cosby Show—an ideologically based analysis” in Critical Survey Vol. 6,
  No. 2 pp. 188-194
• Gray, Herman, “Reaganism and the Sign of Blackness” in Watching Race: Television and the
  Struggle for “Blackness” pp. 14-35.
• Gray, Herman, “The Politics of Representation in Network Television” in Watching Race:
  Television and the Struggle for “Blackness” pp. 70-93.
• “Its a Different World Where You Come From” in Watching Race: Television and the Struggle
  for “Blackness” pp. 93-113.
Week 4: Hip Hop and Popular Culture in the Mainstream, 1990s; The New Millennium,
2000s (June 22nd-26th)
*Final Project Thesis Statement Due June 24th*
Screenings from: Martin, The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, Living Single, Roc, In Living Color, Tyler
Perry’s House of Payne, Girlfriends, The Bernie Mac Show, Everybody Hates Chris
Readings:
• Smith-Shomade, Beretta. “The Rise of Fox” in Shaded Lives: African American Women and
  Television pp. 35-37.
• Zook, Kristal Brent. “Blood Is Thicker than Mud: C-Note Goes to Compton on The Fresh
  Prince of Bel-Air” in Color By Fox: The Fox Network and the Revolution in Black Television
  pp. 15-24.
• Zook, Kristal Brent. “Sheneneh, Gender-Fuck, and Romance: Martin’s Thin Line Between
  Love and Hate” in Color By Fox: The Fox Network and the Revolution in Black Television pp.
  53-64.
• Zook, Kristal Brent. “Under the Sign of Malcolm: Memory, Feminism, and Political Activism
  on Roc” in Color By Fox: The Fox Network and the Revolution in Black Television pp. 77-87.
• Gray, Herman,“Spectacles, Sideshows, and Irreverence: In Living Color” in Watching Race:
  Television and the Struggle for “Blackness” pp.130-147.
• Zook, Kristal Brent. “Living Single and the ‘Fight for Mr. Right’: Latifah Don’t Play” in Color
  By Fox: The Fox Network and the Revolution in Black Television pp. 65-68, 69-74.
• Guerrero, Lisa, “Single Black Female: Representing the Modern Black Woman in Living
  Single” in eds. David J. Leonard and Lisa Guerrero, African Americans on Television: Race-
  ing for Ratings pp. 177-190.
• Smith-Shomade, Beretta. “Contemporary Black Situation Comedy” in Shaded Lives: African
  American Women and Television pp. 37-39.


• Love, Bettina, “Tyler Perry Takes Over TV” in eds. David J. Leonard and Lisa Guerrero,
  African Americans on Television: Race-ing for Ratings pp. 282-298.
• Cutts, Qiana M., “The Black Family in the New Millennium: The Bernie Mac Show, My Wife
  and Kids, and Everybody Hates Chris” in eds. David J. Leonard and Lisa Guerrero, African
  Americans on Television: Race-ing for Ratings pp. 191-206.
Week 5: Sketch Comedy and Reality Television; Black Webseries, Interrupting Hollywood
(June 29th-July 2nd)
Monday Screenings: Chappelle’s Show, The Boondocks, Flavor of Love, Awkward Black Girl
Readings:
• Squires, Catherine. “The Conundrum of Race and Reality Television.” In A Companion to
  Reality Television, edited by Laurie Ouellette.
• Gates, Racquel J. “Embracing the Ratchet: Reality Television and Strategic Negativity” in
  Double Negative: The Black Image and Popular Culture, pp. 142-181.
• Guerreo, Lisa, “‘Black’ Comedy: The Serious Business of Humor in In Living Color,
  Chappelle’s Show, and The Boondocks” in eds. David J. Leonard and Lisa Guerrero, African
  Americans on Television: Race-ing for Ratings pp. 229-250.
• Cunningham, Phillip Lamarr, “Get a Crew…and Make it Happen”: The Misadventures of
  Awkward Black Girl and New Media’s Potential for Self-Definition in eds. David J. Leonard
  and Lisa Guerrero, African Americans on Television: Race-ing for Ratings pp. 191-206.
Week 6: Final Project Due July 9th by 5PM via Canvas
