Object Lessons ANT 394 M
M 9-12 5.118 SAC
Marina Peterson marina.peterson@austin.utexas.edu SAC 5.128 Office hours: M 1-3
Katie Stewart kstewart@mail.utexas.edu 4.408 CLA office hours: M 2-3, Th 2-3
This course will be an experiment in long-form writing. Each participant in the seminar
will plan, draft and/or write a short (25,000 word) book-length manuscript modeled on
Bloomsbury’s Object Lessons series: http://objectsobjectsobjects.com/
Pick an ordinary object that will help you develop your dissertation project. We’ll do a
series of experiments to imagine and write angles and trajectories and pools of writing
that work to develop your project. We’ll read in new materialisms, subjects-and-objects,
object oriented studies, thing theory, nonrepresentational theory, and discard studies.
Some concerns of the class are: What is an anthropological object, and how does it come
into focus or existence? What does an object do, and how can we write it? Can we
approach the thing itself through writing? What happens when something fails, is
destroyed, or has not yet come to be? Is caught up in circulation? What of encounters,
whether human/nonhuman or “dynamic assemblages” of forms of matter? What is an
object’s composition, lifespan? If culture or life is now conceived as an assemblage of
forms and forces of all kinds that are complexly interrelated, what are the new objects of
this “whole” (think of atmospheres, stickiness, rhythms, frictions, inter-species lines of
influence, etc). What is a concept, what does a concept do, in a world of assemblages and
emergences? Is there a collective (sense, sensibility, identity, route of travel, etc)?
Each week everyone will pick one of the Object Lessons books to peruse over the week,
then switch to another the following week. The topics of these books include Remote
Control, Phone Booth, Golf Ball, Drone, Drivers License, Hotel, Refrigerator, Silence,
Glass, Waste, Shipping Container, Book Shelf, Hood, Bread, Cigarette Lighter, Dust,
Hair, Tree… You may also write a 1500-word essay for publication in The Atlantic on-
line. Go to the Object Lessons website to pitch your idea.
You will need to write 300-400 words/day, even if only a rough draft, a series of
questions, etc. Use the readings as a prompt for your writing for the week – whether
launching off a passage that sparks your interest or adopting the project of the author.
Some weeks we’ll workshop our writing, each of us reading 500 carefully edited words.
Other weeks we’ll break into small groups in which we read everything we’ve written
and then discuss possible architectures of the manuscript.
Books:
John Law, Aircraft Stories
Hugh Raffles, Insectopedia
The articles are all on canvas.


Week 1.
Your topic, and the architecture of your work
Ben Anderson. Affective Atmospheres. Emotion, Space and Society 2, 2009.
Marina Peterson. Sensory Attunements
Katie Stewart. Atmospheric Attunements
*Attunements workshop
Week 2.
Heidegger. The Thing
Grosz. The “Thing”
Brown. Thing Theory
Week 3.
Isabelle Stengers. History from the Middle: Between Macro and Mesopolitics. Inflexions.
Alphonso Lingis. Irrevocable Loss. Non-Representational Methodologies, Phillip
Vannini, ed., Routledge, 2015.
Manuel deLanda. Emergence, Causality and Realism. In Speculative Realism.
Week 4.
Isabelle Stengers. Diderot’s Egg.
Perec, An Attempt at Exhausting a Place
*Aleatory Devices workshop
Week 5.
Diana Coole. New Materialisms
        Introducing the New Materialisms, Coole and Frost
        The Inertia of Matter and the Generativity of Flesh, Coole
        Impersonal Matter, Orlie
Jane Bennett. The Force of Things & The Agency of Assemblages. In Vibrant Matter
Week 6.
Baudrillard Subjective Discourse or the Non-functional System of Objects (in Object
Reader)
Mary Douglas, The Genuine Article
Barthes, Plastic
Malabou, Ontology of the Accident
Week 7.
Deleuze. What is a Concept & Percept, Affect, Concept. In What is Philosophy?
–. Having an Idea in Cinema
*Scenes workshop


Week 8.
Christine Hume, Ventrifacts
Craig Martin. “Some Speculative Approaches to Writing through Fog” in Who is this
Who is Coming
–. Fog-bound
Week 9.
Karen Barad. On Touching.
Anna Tsing. 2012. Unruly Edges: Mushrooms as Companion Species Environmental
Humanities, 1 141-154
Song. Pigeon Trouble Chapter 7
Week 10.
Nick Shapiro, Attuning to the Chemosphere, Cultural Anthropology
Elizabeth F. S. Roberts, What Gets Inside, Cultural Anthropology
*Sensory ethnography workshop
Week 11.
Bruno Latour. Attempt at a Compositionist Manifesto. New Literary History 41, 2010.
Jason Pine. Last Chance Incorporated. Cultural Anthropology.
Week 12.
John Law. Aircraft Stories
Week 13.
Raffles. Insectopedia
Week 14.
Wrapping up
