                                   ANT325L • 31760 • Fall 2018
Practices of looking
Introduction to Visual Anthropology
Instructor: Craig Campbell
Class meets: MW 2:30PM-4:00PM
Class location: SAC 4.118
Office location: SAC 4.122
Office Hours: Thursdays 2-4pm
Email: craig.campbell@utexas.edu
       “Seeing not only makes us alive to the appearance of things but to being itself.”
                                                                                       ~David MacDougall
This class will introduce you to the history of Visual Anthropology, which has a bifurcated set of
fascinations: the study of visual culture and the use of visual images in the production of
anthropological knowledge. In this class, you will develop sensibilities and skills for the
examination of vision as a cultural practice. The methodological and analytical tools associated
with Visual Anthropology will help you understand broadly how the visual has been constituted
as a category and specifically how it relates to the study of culture and society in anthropology.
This course will explore the history of the visual in anthropology as seen in the production of
photographs, films, and videos. We will explore themes of media, mediation, everyday life, “the
gaze,” documentary forms, materiality, technology, realism and representation, as well as ethics.
This course will introduce participants to critical approaches and analytic methods that broaden
their toolkit for describing the world and the ways in which it is historically constituted and
culturally mediated. This course is ideally taken prior to “The Photographic Image: Visual
Anthropology II.”
Required readings
Available for purchase at the University Co-op.
         Pinney, Christopher. 2011. Photography and Anthropology. London: Reaktion
         Books.
         Vium, Christian. 2017. Christian Vium: HSBC Prize for Photography 2016.
         Bilingual edition. Actes Sud/HSBC.
Available for download from Canvas.
         Articles, book chapters, and other required readings will be shared on the Canvas
         platform.
                                                                                                     1


                                   ANT325L • 31760 • Fall 2018
Grading scheme
15% - Participation. I will do roll-call each class. You are expected to attend all classes, though I
will allow for two unexcused absences. You are expected to have read the articles and taken
notes. I will be calling on individuals in class to respond to specific questions regarding the
readings. Attendance, participation, and evidence of preparation contribute to your participation
grade.
25% - Reading quiz. We will have regular quizzes on assigned readings. These are pretty simple
unannounced pop-quizzes to make sure you've done your readings.
30% - Visual Anthropology article analysis. Provide a summary and critique of an article from a
Visual Anthropology journal (Visual Anthropology Review or Visual Anthropology). Be prepared
to give a short presentation in class.
30% Assignment: Photo-essay analysis. Read Sutherland’s article “The Photo-Essay.” Find a
photo-essay that is done by a non-anthropologist. Comment on why and how it differs from an
anthropological photo-essay. Be prepared to give a short presentation in class.
         *Reading schedule and syllabus updates will be posted on Canvas*
                                                                                                    2


                                    ANT325L • 31760 • Fall 2018
Additional Resources.
Print and digital journals:
    •    Visual Anthropology Review - http://societyforvisualanthropology.org/visual-
         anthropology-review
    •    Visual Anthropology - http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gvan20
    •    Visual Ethnography - http://www.vejournal.org
Websites:
    •    www.visualanthropology.net
    •    http://societyforvisualanthropology.org
Streaming Video services:
    •    Kanopy [https://utexas.kanopystreaming.com]
    •    Alexander Street Press [https://alexanderstreet.com]
Course Policies and Information for Students
Inclusive learning environment statement
The best learning environment––whether in the classroom, studio, laboratory, or fieldwork site––
is one in which all members feel respected while being productively challenged. I recognize
cultural antagonisms towards (and challenges faced by) people of color, women, LGBTQ
identified folk, linguistic minorities and others. My goal is to help you feel safe to express your
ideas, criticisms, and questions. I am dedicated to fostering an inclusive atmosphere, in which all
participants can contribute, explore, and challenge their own ideas as well as those of others.
Every participant has an active responsibility to foster a climate of intellectual stimulation,
openness, and respect for diverse perspectives, questions, personal backgrounds, abilities, and
experiences. I recognize my responsibility for maintaining this climate.
Attendance policy
Regular attendance is required. You will be permitted two unexcused absences before
unexcused classes incur a penalty towards your final participation grade. You are not allowed to
miss tests without prior notice.
Notice regarding academic integrity
    •    Honor Code or statement of ethics.
                                                                                                    3


                                  ANT325L • 31760 • Fall 2018
             o   University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
                 Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
                 responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
                 through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
                 community.
     •  Web site for more information: http://uwc.utexas.edu/academic-integrity
Religious Holy Days
     •  By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
        prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
        examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I
        will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
        the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     •  If you are worried about someone who is acting strangely, you may use the Behavior
        Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
        behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
        of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
        Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
        512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support
for your learning.
     •  University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     •  Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     •  Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                                                                  4
