                                 UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                               Department of Mechanical Engineering
                     DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROLS
                             ME N344 (Unique #75975); Summer 2020
                                        MW 900-1200; Zoom
Instructor: Dr. Dongmei Chen                                                      Office Hours
dmchen@me.utexas.edu                                                              W 1:00-2:00pm
TA Hanyu Zhu : zhuhanyu@utexas.edu (Zoom)                                         Tue : 1-3pm
                                   TENTATIVE SCHEDULE
WEEK                                      TOPICS                                          Note
6/8,10 (HW Due) Introduction; First law concept vs. Energy/power concepts
                 Examples: mass spring damper and electrical circuit
                 Introduction to Bond graph: One-port elements and sources
                 Modeling Examples: One can/funnel system-capacitor, resistor
                 Two-port components; Three-port elements
                 Electrical circuits and MSD systems
6/15,17 (HW1) Bond graph and state variables; dependent/independent                       Quiz 1
                 Derivation of state equations
                 More complex system modeling:
                 Mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, thermal and electromagnetic systems
6/22 (HW2)       Operation for linear systems                                             Quiz 2
                 Solution of state equations, unforced, forced responses
6/24             Review 1
6/29 (HW3)       First and second order systems
7/1              Midterm exam
7/6 (HW4)        Eigenvalue/eigenvector solutions                                         Quiz 3
7/8              Transfer functions and analysis
7/13 (HW5)       Inverse Laplace transform                                                Quiz 4
7/15             Bode plots, system identification
7/20 (HW6)       Introduction to closed-loop automatic control; PID control               Quiz 5
                 Control design & applications
7/22              Review 2
7/27 (HW7)       Examples of modeling and control of complex systems
7/29-30           Final exam
 Prerequisites: M 427K, ME 318M, ME 324, ME 340, and ME 140L, and co-registration in ME
144L)
Refs:   D. Rowell & D.N. Wormley, System Dynamics: An Introduction, Prentice-Hall, 1997


        D. Karnopp, D. Margolis & R. Rosenberg, System Dynamics, Wiley, 2000
        Brief version of System Dynamics from the University Coop ((including Chapters 3, 4,
        &5)
        G. F. Franklin, J. D. Powell, A. Emami-Naeini, Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems,
        Prentice Hall, 2002.
 Grading:         Homework        15%     No late HW accepted w/o prior approval/excuse
                  5 Quizzes       25%
                  Midterm Exam    25%
                  Final Exam      35%
Course Evaluation: MEC form               Scholastic dishonesty policy strictly enforced
Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of
the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4241 TDD or the College of Engineering Director of
Students with Disabilities at 471-4321, and visit the UT Austin Services for Students with
Disabilities at http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. Below is the instruction on how to obtain
the accommodation letter:
        Students are responsible for contacting their instructors to deliver and discuss their
        Accommodation Letter, and any associated handouts, as soon as possible to determine
        how accommodations will be provided in this class. Students can access Accommodation
        Letters via the SSD Student Web Portal:
        http://ssdportal.ddce.utexas.edu/ClockWork/custom/misc/home.aspx


OBJECTIVES
• Represent dynamical systems in mathematical terms (differential equations) using bond graphs
• Assess characteristic behavior of dynamic systems in the time and frequency domains
• Synthesize automatic controllers to achieve desired behavior
COURSE CATALOG DESCRIPTION
Lumped physical system models; electrical, fluid, mechanical, and thermal system analysis; linear
system transient, steady-state behavior; introduction to feedback control.
Three lecture hours a week for one semester.
HOMEWORK POLICY
Homework will be assigned to support lecture material and reading assignments-approximately
seven homework assignments plus one optional homework assignment. No late homework will
be accepted except for illness or other extenuating circumstances. Students should bring a signed
excuse from a health professional (if ill) or other authoritative professional (other extenuating
circumstances).
EXAMINATION and LABORATORY POLICY
Five quizzes, one midterm and one final examination will be given in the course. The material
covered in the final examination is comprehensive. The five quizzes will test material covered in
prior lectures. The midterm examination will test material covered prior Review1. Final exam is
scheduled at the end of the term. Quizzes and the midterm will be given according to the above
schedule. The format of the exams will be discussed prior to the exam.
Make-up quizzes and exams will not be provided. Signed excuses from appropriate professionals
(i.e. doctors for illness, etc) must be turned in if an examination is not taken—otherwise a grade
of zero will be assessed for that examination.
There will be no lab projects during the semester.
CLASS FORMAT
Lecture style.
ATTENDANCE
Regular class attendance is expected but roll will not be taken. Class participation will be noted.
IMPORTANT DATES
Refer to course catalogs.


KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES STUDENTS SHOULD
HAVE BEFORE ENTERING THIS COURSE
All materials covered in courses M 427K, ME 218 (318), and ME 324. Completion or co-
registration in EE 331K (ME340) is required and basic knowledge of heat transfer and fluid
mechanics. Special emphasis will be on mathematical modeling, solution of differential equations,
and complex numbers.
KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES STUDENTS GAIN FROM
THIS COURSE
Students will gain experience in mathematical modeling of dynamics systems to determine
response characteristics to design parameters, an appreciation for applied mathematics (using
differential equations, complex numbers, etc.) and math applications (MatLab), and the ability to
control the dynamic performance of dynamic systems.
IMPACT ON SUBSEQUENT COURSES IN CURRICULUM
This is a technical elective. It should help in the senior design projects course and mechatronics
courses.
ABET EC2000 PROGRAM OUTCOMES ACHIEVED
     1. Knowledge of and ability to apply engineering and science fundamentals to real problems
     2. Ability to solve open-ended problems
     3. Ability to design mechanical components, systems, and processes
     5. Ability to use modern computer tools in mechanical engineering
     8. Ability and desire to lay a foundation for continued learning beyond the baccalaureate
     degree.
ASME PROGRAM CRITERIA OUTCOMES ACHIEVED
     b. Ability to apply advanced mathematics through multivariate calculus and differential
     equations.
     d. Ability to work professionally in both the thermal and mechanical systems areas including
     the design and realization of such systems.
DESIGN ASSIGNMENTS
No special design assignments will be given. Students will be asked to design controllers in
homework.
PROFESSIONALISM TOPICS
Not specifically covered.
