The University of Texas at Austin                                                    SOC302 (82345)
Department of Sociology                                                               Summer I, 2020
                                                                         Online On-Demand Course
                               Introduction to the Study of Society
Instructor:                    Jamie O’Quinn
Course Objectives
•       To develop a sociological perspective on multiple facets of modern society including
        globalization and social inequality.
•       To gain a deeper understanding of the research process and its role in public knowledge
        and policy
•       To learn how to craft a scientifically based argument and communicate it effectively.
Course Description
This course offers an introduction to the theories, methodologies, vocabulary, and themes of the
discipline of sociology. During the semester, we will explore the linkages between individuals
and the larger cultures, contexts, and institutions in which they live their lives in order to better
understand the structure and function of social interaction, human behavior, and the institutional
frameworks of society. The over-arching purpose of the course is to develop a “sociological
imagination”, which students can then use be used to make sense of current social issues and
patterns of everyday life.
The course is delivered completely online, which gives students more latitude in completing their
work, though the class is NOT entirely self-paced. The course material is organized into sections
by week, and students are expected to complete all of a section’s reading assignments, lecture
videos (organized into “Modules”), quizzes, and discussion posts by Friday at 11:59pm each
week. See the course schedule below for due dates. This design allows students to complete the
work within one week according to their own schedule.
Course Communication and Instructional Support
Announcements. Outside of the video lectures, any student communication initiated by
instructors and teaching assistants will be conducted via the “Announcements” page on our
course website, so please make sure to check the “Announcements” page daily.
Outside-of-Class Communication. Students who wish to contact the instructor or teaching
assistants can do so either over Zoom during office hours or via email. Do not assume that TAs
will receive communication submitted through Canvas comments.
Canvas and Course Technological Requirements
To access the class home page, students can go to http://canvas.utexas.edu/ and log into the
Canvas system with their UT EIDs. Students will be able to view class lectures through Canvas,
and all course material will be posted on this web page, including announcements and grades.
The home page on Canvas will have links to the course syllabus, the daily videos, a help section,
and several other important links you’ll use through the course.
                                                   1


Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled
laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer
should have enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following
requirements:
         • Laptop or desktop computer
         • Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
         • Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox
         • 5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
         • Ensure your microphone and webcam work properly if your course requires them
Tips for the best class experience:
       •  Close all unnecessary browser windows and tabs and programs
                o Streaming music (Pandora, Spotify, etc.)
                o Social media sites
                o Youtube or other video sites
                o Online/Offline Gaming
       • Clear the browser's cache before class (here's how)
       • Check your computer is free of viruses, malware, and spyware (UT recommendations)
Need additional help?
     •   Look for "Online Course Tech Support" in the left navigation menu of your Canvas
          course.
     • Students facing financial hardship and in need of technology for courses can apply via
          UT Emergency Fund
          (https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/studentemergencyfund.php); they can also
          visit Texas One Stop (https://onestop.utexas.edu/) for other questions related to
          resources, assistance, and funding.
Course Readings
Carr, Deborah, Anthony Giddens, Mitchell Duneier, and Richard Appelbaum. 2018. Introduction
to Sociology, Seagull Version Eleventh Edition. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. ISBN:
978-0-393- 63945-2. https://books.wwnorton.com/books/webad.aspx?id=4294994899.
This version of the textbook is shorter and cheaper than the standard version. It should be
purchased through the University Co-op. Purchase comes with free access to the ebook and other
resources, which can be accessed through: https://digital.wwnorton.com/introsoc11seagull.
Course Requirements
Attendance and participation (10%). All students are required to watch all of a section’s daily
videos by Friday at 11:59pm each week. Videos contain built-in instapoll questions to gauge if
students are actually watching. (This means that you cannot simply play the video and then leave
the room and do something else!)
                                                  2


Discussion posts (5%). In order to facilitate student interaction, we will have a running
discussion blog throughout the semester on Canvas. Each week, students are required to write
and post either a 100-200 word original discussion post, or a 100-200 word comment on another
student’s discussion post. These posts are also due each Friday at 11:59pm.
Daily quizzes (50%). Students are responsible for completing a daily quiz before watching the
daily videos beginning on Tuesday, June 9th. The quizzes will be 5 minutes long and contain 5
multiple choice questions covering the previous day’s lecture and/or reading materials. The
purpose of daily quizzes is to ensure that students keep up with course materials and are grasping
the basic course content. Note that there will be no makeup quizzes. Instead, the two lowest
grades on the daily quizzes will be dropped from the final average at the end of the course.
Quizzes are also due each Friday at 11:59pm.
Short papers (30%). Students must also complete TWO of the four short paper prompts during
the semester (15% each). These papers will be 2 single-spaced pages in length and are intended
to encourage you to think about current issues and events in a sociological way. More details are
located on each of the paper prompts (located in the “Assignments” tab on Canvas). I will go
over paper prompts at the end of each week and papers you choose to complete should be
uploaded on Canvas by 12:00pm every Monday starting June 15th. These due dates are:
Paper 1 due June 15th
Paper 2 due June 22th
Paper 3 due June 29th
Paper 4 due July 6th
Because students are only required to complete two of the four possible papers, there will be NO
excused late or missing papers. This means that you should plan accordingly! If you already
know that you will be particularly busy during one weekend of the course, make sure that you
choose papers for different weeks. I also recommend that you do not choose to skip both of the
first papers in case you get sick or have a family emergency later on in the semester. All four
prompts are available on Canvas starting at the beginning of the course. I recommend that you
take a look ahead of time to see which two you might be interested in completing so that you can
plan ahead.
Reflection paper (5%). Students will complete a reflection paper to be turned in at any point
during the semester (absolute last day to turn in is July 13th at noon, no exceptions). For this
paper, students will discuss one key concept from the course and apply it to their lives. This
means that you will be able to complete this paper any time after the first course lecture. These
papers will be 2 pages single spaced in 12 pt. Times New Roman font with normal margins on
all sides. Note: I recommend not leaving the reflection paper to the last minute. I would
especially recommend turning the reflection paper in early if you have a final paper or exam due
in your other courses.
We will not have daily videos posted for Fridays. Instead, Fridays will serve as a writing
consultation day. I will hold an additional 2 office hours to address questions about papers.
                                                  3


Note, there will be no final given during finals week.
Grading Policies
Grading: Grades are assigned on a plus/minus scale, where A = 93-100, A- = 90-92.9, B+ = 87-
89.9, B = 83-86.9, B- = 80-82.9, C+ = 77-79.9, C = 73-76.9, C- = 70-72.9, D+ = 67-69.9, D =
63-66.9, D- = 60-62.9, F = 59.9 or below.
Late assignments. All paper assignments must be turned in through Canvas by 12:00pm on
Monday on the day they are due. If you turn in a paper late, it will be docked ½ letter grade (5
points) for each day late. Again, because students may choose which papers to complete, there
will be no excused late papers.
Missed quizzes. There are no make-up quizzes and quizzes cannot be turned in late. A missed
quiz will count as a 0, but, again, the two lowest grades on the daily quizzes will be dropped
from the final average.
Course Integrity & Academic Dishonesty
University of Texas Honor Code. “As A Student of the University Of Texas at Austin, I Shall
Abide By the Core Values of The University and Uphold Academic Integrity.”
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
When taking daily quizzes, students cannot receive help from any source other than their own
class materials (e.g., notes, textbook). When completing short papers, students can only turn in
original work done exclusively by them. For any course assignment, students must not
collaborate or share information with others, and they are not allowed to provide their UT EIDs
to others for the purpose of engaging in class activities. Please note that the online format of this
course allows the monitoring and detection of issues involving identity verification, collusion,
collaboration, and plagiarism.
Grade-related penalties for academic dishonesty can be routinely assessed (up to and including
an "F" in the course), and students can also be suspended or even permanently expelled from the
University for scholastic dishonesty. Please remember that all information is stored on secure
computer servers.
Data security. All instapolls, quizzes, and writing assignments over the system will be saved and
stored for educational and general academic research. Any such research or data-sharing with
other researchers will de-identify the data, including the removal of names, UT EIDs, email
addresses, and other information.
Other University Policies & Services
                                                    4


Religious holy days. Religious holy days should not affect students’ participation in this course,
since students can watch course lectures and take quizzes at times that are convenient for them.
Furthermore, if a paper due date interferes with a religious holy day, students are encouraged to
select that paper as one of their two to skip.
Students with disabilities. Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may
require to accommodate a disability-related need. You may find out more information on the
Services for Students with Disabilities website: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Mental health needs and concerns. If you have concerns about another student in the class or
anyone else you encounter at UT, please contact the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at
512-232-5050. If you are having a personal crisis, please contact the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC) Crisis Line at 512-471-CALL (2255).
                                                  5


                                  COURSE SCHEDULE
Week 1: The Concepts of Sociology
Date                   Topic                      Reading      Assignments
Thursday 6/4           NO CLASS
Friday 6/5             Thinking Sociologically    On Canvas:   Videos
*Last day of the                                  Excerpt from
official add/drop                                 Sociological
period                                            Imagination
Monday 6/8             Three Ways of Studying     Ch. 1        Videos
                       Society
Tuesday 6/9            Social Construction                     Quiz and videos
Wednesday 6/10         Social Organization        Ch. 3        Quiz and videos
Thursday 6/11          Units of Social Life       Ch. 6        Quiz and videos
Friday 6/12            Paper Writing &                         Due at 11:59pm:
                       Consultation                            -This week’s quizzes
                                                               -Finish watching all of this
                                                               week’s videos
                                                               -Original discussion post or
                                                               comment on someone else’s
                                                               discussion post (100-200
                                                               words)
Week 2: Sociological Theories and Practices
Date                   Topic                      Reading      Assignments
Monday 6/15            Studying Deviance & Social Ch. 7        -Quiz and videos
                       Control                                 -Paper 1 due at 12pm
Tuesday 6/16           Understanding Deviant                   Quiz and videos
                       Behavior
Wednesday 6/17         The Sociological Method    Ch. 2        Quiz and videos
                                             6


Thursday 6/18           Sociological Research             Quiz and videos
Friday 6/19             Paper Writing &                   Due at 11:59pm:
                        Consultation                      -This week’s quizzes
                                                          -Finish watching all of this
                                                          week’s videos
                                                          -Original discussion post or
                                                          comment on someone else’s
                                                          discussion post (100-200
                                                          words)
Week 3: The Stratification of Society
Date                    Topic                     Reading Assignments
Monday 6/22             Stratification            Ch. 8   -Quiz and videos
                                                          -Paper 2 due at 12pm
Tuesday 6/23            Money & Stratification I          Quiz and videos
Wednesday 6/24          Money & Stratification II         Quiz and videos
*Last day to switch to
pass/fail or credit/no
credit
Thursday 6/25           Social Mobility                   Quiz and videos
Friday 6/26             Paper Writing &                   Due at 11:59pm:
                        Consultation                      -This week’s quizzes
                                                          -Finish watching all of this
                                                          week’s videos
                                                          -Original discussion post or
                                                          comment on someone else’s
                                                          discussion post (100-200
                                                          words)
                                              7


Week 4: Divisions in Social Life
Date                   Topic                    Reading Assignments
Monday 6/29            Racial/Ethnic Inequality Ch. 11  -Quiz and videos
                                                        -Paper 3 due at 12pm
Tuesday 6/30           Gender Inequality        Ch. 10  Quiz and videos
Wednesday 7/1          Age Stratification               Quiz and videos
Thursday 7/2           Intersectionality                Quiz and videos
Friday 7/3             Paper Writing &                  Due at 11:59pm:
                       Consultation                     -This week’s quizzes
                                                        -Finish watching all of this
                                                        week’s videos
                                                        -Original discussion post or
                                                        comment on someone else’s
                                                        discussion post (100-200
                                                        words)
Week 5: Contexts of Social Life
Date                   Topic                    Reading Assignments
Monday 7/6             Family                   Ch. 15  -Quiz and videos
                                                        -Paper 4 due at 12pm
Tuesday 7/7            School                   Ch. 16  Quiz and videos
Wednesday 7/8          Church                   Ch. 17  Quiz and videos
Thursday 7/9           Conclusion                       Quiz and videos
Friday 7/10            Paper Writing &                  Due at 11:59pm:
                       Consultation                     -This week’s quizzes
                                                        -Finish watching all of this
                                                        week’s videos
                                                        -Original discussion post or
                                                        comment on someone else’s
                                             8


                                       discussion post (100-200
                                       words)
*Reflection paper due by 7/13 at 12pm*
                   9
