                                                                                    1
                University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
                           ACC 310 F - WB
                   Foundations of Accounting
                                Spring – 2019
                       Course Syllabus (draft)
                        Instructor: May Wang
                                                                                     1
                    ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                2
              Notice about the Course Syllabus
This course syllabus is tentative. It represents my current plans and a
timeline for the course, and it is subject to change (update). As we go
through the semester, those plans, due dates or the timeline may change to
enhance the class learning opportunity and to fit the course progress better.
Such changes, communicated clearly to the class, are not unusual and
should be expected. An updated course syllabus will be posted on Canvas
once any change made to the course syllabus and/or the course schedule.
It is students’ full responsibility to read the course syllabus thoroughly, to
understand the course structure and the course policies (including course
work, and course deadlines, etc.), and to conform to the course policies and
procedures stated in this syllabus. Simply put, knowing what you are getting
into (how the course is conducted) is one of the critical elements to succeed
in the course.
Notice: The detailed course schedule and due dates for all assignments will
be communicated to students on a finalized course syllabus, and such
syllabus will be posted on Canvas on the 1st day of the class. Students will be
given a plenty of time to get familiar with the course policies and the course
work before the 1st due date.
Thank you for your attention to this Notice!
Your instructor,
May Wang
                                                                                 2
                     ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                  3
                Instructor & TA Information
Instructor Information:
          Instructor:          May Wang
          Office:              McCombs School of Business
                               CBA 6.204
          Office Phone:        512 - 471 - 6092
          Office Hours:        TBA
          E-mail:              May.Wang@mccombs.utexas.edu
          Course Site:         http://courses.utexas.edu
TA Office Hour Information: TBA
                                                                   3
                   ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                          4
                Course Description & Objectives
Course Description:
This course provides an introduction to financial and managerial accounting, with
emphasis on the content, interpretation, and uses of accounting reports. It discusses the
determination and reporting of net income and financial position, and the theories
underlying business financial statements; and consideration of managerial accounting
topics designed to extend the student's knowledge to the planning and controlling of the
operations of the firm. There are no course prerequisites for this class.
The course is taught as a web-based course and conducted entirely through course site –
Canvas. The course materials consist of 13 units, and the main topic for each unit is
outlined in the “Course Schedule” section at the end of this course syllabus.
The course materials are well-organized and laid out on Canvas, and the course set up is
clear and easy to follow. The course has been receiving positive feedback and has
become a popular and highly demanded course for students who desire to learn about
the language of business (accounting) and the business world.
Course Objectives:
Upon successful completion of this course, each student will be able to:
    Demonstrate an understanding of the role of accounting and its importance in
       making effective and informed business decisions
    Demonstrate an understanding of debit and credit rules and the accounting cycle
    Demonstrate an understanding of the main financial statements
    Demonstrate an understanding of the basics of accrual accounting
    Apply forecasted financial statements to a business plan in order to help secure
       funding for a business venture
    Demonstrate an understanding of basic decisions that management must make to
       run an effective and successful business.
Flagged Course Statement:
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses
are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of
quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use
of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
                                                                                           4
                        ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                          5
                      Required Course Materials
Required Course Materials
The course materials are the excerpts from selected textbooks, and the entire course
materials are embedded in the course website – Canvas. No hardcopy of the textbook is
required for the course.
How to Access the Course Materials?
This is an entirely web-based course, and the course materials (readings, exercises,
practice problems and quizzes, etc.) have been embedded electronically within the UT
Canvas learning management system – simply, Canvas. To access the course materials
on Canvas, students who plan to take the course must meet certain requirements:
     Students must complete a “Course Policies Quiz”, and
     Students must compete “Course Policies Confirmation” statement, and
     Students must pay for the course materials embedded on the Canvas via a portal
       named as “Course Materials Fee” in “Modules” section on Canvas. The
       payment link will be available to students once the course is published on the 1st
       day of the class.
Upon completion of these three requirements, students will be able to access the course
materials throughout the semester. No additional bookstore fees/payments are required.
No Refunds Warning: There are no refunds for the purchase of the course materials
once you have paid for. Therefore, before you make a final decision to purchase the
course materials, it is strongly suggested that you read the course document carefully –
the syllabus, understand the course policies. It is your best interest to learn about the
course before you make a purchase payment.
Course Materials Purchase Support
If you run into any problem paying for the course materials on the Canvas site, you
should contact execed@mccombs.utexas.edu for help or call at 512-471-5893. Note that
neither the instructor nor TAs will be able to address any questions about the purchase
of the course materials.
                                                                                           5
                        ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                          6
                             Course Communication
Primary Communication Channel - Canvas
The course site, Canvas is a Web-based course management system with password-protected access at
http://canvas.utexas.edu/. To access the course website – Canvas, you will need a UT-EID and then
simply follow the link above. Canvas will be the primary communication channel for the course. Once
you purchase the course materials, you will have full access not only to the course materials but also to
all of the course related communication/announcements, assignments and grades. It is each student’s
responsibility to keep up with the course communication timely on Canvas throughout of
semester.
Please notice that under the default setting on your Canvas site, you will receive email notifications of
all announcements posted by the instructor. Please make sure that your Canvas email notification
switch is on so you do not miss any announcements about the course.
Communication through Email
The use of e-mail is required for the course, and your email address registered with the University will
be used for the course communication. Please make sure that you have access to your email address,
and you are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with both
University-related communications and with the course related communications. Please recognize that
such communications may be time-critical.
For this course, emailing to TAs or the instructor from Canvas inbox is not allowed. It delays
communication. To ensure that our communication with students efficient, students must use your
email address registered with the University for sending to and receiving emails from us (TAs and the
instructor) for expediting feedback. Emails sent from Canvas Inbox to TAs and the instructor will
not receive a response.
Communication about the Course Materials:
As an online course, following the proper channels of communication indicated in this syllabus is
critical for an effective learning experience. Following channels are available for students who may
ask questions related to the course materials.
Visiting office hours – If you have questions about the course materials (reading materials and
assignments), you are encouraged to visit TA’s office hours. We have two dedicated TAs who have
solid knowledge base to address students’ questions. It is challenging to try to explain or walk through
an accounting problem and solving process through an email. I suggest you to send a brief email about
your questions to your TA prior to your visit so that your TA can plan ahead and to address your
questions more efficiently during the office hours. Our TAs offer 4 times of office hours in total per
week, which gives students a plenty of opportunities to ask questions and to get help you may need.
Emailing your questions to TAs – If you cannot make it to your TA’s office hours, you can email
your questions about the course materials or an assignment to your TA. To efficiently address your
questions, your email to TAs must be brief, clearly written, and you must lay out your questions in a
logic way.
                                                                                                           6
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                          7
                        Course Communication (continued)
Communication about the course materials on Canvas - You may get answers for your questions
from Canvas. If a question about course materials (readings or assignments) has been asked frequently
by the class, your TAs may post an answer on Canvas so that the whole class can benefit! Therefore,
visiting the course site regularly and staying connected with Canvas are crucial for this course.
Questions Related to the Course Policy
If you have questions about the course policy, you must first read and check your questions with the
course syllabus and with announcements posted on Canvas. You need to make sure that you are not
going to ask questions that have already been addressed. If you believe that your questions regarding
the course itself or the course policies have not been addressed anywhere in the course syllabus or on
Canvas, you can either visit the instructor’s office hours or email your questions to the instructor.
24 Hour Turn-around Time Policy
24 hours duration: When you email your TA or the instructor, please expect at least a 24 hour turn-
around time. We appreciate your understanding that this is a large class, and we deal with a lot of
students’ emails on a constant base besides our daily management of the course. Plus, TAs have their
own intensive graduate school workloads and recruiting schedules, and mutual understanding is
important. Our TAs have every intention to get back to students at the earliest time as their schedules
will allow. An online course offers great flexibility but also requires self-discipline to be successful.
For those of you who expect a timely response from TAs, it highly suggested that you email your
questions to your TA at least two days before a due date for a unit. Waiting until the last second before
a due date to ask questions is not suggested and may end up receiving no timely response from your
TA about your questions about the course materials.
Do not send your question at last minute: Any “last minute” questions (before a due date) about any
assignments may not be addressed as you must give TAs 24 hour cushion/turn-around time to get back
to you. The “last minute” refers to sending your questions to TAs during the last 24 hours before a
due date. For example, if a deadline is on Wednesday at 11:59 pm, then, the latest time you need to
email your questions to your TA is on Tuesday before 11:59 pm.
Follow the Communication Policies
To manage a course with a large amount of students more efficiently, you are expected to show respect
for both TAs and the instructor’s time by communicating more effectively, and you are expected to
follow the course policies stated in this syllabus. We emphasize these policies to serve only one
purpose - utilizing our time to the maximum and to serve more students.
Once again, for students who want to succeed in the course, it is critically important to know the
course policies and to follow the course policies. To put it simply, emails that demand for anything that
is against the course polices will not receive a response. We only can achieve our learning objectives
by conforming to the course policies and by working together. So, staying organized, following the
course polices, meeting deadlines, and communicating effectively are critical aspects for achieving
better results for your performance.
                                                                                                           7
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                         8
                          Course Communication (continued)                           .
The good news is that based on my experience teaching this course, more than 95% students respect
the course policies, study the course polices seriously on the day one, keep up with the course pace
over the semester, perform very well in the course, and happily graduate from the course. So, cheer up
and get ready for a great semester!
Communication/Canvas Support:
For this online course, it is critical to make sure that you have access to Canvas all the time and that
your internet connection is reliable. It is your responsibility to secure your access to Canvas with a
secured and reliable internet connection. If you run into any issues with Canvas or the internet
connection, it is your responsibility to contact and seek help timely from Canvas Support.
Canvas Support: UT Austin has contracted Instructure, the company behind Canvas, to provide Tier 1
support for all UT faculty, staff, and students. You can access this 24/7/365 support through the help
menu in the lower left corner of the Canvas interface (see below).
There are two choices for this support, phone for “Canvas Support Hotline” or “Chat with Canvas
Support”. The chat option will provide you with the option to have your completed chat session
emailed to you in digest form for future reference.
Note: Please do not send any email regarding Canvas issues and your internet issues to the TAs or the
instructor since we have no control over them, and Canvas Support is the right source from which to
seek help.
                                                                                                          8
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                          9
                                        Office Hours
TA’s Office Hours
We have two dedicated TAs assigned for the course to assist students. Our TAs are graduate students
(Master in Professional Accounting) who are competent, motivated, and ready to help students
throughout the course. Each TA will provide office hours twice per week for total of 4 times per week.
This will give students plenty of opportunities to visit the TA’s office hours and to get the help they
may need. I suggest to email your questions briefly to your TA prior to your visit. In this way, your TA
will be able to plan ahead, more efficiently address students’ questions, and help more students during
their office hours.
During the semester, you are welcome to provide feedback to the instructor about how our TAs are
doing in assisting students. With your feedback, both TAs and I will make adjustments to better help
you. Our TAs provide valuable resources to assist you, and it is up to you to utilize such resources. I
encourage you to make effort and to work with your TA to enhance your performance when needed.
Instructor Office Hours
Besides TA office hours, the instructor will also hold office hours once a week over the semester. You
are welcome to visit my office hours for questions about the course policy, course set up, learning tips,
any concerns you may have about your study, or any feedback you might have about the course.
If you encounter difficulties in your study during the semester, you are welcome to visit my office
hours. I will be glad to help you identify issues and to help you make progress instead of seeing you
falling behind. Further, the instructor is dedicated to oversee and manage the entire course, to monitor
and review the course materials and the class performance, to open and set up deadlines for course
work, to help students with their leaning experience, to make sure the class will run orderly, fairly and
smoothly. Therefore, your consideration for the instructor’s time is greatly appreciated. That is why
that we have dedicated TAs to especially help students with the course materials related questions.
                                                                                                           9
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                       10
                         Course Work & Evaluation
Course Work & Percentage Allocation:
                                                                              Percentage
                          Course Work                        Points
                                                                             Weighted
         Course Policies Quiz
         Course Policies Confirmation                           20                2%
         Purchase Course Materials
         Practice Exercises                                    100               10%
         Ribs on the Run Exercises                             100               10%
         Unit Quizzes                                          400               40%
         Prerequisite quiz on Proctor U procedures              10                1%
         Comprehensive Final Exam                              100               37%
                  Total Points and Percentage                  730              100%
Notice:
It is very important to know each type of the course work and to know the deadlines and course
policies related to each type of the course work. That is why you need to pay a close attention to the
next section of this syllabus, which describes each type of course work and states all the course
policies for them. So, read thoroughly!
                                                                                                       10
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                           11
                Course Work Description & Polices
Course Policies Quiz
The course syllabus is the course official document and a contract between the course and students.
Taking and passing the course policies quiz is a part of your course work and is to ensure that everyone
in the course will follow the course policies and will learn and compete for a better performance on an
equal field. The detailed instructions called “Be prepared to take the Course Policies Quiz” will be
posted on Canvas so that students know how to prepare for this quiz. Make sure that you read such
instructions thoroughly and carefully before you take this quiz. 15 points are assigned to the course
policies quiz, which is a part of your overall grades.
Completion of “Course Policies Confirmation” Statement
Once you complete and pass the syllabus quiz, the next step is to complete the “Course Polices
Confirmation Statement”. Four points are assigned to this confirmation statement. The confirmation
statement simply serves as your signature just like you signed your name on the course syllabus, which
is the contract between the course and a student. It is quite simple.
Practice Exercises
Practice Exercises in nature are the homework for each unit, and they provide opportunities for you to
reinforce and evaluate your understanding of the material. Your grades for the Practice Exercise are
based on accuracy and timely submission, and you receive points for each correct answer. You are
provided with following practice exercise policy that gives you an advantage and a plenty time to work
and complete them.
       Availability: Practice exercises for each unit will be available as each unit will be published to
        the class. For each unit, you will have about a week to study materials and complete practice
        exercises.
       Due date: Practice exercises for each unit are due on the following Thursday before 11:59 pm.
       Time limitation for each practice exercise: None
       Number of attempts: You will have three attempts to submit each practice exercise. Of these
        three attempts, the highest score will be factored into your final grade.
       Availability of correct answers: You will be able to view correct answers after the last
        attempt.
       If you miss submitting a practice exercise by its due date, you will receive “zero” for that
        practice exercise. No late work will be accepted under any circumstance, and NO make-up
        attempts are offered for any missing assignment.
       Accurate and independent completion of the practice exercise is critical to your success on
        subsequent assignments and to your overall performance for the course.
       Your performance on Practice exercises is worth 10% of your final grade.
                                                                                                           11
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                        12
             Course Work Description & Polices (continued)
Ribs on the Run Exercise
There is a Ribs on the Run Exercise for each unit, and this exercise in nature is also homework,
which provides you with an opportunity to apply the content presented in each unit. Your grade for
each Ribs on the Run exercise is based on accuracy and timely submission, and you receive points for
each correct answer. The following is the policy for Ribs on the Run exercise.
       Availability: Ribs on the Run exercise for each unit will be available as each unit will be
        published to the class. For each unit, you will have about a week to complete the Ribs on the
        Run exercise.
       Due Date: The Ribs on the Run exercise for each unit is due on the following Thursday before
        11:59 pm.
       Time limitation for each exercise: None
       Number of attempts: You will have two attempts to submit each Ribs on the run exercise. Of
        these two attempts, the highest score will be factored into your final grade.
       Availability of correct answers: You will be able to view correct answers after the last
        attempt.
       If you miss submitting a Ribs on the Run exercise by its due date, you will receive “zero” for
        the exercise. No late work will be accepted under any circumstance, and NO make-up
        attempts are offered for any missing assignment.
       Accurate and independent completion of the Ribs on the Run exercise is critical to your
        success on subsequent assignments and to your overall performance for course.
       Your performance on Ribs on the Run exercises are worth 10% of your final grade.
Unit Quizzes
Each unit has a unit quiz to test your understanding of the materials. Each unit quiz may consists of
multiple-choice questions or true or false questions on concepts covered in the unit. Unlike the
homework assignments, you are only allowed one attempt for each unit quiz. So, be sure to start it only
after you have thoroughly completed and reviewed all of the unit content and are comfortable with the
concepts. Once you submit your answers, you will not be able to edit them. Your grade for each unit
quiz is based on accuracy and timely submission, and you receive points for each correct answer.
Please read the following policy carefully regarding taking a unit quiz:
       Availability: The unit quiz for each unit will be available on each Thursday at 8:00 am, and
        you will have a whole day on each Thursday to complete the unit quiz.
       Due Date and Time: The Unit Quiz is due on each Thursday before 11:59 pm
       Time limitation: Time for each unit quiz is limited and varies depending on materials tested
        and difficulty level of each unit quiz, approximately from 20 minutes to 25 minutes.
                                                                                                        12
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                           13
             Course Work Description & Polices (continued)
      Warning: A reliable internet connection is required and critical, and is your responsibility.
       Please use a long-standing proven connection and test it before starting unit quizzes. Time
       begins the moment you start a Unit Quiz and runs continuously; there is no way to pause it,
       including loss of connectivity or logging out, and there are no make-ups if you missed a unit
       quiz due to any issues related to the internet connection. A late submission or a missing unit
       quiz due to a connection failure are not an excuse for retaking a unit quiz. So, it is critical to
       plan accordingly. For an online course, not paying attention to such policy will negatively
       impact your performance. A student who assumes that he or she could bargain for a make-up
       unit quiz when encountering an internet issue only puts his or her performance at risk.
      Number of attempts allowed: Only one attempt is allowed for taking a unit quiz. Once you
       submit your answers, you will not be able to edit them. Remember, this is a test for each unit,
       and it tests whether you really understand the materials covered for each unit.
      Resources you may use: Written and digital materials, a calculator, and a self-created note
       sheet. Warning: Direct or indirect assistance from any individual is STRICTLY
       PROHIBITED and is an unequivocal violation of the McCombs School of Business Code of
       Ethics and University’s policy on Academic Dishonesty and Cheating.
      Warning: Your ability to use the allowed resources is constrained by the time limit, and you
       are only allowed one attempt for each Unit Quiz. Therefore, it is strongly RECOMMENDED
       that, in addition to diligent review and practice before taking each Unit Quiz, you make your
       own notes for use during the time you take each Unit Quiz—it is an excellent aid for reviewing
       the material, taking the quizzes, enhancing your performance.
      Availability of correct answers: You will be able to view answers for each unit quiz after its
       due date but within 24 hours.
      If you miss submitting a unit quiz by its due date, you will receive “zero” for the unit quiz. No
       late work will be accepted under any circumstance and NO make-ups for any missing unit
       quiz.
      No questions answered policy: During a unit quiz time (Thursday from 8:00 am to 11:59 pm),
       any questions related to a unit quiz will not be answered.
      Your performance on Unit Quizzes is worth 40% of your final grade.
Prerequisite Quiz on Proctor U and the Final Exam
To make sure that students are fully aware of the processes and policies about Proctor U system, and to
make ensure that students are well prepared for taking the final exam within the Proctor U system, a
prerequisite quiz must be taken and passed in order to take the final exam as this quiz is a part of
preparation for the final exam that is proctored by Proctor U. This quiz will be set up on the course site
– Canvas, and it will be given after the completion of all of the course materials (after unit 13 is
covered). Students will be provided all of the information needed to prepare for this quiz.
                                                                                                           13
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                         14
             Course Work Description & Policies (continued)
Comprehensive Final Exam
Thirty-seven percent of your total grade is allocated to a comprehensive final exam, which covers all
13 units included in the canvas course material. The type of questions on the final exam will be
multiple choice questions. The final exam will be proctored with a time limit. You will be given
flexibility to schedule for your final exam in a two-day window and to take the final exam at your
scheduled date and time. Students must take the final exam during the final exam window (see course
schedule). The final exam will test your solid understanding of the course materials and also will test
your ability to apply the concepts, teams, basic accounting topics you have learned from the course to
solving problems. Therefore, understanding the course materials is critical for preparing for the final
exam. Besides studying all the course materials, we will make great effort to prepare some exercises
and practices to help our students get ready for the final exam.
Preliminary information about the final exam and about Proctor U
The following is some basic information about the final exam:
       The final exam will be given approximately 2.5 to 3 hours, and you will have plenty time to
        complete the final exam.
       The final exam will be closed-book and will be all multiple choice questions.
       The final exam will be set up on Canvas, and you will be taking the final exam on Canvas just
        like the way you take a unit quiz.
       The final exam will be given in a two-day window, and you will be able to schedule your exam
        on one of two final exam days.
       The final exam will be proctored by Proctor U, a user-friendly proctoring system and a live
        online proctoring service that allows you to take your exam from your home or a comfortable
        place. The detailed information about how Proctor U work and, and how to set up an account
        with Proctor U will be posted on Canvas (includes videos) later the semester. Once again that
        you will be well-informed about Proctor U system and about how to use the Proctor U system
        for your final exam.
Therefore, you will have great flexibility to schedule for your final exam during the scheduling time
and the great flexibility to take the final exam at your scheduled final exam time. It works simple, and
it works pretty well. So, relax!!
No Extra Credit Policy
       There are No extra credit activities. The points you earn across assigned all course work will
        result in your final course grade.
       There will be No opportunity to raise your course grade by asking for or doing any “extra
        credit” work during or after the end of the semester—that would violate University policy.
                                                                                                         14
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                          15
            Course Work Description & Policies (continued)
Numbering Convention Policy for all Assignments
An essential part of accounting is precision. In this course, you need to be precise in the way you enter
your answers for all assignments on Canvas; otherwise, they will not be counted as correct answer. The
proper format for entering numbers is:
       No dollar sign
       Commas between every three digits
       No decimal and no digits beyond a decimal point. (All answers are integers.)
       Negative numbers denoted by parentheses, not a minus sign. (This is an accounting
        convention.)
For example, if your answer to a question is eight hundred thousand dollars, the correct way to enter
this number for full credit is: 800,000. The followings will be considered incorrect and you will not
receive the full credit. $800,000, $800,000.00, $800000, $800000.00, $800,000.00, 800,000.00,
800000, 800000.00, and 800,000.00. You get the idea.
The grading for all assignments will strictly follow this numbering convention.
Accommodation Policy for the Course:
In order to be accommodated for unit quizzes and for the final exam, a student must provide a
university official document of accommodation from SSD office, and you must submit/send the
document in PDF to the instructor. The accommodation starts being applied to a unit quiz or to the
final exam only after the instructor receives and reviews the documentation from a student.
       For students who plan to have an accommodation (an extra time) for the unit 1 quiz, you must
        provide and submit the university official documentation the latest by Sept. 10th.
       If a student asks for an accommodation for a unit quiz or for the final exam without a university
        official document, his or her email will not be responded.
       Students who submit the university official documentation and who are eligible for
        accommodation do not need to inform the instructor about your accommodation for each unit.
        We will set up the accommodation for you as each unit quiz becomes available.
       If a student is eligible for the accommodation but encounter any issue with your
        accommodation time, it is your responsibility to inform the instructor as soon as possible.
Important notice: The application of the accommodation is not retroactive! What does this mean? For
example, a student will not be allowed to demand an accommodation (extra time) for unit 1 or unit 2
quiz when the student provides the office documentation after the course has already completed the
unit 1 or unit 2 quiz.
                                                                                                          15
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                           16
                                      Grading Policy
Principle Grading Policy
The ACC 310F-WB course has adopted the University’s plus/minus grading as the standard for
grading bass. The faculty believes that plus/minus grading permits us to better distinguish gradations in
performance and provides better feedback to students on their performance.
Further, The McCombs School of Business has set grading guidelines for this course such that the
final class grades will fall such that the class average will be in the range of 3.0 – 3.2 at the end of
the semester. If the overall class average is out of the range, the final class grades will be adjusted
accordingly. As the McCombs School faculty, I conduct this course by strictly respecting and
following such grading guidelines.
You may estimate your performance during the semester based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90%
= A-, 80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and below 60% = F. (Notice that under the plus/minus system
an undergraduate student needs a D- or better to receive credit). Warning: These cutoffs are only used
as a reference point for you to estimate your grades over the semester, and they are not associated with
the final grades cut-offs nor with your final grades. Further, it does NOT give students any justification
for negotiating grades.
Based on the principle of grading policy, a student’s performance/final grade is measured against the
class overall performance. In other word, a student’s final grades will be contingent upon the class’s
overall performance. Under the principle grading policy, the instructor will have final discretion and
authority to determine the final class grade cut-offs in order to achieve the average final grade range of
3.0 to 3.2, and such decision will be made after thoroughly reviewing the class performance and after a
careful consideration of the overall class performance. Therefore, there is no way to know the exact
cut-off for the final letter grades during the semester until after the course is completed and until the
course performance will be reviewed. Both TAs and the instructor will not be able to tell you the final
grades cut-off during the semester, and emails questioning about the final cut-off will not receive a
response during the course.
Check Your Grades:
Canvas automatically grades assignments submitted by students, and the grades for each assignment
are available on Canvas as soon as an assignment is submitted (used up all allowed attempts).
Therefore, students can view their grades on Canvas in “Grades” Section all the time. Canvas grade
section indicates possible points assigned for each assignment and the points a student has earned.
Students are fully responsible for checking their own grades, and you should check your grades right
after each grading is up for an assignment on Canvas (right after each assignment is submitted at its
last attempt). Canvas management system grades all assignment accurately.
If you have questions about your grades, you must communicate with your assigned TA within a week
after a unit is closed. Do not wait until the end of the semester to question your grade components,
and such inquiry is unreasonable and will not receive a response. Any last minute inquiries about
grading will not be justified nor addressed since timely managing grades for the course is a critical part
of management of the course that has a large amount of students. We need your support and
cooperation!
                                                                                                           16
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                        17
                                     Grading Policy
Notice: The deadline for addressing grade related questions for each unit is within a week after a unit
is closed, and this deadline must be strictly applied to students.
Before you make an inquiry about your grade, you must double check your grade on Canvas and make
sure that you have solid reason(s) for your inquiry. When a student makes an inquiry by an email, you
must clearly indicate which unit and specific assignment you are inquiring. Further, your email must
be brief, clear, and to the point so that your TA can understand your inquiry, quickly review your
grades, and get back to you.
Incomplete Policy:
Incompletes will be given only in the RAREST of circumstances and only in accordance with
university policy. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing “extra credit” work
during or after the end of the semester—that would violate University policy.
No Rounding Policy
Notice that there will be No grading percentage rounding: For example, if you have earned a total of
89.9999%, your estimated letter grade would be a “B+” based on the estimation reference point of the
traditional cut-off, which means that 89.9999 % is NOT rounded up to 90.0%. Once again, this “B+” is
an estimate before we know the exact cut-off for the final class grades. No rounding policy is strictly
applied to the course, and no negotiation of rounding grades is allowed.
                                                                                                        17
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                          18
                               Due Dates & Polices
Due Dates:
You may complete each unit as soon as you wish during the time it is available to the class. But
meeting due dates for all units are critical for completing the course.
Emphasis on Due Date Policy:
      As an online course, you have flexibility to complete your study for each unit at your own pace
       as soon as each unit is published until the due date for that unit. Any assignment that has not
       been completed by its due date will receive zero points.
      Due to the time limit for each unit quiz, you should plan ahead for some time that fits your
       schedule to complete each unit quiz. Again, failure of internet connection will not be an
       excuse to re-take the unit quiz. It is your responsibility to plan ahead, to test your internet
       connection, and to submit each unit quiz on time.
      I strongly suggest that you access the course site at least 4 to 5 times per week and to spend at
       least 8 to 10 hours per unit. By doing so you will be able to actively participate, complete your
       assignments, and access announcements in a timely manner. Overall, you want to keep up with
       the course pace and work diligently to ensure your performance
Late Assignment Policy
      No late assignments: All assignments close at due dates indicated in the “Due Dates” table
       above. Therefore, assignments cannot be submitted after a due date/deadline, even 1 second
       after the deadline. Therefore, please give yourself sufficient time to comfortably complete all
       assignments, and make sure that your internet connection is reliable!
      No time extensions: There are no time extensions for course activities, including Practice
       Quizzes, Ribs-on-the-Run exercises, and Unit Quizzes. As a self-paced course you can
       manage your time to make assignment deadlines. Please allow for a time cushion in completing
       your assignments … do not wait until a minimum expected time before the due date to get
       started. It is highly recommended that this cushion is days, not hours, to allow for any
       unexpected events.
      Bad internet connections or other technical problems: A bad internet connection or other
       technical problems with your system are not justification for a missed assignment. You should
       confirm your connection by starting activities with ample time to address connection issues
       before the deadline. This is especially important if you are not using a familiar and proven
       connection, for example, when you are traveling.
      Possible make up due to sickness: 1) if a student misses an assignment due to the sickness, it
       is the student’s responsibility to inform the instructor and to provide a doctor's note. 2) If a
       student is sick and provides a doctor’s note that covers a sick date (dates), upon reviewing the
       doctor notes, the student may be allowed to make up a missing assignment. 3) If a student
       missed an assignment due to an emergency situation, it is the student’s responsibility to inform
       the instructor at the earliest time and to provide a proof for the emergency situation in order to
       be considered for a makeup assignment. 4) Any proof or a doctor’s note provided by a students
                                                                                                          18
                           ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                           19
                               Due Dates & Polices (continued)
must covers the dates that are lined up with an assignment outstanding date and its due date. 5) A
student must inform the instructor at the earliest time and must provide any proof and a doctor’s note
timely (within a week when a unit is closed).
        Again, it is your responsibility to start early, to give yourself days of time ahead to avoid any
         unexpected issues, to seek help from 24/7 Canvas support if you need, and to meet the course
         due dates.
Dropping the Course:
It is a student’s responsibility to drop a course. Students must go through the official procedures to
drop the course. A student who stops attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a
grade of F.
Consult the Academic Calendar on the Registrar’s website (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for
specific deadlines.
                                                                                                           19
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                           20
                        University Notices & Policies
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It
is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail
address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current
with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
Electronic Class Rosters
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at The University.
Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available
within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions and
chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a component of the sites. Students
who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory
information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting
directory information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi02-03/app/appc09.html
Academic Integrity – University of Texas at Austin
Students of the University of Texas and this course may not share or distribute materials that could be
an advantage to another current or future student. Violations are indefensible acts of scholastic
dishonesty. For more on the University of Texas policy of Academic Dishonesty and Cheating, follow
the link at http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-
conduct/
Code of Ethics – McCombs School of Business
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail
in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics.aspx.
By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that
document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described
in that document. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its
assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial
Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic
dishonesty.
                                                                                                           20
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS


                                                                                                            21
                     University Notices & Policies (continued)
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this
course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class
can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please
come to me at any time with any concerns.
Religious Holy Days
This is a self-paced course. Each student is responsible for managing her or his time to avoid conflicts
between coursework and religious holidays of individual relevance. Accordingly, assignment due dates
will not be modified for religious holidays.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the
Office of Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
       Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
        buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
       If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing ASAP.
       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
       Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):512-232-5050 or on-line.
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                                                                            21
                            ACC 310 F - WB – SPRING 2019 – COURSE SYLLABUS
