               The University of Texas at Austin Department of Radio-Television-Film
                  RTF 306: INTRODUCTION TO WORLD CINEMA HISTORY – Web Based
                                      Unique # 73440 / Summer 2019
 Course Instructor: Kate Cronin, PhD in Progress
                                                         Teaching Assistant: Eric Forthun, PhD in Progress
                   Office: CMA 6.150
                                                                                Office: CMA 6.156
                    Email: REDACTED
                                                                                 Email: REDACTED
                                                                                   Office Hours:
                     Office Hours:
                                                                           In person: by appointment
              In person: by appointment
                                                                          Online: Wednesdays, 1-4 pm
         Online: Mondays and Fridays, 1-4 pm
                                                                             Canvas Conferences
                  Canvas Conferences
Contact for Technical Assistance: Email your course instructor, Kate Cronin at REDACTED.
She will put you in contact with someone who can help you.
Course Description: In this course, we will explore how the movies developed from a circus
amusement to multinational industry as well as how film can be understood as socio-cultural,
technological, aesthetic and economic artifact. Global in scope, this course will sample a variety of “national
cinemas” in order to compare and contrast how moviemaking developed uniquely in different parts of the
world. We will also address how decades of popular and critical attention to the glamour and gossip
surrounding Hollywood movies has affected our understanding of “American” cinema. Designed for
students who have not taken previous coursework in film or media studies.
Course Learning Objectives:
       1.  Explain general cinematic trends in key regions around the globe at selected moments of
           time
       2. Identify how the inception and evolution of the film industries relate to today’s
           entertainment conglomerates
       3. Analyze primary and secondary sources to interpret cinema as artistic product and historical
           artifact
       4. Actively construct and interpret history by analyzing primary sources and formulating
           arguments
Accessing the Course: Required Technology and Materials
       •   The canvas module section will serve as your “Home” base for the course. NOTE:
           For assignment content, access Canvas via a computer NOT a cell phone or
           tablet.
       •   Textbook: Gomery, Douglas and Clara Pafort-Overduin. Movie History: A Survey (second
           ed.) New York: Routledge, 2011. Available at the UT Co-Op or online retailers.


       •    Additional Readings are uploaded to Canvas and available in the “Files” section.
       •    Branchtrack Simulations for Assignments 2 and 3: Weeks 4-7 and Weeks 8-9. More
            details forthcoming.
       •    Films: Several of the feature films assigned are located on Kanopy via UT Libraries:
            https://utexas.kanopystreaming.com/ [Note: You will need to create a Kanopy account for
            access.] You will also need to rent films from amazon, itunes, a local video store, or a library for
            some of the required screenings. Within each module there will be a page titles “Screening info.”
            This page will tell you (and link you) where you can obtain the films for that week.
NAVIGATING CANVAS: * The modules section on canvas is your best friend! *
I have organized each module by week. Click on the “week at a glance” page within each module to see what
you should be working on for any given week, find out how to access the screenings, access the course units,
quizzes, and assignments, and see when all graded content is due. The first 6 course modules will be
available to you from June 6 onwards. The final 4 modules will become available on July 13.
READ THIS:
       1. Although taking this course online allows for some flexibility, please note modules MUST be
            completed in order and there is a weekly quiz each Friday due at midnight. No late quizzes
            will be accepted. That said, in order to provide some cushion, I will drop your
            lowest quiz grade and double your highest. I suggest you save this “dropped quiz
            grade” in case of an emergency. Again, the module section on Canvas should walk you
            through this.
       2. It is strongly recommended that you keep up with the course schedule as laid out
            below.
      3.    Late submissions will automatically lose 5 points for each day they are late.
            There will be NO LATE SUBMISSIONS ACCEPTED for WEEKLY QUIZZES or for the
            FINAL EXAM. It is highly (HIGHLY) recommended that you do not wait until the last
            minute to complete course readings, units, and submit assignments.


                                 COURSE SCHEDULE AND DUE DATES
             All due dates listed below are Central Standard Time (CST - aka, Austin time)
            WEEK/TOPICS                                 ASSIGNMENTS                     DUE DATES
     WEEK 1: JUNE 6 TO JUNE 14         Reading: Textbook Preface and Ch. 1
Course
Introduction                           Course Introduction: Welcome, Approaches to
                                       Film History.
AND
                                                                                       Canvas Syllabus and
Unit 1: Origins and Inventions         Unit 1: Introduction, Early Moving Image        Unit 1 Content quiz:
of Cinema                              Formats, Key Individuals and Innovations (Film  DUE Friday, June 14:
                                       Technology), Immigration, Vaudeville, and Early      11:59 pm
                                       Film Genres, Key Individuals and Innovations
                                       (Film Narrative), A Few
                                       Historiographical Notes
                                       Assessment: Canvas Quiz
     WEEK 2: JUNE 17 TO JUNE 21        Reading: Textbook Ch. 2 and Ch. 3
Unit 2: The Movies Become Big Business
                                       Unit 2: Introduction, Early Film Exhibition,
AND                                    An Industry Emerges, Vertical Integration and
                                       The Patent Wars, The Rise of the
Unit 3: The Birth of Hollywood                                                             Canvas quiz:
                                       “Independents”
                                                                                       DUE Friday, June 21:
                                                                                            11:59 pm
                                       Unit 3: Introduction, The Move to
                                       Los Angeles, World War I and the
                                                                                               AND
                                       “Roaring Twenties,” Origins and
                                       Aspects of the Studio System,
                                                                                         Primary Source
                                       Silent Film Comedy, Conclusion
                                                                                           Assessment:
                                                                                       Due Friday, June 28:
                                       Film: All integrated within the course
                                                                                            11:59 pm
                                       modules, including Easy Street (1917), USA, 16
                                       minutes, Get Out and Get Under (1920), USA, 25
                                       minutes, Sherlock Jr. (1924), USA, 44 minutes
                                       Assessment: Canvas Quiz AND Primary Source
                                       Assignment


   WEEK 3: JUNE 24 TO JUNE 28               Reading: Textbook Ch. 4 and Ch. 5
Unit 4: Silent German Cinema
                                            Unit 4: Introduction, German Cinema and the
                                            Impact of World War I, The Golden Age of
AND
                                            German Silent Cinema, Conclusion                 Canvas quiz:
                                                                                          DUE Friday, June 28:
Unit 5: Soviet Cinema
                                            Unit 5: Introduction, Early Russian Cinema         11:59 pm
                                            and the Soviet Revolution, Soviet Filmmaking
                                            and Theories of Montage, The Legacy of Soviet         AND
                                            Cinema
                                                                                            Primary Source
                                            Films: Das Cabinet des Dr. Caligari / The         Assessment:
                                            Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920, Germany)       Due Friday, June 28:
                                                                                               11:59 pm
                                            Man With A Movie Camera (1929, USSR)
                                            Assessment: Canvas Quiz AND Primary
                                            Source Assignment
     WEEK 4: JULY 1 TO JULY 5                Reading: Textbook Ch. 6 and Ch. 8
Unit 6: Race (and Racist) Films – Griffith,
                                            Unit 6: Introduction, D.W. Griffith and The
Micheaux, and More
                                            Birth of a Nation, Oscar Micheaux and “The
                                            Race Film,” Historiographical Challenges
AND
Unit 7: The Coming of Sound                 Unit 7: Introduction, Sound Technologies,        Canvas quiz:
                                            Industrial Impact, Sound Genres, Conclusion           DUE
                                                                                            Friday, July 5:
                                            Films: Veiled Aristocrats (1932, USA)              11:59 pm
                                            The Bronze Buckaroo (1938) Both Available on
                                            Netflix
                                            Assessment: Canvas Quiz


     WEEK 5: JULY 8 TO JULY 12      Reading: Textbook Ch. 7; “The Motion Picture
                                    Production Code of 1930”
Unit 8: The Hollywood Studio System
                                    Unit 8: Introduction, An Evening’s
AND                                 Entertainment, The Production Code, Labor
                                    Unrest
Unit 9: World War II –                                                                      Canvas quiz:
Entertainment and Propaganda                                                                     DUE
                                    Unit 9: Introduction, World War II,
                                                                                           Friday, July 12:
                                    Hollywood During the War, Enduring
                                                                                              11:59 pm
                                    Influences of World War II.
                                                                                                 AND
                                    Films: Baby Face (1933, USA) – Available
                                    to rent via Amazon, iTunes, and at UT Fine
                                                                                          Production Code
                                    Arts Library
                                                                                              Simulation
                                                                                            Assignment:
                                    Casablanca (1942, USA) – Available to
                                                                                         Due Friday, July 26,
                                    rent via Amazon, iTunes, and at UT Fine Arts
                                                                                               11:59 pm
                                    Library
                                    Assessment: Canvas Quiz AND Production
                                    Code Simulation Assignment.
                                    Note: midterm is next week. Plan
                                    accordingly.
    WEEK 6: JULY 15 TO JULY 19      Reading: Review Textbook Ch. 8 (pg. 216-223)            Canvas quiz:
                                                                                                 DUE
Unit 10: Italian Neorealism         Unit 10: Introduction, Pre-World War II Cinema,        Friday, July 19:
                                    World War II and Italian Neo- Realism, Legacy             11:59 pm
                                    Films: Ladri di Biciclette / Bicycle Thieves (1948,          AND
                                    Italy) — Available via Kanopy and to rent via
                                    Amazon, iTunes, and at UT Fine Arts Library         MIDTERM Due Sunday
                                                                                         July 21, 11:59 PM
                                    Assessment: Canvas Quiz AND Production
                                    Code Simulation Assignment AND Midterm                       AND
                                    Note: midterm is this week. Plan                      Production Code
                                    accordingly.                                             Simulation:
                                                                                         Due Friday, July 26,
                                                                                               11:59 pm


    WEEK 7: JULY 22 TO JULY 26   Reading: Textbook Ch. 9, Ch. 11
Unit 11: Hollywood and the 1950s Unit 11: Introduction, Status of the Hollywood
                                                                                      Canvas quiz:
                                 Film Industry, Popular Genres of the 1950s and
                                                                                          DUE
AND                              1960s, Exploitation
                                                                                    Friday, July 26:
Unit 12: The French New Wave                                                           11:59 pm
                                 Unit 12: Introduction, Origins of the French New
                                 Wave, New Wave “Auteurs” and Aesthetics,
                                                                                          AND
                                 Legacy of the French New Wave
                                                                                   Production Code
                                 Films: Singing in the Rain (1952, USA) –
                                                                                       Simulation
                                 Available to rent via Amazon, iTunes, and at UT
                                                                                      Assignment:
                                 Fine Arts Library
                                                                                  Due Friday, July 26,
                                                                                        11:59 pm
                                 The 400 Blows (1959) — Available via kanopy
                                 Assessment: Canvas Quiz AND Production
                                 Code Simulation Assignment
   WEEK 8: JULY 29 TO AUGUST 2   Reading: Textbook Ch. 10; Chapter 12
Unit 13: “New American Cinema”   Unit 13: Introduction, Cuban Cinema Before
                                                                                      Canvas quiz:
                                 1959, A Revolutionary Cinema?, Cuban Cinema
AND                                                                                       DUE
                                 post- 1980]
                                                                                   Friday, August 2:
Unit 14: Japanese Cinema                                                                11:59 pm
                                 Unit 14: Introduction, Early Japanese
                                 Cinema, World War II and U.S. Occupation,
                                                                                          AND
                                 Japanese Cinema Post-1952
                                                                                     New American
                                 Films: Bonnie and Clyde (1967, USA) Available
                                                                                  Cinema Simulation
                                 to rent via Amazon, iTunes, and at UT Fine Arts
                                                                                      Assignment:
                                 Library
                                                                                           DUE
                                                                                   Friday, August 9,
                                 Rashômon (1950, Japan) on Kanopy
                                                                                        11:59 pm
                                 Assessment: Canvas Quiz and New American
                                 Cinema Simulation Assignment


  WEEK 9: AUGUST 5 TO AUGUST 9      Reading: Textbook Ch. 14, “A Big Fat
                                    Indie Success Story”
Unit 15: Cuban Cinema                                                                    Canvas quiz:
                                                                                              DUE
                                    Unit 15: Introduction, Industrial Shifts,
AND                                                                                    Friday, August 9:
                                    The American New Wave, Exploitation: 70s
                                                                                           11:59 pm
Unit 16: Conglomerate Hollywood and Style
the “Indies”
                                                                                              AND
                                    Unit 16: Introduction, Blockbusters and
                                    the New Hollywood, Independent Film,
                                                                                        New American
                                    Considering the “New”
                                                                                      Cinema Simulation
                                                                                         Assignment:
                                    Films: Portrait of Teresa (1972) Vimeo,
                                                                                              DUE
                                    password will be e-mailed.
                                                                                       Friday, August 9,
                                                                                           11:59 pm
                                    My Big Fat Greek Wedding (2002, USA) –
                                    Available to rent via Amazon, iTunes, and
                                    at UT Fine Arts Library
                                    Assessment: Canvas Quiz and New American
                                    Cinema Simulation Assignment
 WEEK 10: AUGUST 12 to AUGUST 16 Reading: Textbook Ch. 13 (skim, but focus
                                    on section on India), “Bollywood”
Unit 17: Indian Cinema
                                    Unit 17: Introduction, Overview and
AND                                                                                      Canvas quiz:
                                    Statistics, General Chronology: 1896-1947,
                                                                                              DUE
Unit 18: Extra Credit Unit: Iranian Indian Cinema Post-Independence,
Cinema and Conclusion                                                                 Friday, August 16:
                                    Conclusions
                                                                                           11:59 pm
                                    Unit 18: Extra Credit Unit and Quiz on
                                                                                              AND
                                    Iranian Cinema
                                                                                       FINAL Assigned:
                                    Film: Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge/The Big-
                                                                                     Saturday, August 17
                                    Hearted Will Take Away the Bride (1995, India) –
                                                                                           11:59 PM
                                    Available to rent via iTunes or YouTube Movies
                                                                                           Final Due:
                                    Iranian Cinema Screening
                                                                                     Tuesday, August 20,
                                                                                           11:59 PM
                                    - Available to rent via amazon, iTunes, or
                                    YouTube Movies
                                    Assessment: Canvas Quiz, Extra Credit Quiz
                                    (optional) and FINAL EXAM


** NOTE: The MIDTERM ESSAY EXAM will be released on the morning of Thursday, July 18
and will be due Sunday, July 21 at 11:59 pm. The FINAL EXAM/ESSAY will be released on
the morning of Saturday, August 17 and will be due on Tuesday, August 20 at 11:59
PM.
Grading Criteria: There is no "grading curve" for this course. Grades are based on the standard scale and will
*not* have a plus/minus value (i.e., 100 - 90 = A, 89 - 80 = B, 79 - 70 = C, 69 - 60 = D, 59 or below = F). Here
are brief descriptions for each assignment, the point values for each assignment, and the weight that each
assignment will carry in calculating the final grade:
Assessments and Descriptions:
          1. Weekly Canvas Multiple Choice and Short Answer Quizzes covering readings, screenings, and
              Canvas units (to gauge comprehension) – Remembering and Understanding (20%)
          2. 3 Assignments: Primary Source Analysis and 2 Simulation Exercises (to encourage applied
              learning) – Analyzing and Applying (30%)
          3. Midterm and Final Essays (to gauge critical thinking) – Creating and Evaluating (50%)
Grade Breakdown and Due Date Snapshot:
           Assessment                 Points             Grade                          Due Date
                                     Possible         Breakdown
                                                                        Every Friday from June 6 to August
       10 Unit Quizzes*                100                 20%                       16 at 11:59 PM
         Primary Source
             Analysis                   50                 10%           Friday, June 28, 2018 at 11:59 pm
        Production Code
           Simulation                   50                 10%           Friday, July 26, 2018 at 11:59 pm
       Bonnie and Clyde                 50
           Simulation                                      10%              Friday, August 9 at 11:59 pm
             Midterm                   125                 25%              Sunday, July 21 at 11:59 pm
       Final Exam/Essay                125                 25%            Tuesday, August 20 at 11:59 pm
          * I will drop your lowest quiz grade and double your highest. I STRONGLY recommend
          that you save this dropped quiz in case of an emergency.


Essay Information: Two take-home essays will be given in the course. The first essay will cover the material
covered up until that point; the final essay will cover all content presented in the course for the entire semester. The
exam prompts will be posted to Canvas and emailed to the class 96 hours before the essays are due. Students will
submit electronic copies of their exams to TurnItIn (via UT’s Canvas site). Please see the next page for the essay
grading rubric.
Note about TurnItIn: All written assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that
compares submitted material to an archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism.
Other methods may also be used to determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results
of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper
has been plagiarized.
The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery,freedom,leadership,individualopportunity,andresponsibility.Eachmemberof the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
University Writing Center: The University Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone 471- 6222,
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc/ offers individualized assistance to students who want to improve
their writing skills. There is no charge, and students may come in on a drop-in or appointment basis.
Services for students with disabilities: The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY. If you think you need an accommodation for a disability, please email your
course instructor at your earliest convenience. Some aspects of this course, such as the assignments, in-class
activities, or the way we teach may be modified to facilitate your participation and progress. As soon as you make
us aware of your needs, we can work with you and the Office of Services for Students with Disabilities to help
determine appropriate accommodations. We will treat any information about your disability with the utmost
discretion.
Religious Holidays: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a
work assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to
complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at
Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you
will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy: All students should become familiar with the University’s
official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order
to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html


                                             Sample Essay Grading Rubric:*
                                Excellent/A                  Good/B              Competent/C            Poor/D and F
Argument/Focus           Your central argument      Your central argument    Your central argument   You do not appear
                         is clear, interesting and  is clear and somewhat    is vague and/or         to have a central
                         demonstrable (i.e,         demonstrable (i.e,       unclear. Essay content  argument. Essay
                         based on cogent            based on cogent          reflects some           content does not
                         analysis of evidence.)     analysis of evidence.)   recognition and         reflect
                         Your claims reflect a      Your claims reflect      understanding of key    understanding of
                         nuanced understanding      basic understanding of   course ideas.           key course themes
                         of course terms and        course terms and                                 and ideas.
                         themes.                    themes.
Evidence/Context         Essay content illustrates  Essay content supports   Some of the essay       Essay contains little
                         a varied array of          your key argument,       content appears         evidence to support
                         evidence to support key    although could be        miscellaneous or does   a key argument.
                         argument. Quotations       stronger and more        not directly support an More effective
                         and examples are           specific. Quotations     argument. Quotations    quotations and/or
                         framed effectively and     and examples are         and examples are not    illustrations
                         appropriately in text.     somewhat effective       framed effectively.     needed.
                                                    and explained
                                                    appropriately.
Structure/Organization Your essay is logical and    Your essay is fairly     Your essay is not       Essay is confusing
                         presented in a coherent    logical and coherent.    straight forward or     with limited
                         manner. Paragraph          Paragraph transitions    coherent. Transitions   structure and
                         transitions are smooth     are somewhat smooth      between sections are    coherence.
                         and functional.            and understandable.      lacking.
Polish: Sentence         There are no major         There are few            There are several       The number of
Structure, Grammar,      distracting spelling,      distracting spelling,    distracting spelling,   distracting spelling,
and Spelling             punctuation and/or         punctuation and/or       punctuation and/or      punctuation and/or
                         grammatical errors.        grammatical errors.      grammatical errors.     grammatical errors
                         Your sentences are         Your sentences are       Your sentences are      confuses the reader.
                         concise and well-crafted   fairly concise and well- unclear with vague or   Complicated and
                         and word choice is clear   crafted and word         ambiguous language.     unclear sentences
                         and precise.               choice is solid.                                 that confuse
                                                                                                     legibility and reader
                                                                                                     comprehension.
         * The individual assignment rubrics will be tailored to the specifics of each assignment,
         but will be based off of this template.


Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism,
unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating
honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false
or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other
assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the
prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonest damages both the student’s learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student
Judicial services Web site at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs


