                         International Advertising (ADV 334, Unique# 05895)
                                             MWF 9:00 AM – 10:AM
                                                      CMB 2.102
Note: The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be
necessary.
 Instructor: Yongwoog Andrew Jeon (Andy)                                   TA: Martha J Gill
 Office: BMC 4.322                                                         Office: Station 26, BMC 4th Floor
 Email: yongwoog@utexas.edu                                                Email: marthagill@utexas.edu
 Office hours: Mon 10 am - 1 pm and by Appointment                         Office hours: Thurs 11 am – 1 pm and by
                                                                           appointment
                “Globalization is the process by which markets integrate worldwide.”
                                          - Michael Spence, an economist
                                        “Global is shallow, the local deep”
                                           Ulf Hannerz, an anthropologist
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is designed for students to understand persuasive communication strategies for
international markets. Markets are no longer bound with their physical locations thanks to the
rapid development of communication technologies. Or are they? To successfully address the
global market, marketers and advertisers need to fully understand “local” challenges coming
“deep” from cultural, economic, regulatory, and competitive differences. Based on theoretical
and practical understanding of the dynamic interplay between global and local forces, students
will acquire theoretical as well as practical understandings of how to accomplish global
marketing communication goals. Thus, the core objective of this class is to develop an ability to
analyze and map out persuasive communication strategies that are effective in international
markets.
COURSE FORMAT
This course consists of lectures, in-class activities, two exams, and the final project (i.e., a
combination of an individual and team assignment). Students will also have an opportunity to
apply what they learn to real-world examples via the final project. There will be additional
materials that are available on Canvas as the semester progresses.
EXPECTATIONS
Students are expected to attend all lectures and actively participate in the in-class discussions.
Please note that any undocumented absence will not be excused. Students are expected to arrive
to class on time and to stay for the entire class period, or until dismissed. Random arrivals and
exits are unprofessional and distracting. Students are responsible for any information missed
during an absence from class. NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED.


REQUIRED TEXTBOOK
Mueller, Barbara (2017), Dynamics of International Advertising (3rd Ed.), New York: Peter
Lang Publishing Co.
Note: Additional readings may be posted, so be sure to check Canvas frequently.
EXAMS
There will be two in-class exams during the regularly scheduled class period. Exams are
designed to evaluate students’ understanding of core concepts or ideas covered in the lectures,
the textbook, class discussions, and in-class activities.
An optional, comprehensive final exam will be offered as a make-up option for anyone who has
missed one of the two in-class exams and for anyone who wants to improve their course grade.
The final exam will replace the lowest regular in-class exam, only if it is higher. Otherwise, it
will not be included in the calculation of the final grade. You must take the final exam if you
have not taken one of the regularly scheduled in-class tests. The specific time/date and the
location will be announced.
ATTENDANCE (IN-CLASS ACTIVITIES)
There will be an undetermined number of in-class activities (i.e., in-class exercises or quizzes).
These assignments are designed to help students keep up with the pace of the class and to
improve their understanding of the course material. These activities will be distributed and
completed during the class time. The in-class activities cannot be made up unless the instructor
excuses the absence in advance. If you are absent and have a valid excuse (i.e., serious illness or
family emergency), you must bring the appropriate documentation on your first day back.
INDIVIDUAL ASSIGNMENT
The individual assignment, solely by you, requires you to write a business-style recommendation
for the persuasive communication strategies of a US company. In this recommendation, you need
to analyze the markets in foreign countries or any market outside of the US. Based on this
analysis, you need to recommend persuasive communication strategies. Details for this
assignment will be distributed during the class.
FINAL PROJECT (TEAM ASSIGNMENT)
The final project is designed for students to put into practice what they’ve learned and their own
innovative thoughts about international advertising strategies. The final project consists of two
parts.
First, in the team assignment, you will collaborate with your peers in preparing a business-style
presentation. To persuade consumers in foreign markets, you first need to effectively persuade
the CEO of the brand. With your team members, you will prepare a presentation, and during
class, your group will present your project. The quality of both the contents of the project and the
way in which you, as a group, verbally present your project will be evaluated. Two classes will
be dedicated to a discussion of the format of this project, grading criteria, and real-world
examples of the international advertising strategy project. Also, by the time the project is
initiated, I will hold extra office hours for you to discuss the progress of your project. Your team
needs to submit a short progress report in order to make sure that the project is on the right track.


A detailed rubric for the individual assignment will be provided when the assignment is
announced.
Second, it is extremely important to successfully collaborate with your team members in the
advertising industry. This is because you are highly likely to work as a team throughout your
career. Successful collaboration requires your contribution to the overall project success. Thus,
your performance in the team assignment will be assessed based on the peer evaluations and the
part of the project which you are responsible. So, you need to submit your careful evaluations of
your team members’ contribution to the final project.
RESEARCH PARTICIPATION
To enhance students’ understanding in the marketing and advertising research processes and
methods, you need to participate in FOUR research studies. You can find information regarding
opportunities to participate in research on the Advertising Research Participation Pool website at
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool where you can also sign up for studies as well. Note
that you will not receive credit in this class for participating in more than four studies. Also, you
cannot earn credit if you take a study more than once. If you don’t want to participate in the
studies, please contact me to discuss alternative credit opportunities before Thanksgiving
(Friday, May 3). *Please note that the credit that you will receive for this activity is part of the
total grade as you can see below. It is not extra credit in addition to your total grade.
COURSE EVALUATION
Your grade in this class will be based on:
 Attendance (In-class exercise & quizzes)            10 %
 Two Exams (each 18%)                                36 %
 Research Participation (4)                          4%
 Individual Assignment                               20%
 Final Project
      Individual Contribution Grade                  15 %
                                                     *This is assessed based on the peer evaluation
      Team Grade                                     15 %
                                                     *This grade is shared by all the team
                                                     members
 Total                                               100 %
The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
A= 94-100, A-=90-93, B+=87-89, B=84-86, B-=80-83, C+=77-79, C-=70-73, D+=67-69, D=64-
66, D-=60-63. *Grades will not be rounded up or down. For example, an A- is inclusive of
all scores 90.000 through 93.999%.
GLOBAL CULTURES FLAG
This course is designated with the Global Cultures flag. That is, in this course, students will
explore the practices, beliefs, and histories of various non-U.S. cultural groups with the goal of
encouraging students to reflect on their own cultural experiences, within a global context.


UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HORNOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the
future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
Please notify me in advance of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Student with Disability at 512.471.6259 (voice) or 512.232.2937(video phone), or at
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY (ABOUT ABSENCE)
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holyday, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused
under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holyday should inform the instructor as far
in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an
assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Please do visit the following website in advance for more information and the possible
documentation that is required for your absence notification.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php
DEADLINE & STANDARDS
Enlisting aid from anyone outside the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
and will be dealt with accordingly.
