                                KIN 311K, Sports Psychology Unique #74684
                              Summer Semester 2019 MTW 1-3:30pm SZB 286
Instructor:       Erik Gnagy, Ph.D., PGA
Office: Bellmont 414 E-mail: gnagy@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Monday12-1pm and Friday 11am-12pm by appointment.
Course description:
Through the materials presented in this course, students will become familiar with the fundamental
principles of sport and social psychology and their impact on sports performance and athlete well-being.
Students will also learn to develop life-skills, such as, self-regulation, productive responses to adversity,
stress-management, setting goals and achieving them, interpersonal communication, and leadership.
Course Aims & Learning Objectives:
Given the opportunity to study the assigned readings, lecture notes on those readings and material
presented in class, the student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of:
A. The underlying principles/theories guiding the development of mental skills training programs.
B. To describe social/cultural and individual factors which are related to confidence, motivation, stress,
     athlete identity, leadership, career termination/injury and performance.
C. To describe the primary behavioral, social, and biological theories which, are related to human
     behavior, psychological well-being, and sports performance.
Optional Text:
Jean M. Williams (2010). Applied Sports Psychology: Personal Growth to Peak Performance. New York,
NY: McGraw Hill
Use of Canvas in Class:
In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected access at
http:// courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate, to post grades, and to submit
assignment notices. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday
through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Supplemental Readings:
Supplemental articles are available in Canvas when applicable (see files list). Instructions on how to
locate Blackboard readings under the course documents tab will be provided during class. A copy of all
supplemental readings will be available during office hours in the instructor’s office.
Grading:
3 Exams                                                      300 pts (100 pts each Exam)
Positive Psychology Assignment                               50
Athlete Press Conference Evaluation                          100 pts
Total Possible                                               450 pts


Format and Evaluation Procedures:
        A. Exams
                    Exams will consist of true/false and multiple-choice questions and will be limited to
                    the information from the associated section of the course.
                    There will be a total of 3 exams, each worth 100 points Each exam will be equally
                    weighted. All students are expected to take the exam on the designated day and time
                    assigned. If a student cannot take the exam during the scheduled time, it is the
                    student’s responsibility to receive approval the absence and request a make-up
                    exam with the instructor ONE WEEK PRIOR to the exam. In the case of an
                    unexpected emergency, proper documentation for the absence is required (e.g.,
                    physician’s excuse) in order to be able to make-up the exam or assignment.
                    Failure to take an exam on the designated day and time will result in a grade of
                    “0/100 = F” for that exam. NO EXCEPTIONS.
                    Grades for the exams and the exams themselves will be available for review by
                    appointment once graded. The Exam #3 grade can be obtained by emailing the
                    instructor or TA or stopping by the TA’s office one week after the exam.
        B. Positive Psychology Assignments (Critical Thinking/Communication)
                1. Gratitude: For 20 days students will record three things they are grateful for. Each
                    day’s items should be different from previous days. Assignment must be completed
                    by the end of each day during the assigned 21-day period. This assignment is worth a
                    total of 50 pts.
        C. Athlete Press Conference Evaluation (Empirical Analysis Skills, Communication Skills)
                   The goal of this assignment is to make the student aware of how athletes explain their
                   performances and how such explanations affect the athlete’s confidence, motivation,
                   and subsequent performances. To this end, the student will analyze three athlete press
                   conference videos from either a pre-performance or post-performance press
                   conference interview. Specifically, the students will type a two-page paper. The paper
                   should identify the athlete statements that exemplify the theories taught throughout the
                   semester and utilize extant theory to explain how these statements will affect the
                   athlete’s confidence, motivation, and subsequent performances.
The University of Texas Honor Code:
“In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines scholastic
dishonesty—basically, all conduct that violates this standard, including any act designed to give an unfair
or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
    • Cheating, Plagiarism, Unauthorized Collaboration, Collusion
    • Falsifying Academic Records
    • Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended
        deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
    • Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity (e.g.,
        multiple submissions—submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
        without authorization to do so)”


General University Notices & Policies
Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students:
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your
e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s
policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
Documented Disability Statement:
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone). Faculty is not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter
from SSD.
     § Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
         (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative
         text conversion, etc.).
     §   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field
         trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given
         day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     §   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
         phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
         http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Religious Holy Days:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
 Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
 through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
 Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
 Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
 CARE Counseling
 CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to need support
 when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are
 available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your
 CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George
 I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a
 CARE appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number.
  Walk-in hours are also available on Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM. You will check-in at the
 College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let Danie know you’re waiting. All
 services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without your written consent. Come
 by and see us, we are here to listen.


Q drop Policy:
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
         “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit
   an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer
   student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
   dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy:
 Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
 fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
 evacuation:
         § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
             nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
         § If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
         § In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IMPORTANT DATES TO REMEMBER:
Last Day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration require approval of the
department chair and usually the student’s dean: February 6th
Twelfth class day, official enrollment taken: February 6th
Last day an undergraduate may, with the dean’s approval can withdraw from the University or
drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons: November, 1st
Last Class Day: May 10th
Conduct in the Classroom & Expectations:
         Attendance       Regular attendance is expected of all students. The unannounced in-class
                          assignments are designed to reward those students with regular attendance.
                          Students who miss these class days will receive 0 points for that day. Exams are
                          based on all readings from the text/articles, lectures, and research discussed in
                          class. As a result, missing class will likely have a negative affect on your grade.
         Preparation      Each student is expected to keep up with the readings for class. Reading for class
                          will enable all students to contribute to class discussions and will enhance your
                          knowledge of the material.
         Respect          This course encourages open discussion of topics covered. To allow for each
                          student to be able to contribute, only one person should be speaking at any one
                          given time. In addition, side bar conversations and distractions such as surfing
                          the web on your laptop, checking your cell phone, will not be allowed in
                          class. Please turn off your cell phones prior to entering class. If your situation
                          requires that the cell phone be on, please speak with the instructor to make
                          arrangements. Please show up to class early.


Electronics Use: I am asking you to refrain from using phones, smartphones, laptops, tablets, iPads,
and the like in this class. PLEASE TURN OFF ALL CELL PHONES/TEXT MESSAGE CAPABILITIES (I.E., A
NON-VIBRATING MODE) UPON ENTERING THE CLASSROOM. Failure to comply with classroom rules
may result in the forfeiture of participation points for that day.
E-mail: You are encouraged to communicate with Dr. Gnagy as frequently as you wish,
either in-person or through e-mail. If you select e-mail communication, I will do my best
return your e-mails within a reasonable timeframe during weekdays. Responses on weekends may
take longer. If you send an e-mail after 5 pm on any day, I cannot guarantee that you will receive a
response before 10 am the next day. Please note that email response times apply to the duration of the
semester only, and end when final grades have been submitted. Please consider e-mail formal
communication and use formal language in preparing your e-mail. That is, in all e-mail
communication begin with a salutation and address me by Dr. Gnagy. Refrain from using slang
or abbreviations (e.g., lol, omg, etc.), end the e-mail with your name and, if you wish, a closing
phrase (e.g., thanks, sincerely, etc.). It is important that you sign your name on every email, as
some of your email addresses do not clearly state your names. I strongly suggest that you email
me directly at gnagy@austin.utexas.edu rather than sending messages through Canvas. Canvas
is less reliable, especially when sending attachments.


   Tentative Lecture Schedule
                                          Topic
Date        Each topic will include defining concepts, research evidence, &
                                       application
                                            Week 1
7/15           Introduction to Sports Psychology Keys To Success
7/16                       Identity, Goal Setting, Self-Esteem
          Epistemology/Phenomenology Behaviorism and Cognitivist Views
7/17
                         Dual Processing Heuristics and Biases
                                            Week 2
7/22                                    Emotions
7/23           Self-Efficacy/Sports Confidence/Achievement Motivation
7/24                                      Test 1
                                            Week 3
7/29                            Self-Determination Theory
7/30         Cognitive Theories/CBT/REBT/Attributions/Explanatory Style
7/31    The Zone/Stress/Paradoxical Performance/Self-Presentational Stress
                                            Week 4
 8/5                                      Test 2
 8/6              Mindsets/Self-Emotional Regulation/Self Distancing
 8/7                 Stress Management/Mindfulness/Relaxation
                                            Week 5
8/12             Imagery/Pre-Performance Routines/Quality Practice
8/13      Team Cohesion/Self-Fulfilling Prophecy/Leadership Effectiveness
8/14                                     Exam 3
