          The Selfie Stick: Self-Portraiture and Photography of the United States after the 1980s
                                                    Fall 2018
                                           AMS 311S Unique 31099
                                             Instructor: Natalie Zelt
                                                  DESCRIPTION
Self-portraits are a pervasive aspect of everyday life in the United States today. Millions of people have
chosen to turn the camera around and picture themselves. What are the stakes and histories of rotating
the camera lens? How have artists used the camera and photographs to highlight and challenge the
politics of identity in contemporary culture?
In this undergraduate seminar we will consider self-portraiture and the photograph from a different
select position each week. Paying close attention to the politics of the camera in relationship to
representation, students will examine the myriad ways artists have used the camera and pictures in an
effort to depict and sometimes to define themselves. This class is not a chronological survey or
comprehensive history, rather a litany of jumping off points and positions from which students might
begin to grapple with the intersections of self-making, identity formation and photography of the United
States.
                Each of the artworks we will study address these questions in different ways
                                            -What is a self-portrait?
                                            -What is a photograph?
                                             -What is an American?
Each week we will spend time looking closely at an artwork, reading a scholarly text, and putting them in
conversation.
This course carries ​Writing Flag​, which means it is designed to get students to grapple with ideas and
issues raised in the course through writing. You can expect to write throughout the semester and
complete a substantial writing project. You will receive feedback and have opportunities for revision. A
large portion of your final grade will be derived from writing-based projects, so please become
acquainted with the resources at the University Writing Center. The folks there are pretty amazing.
                                                  Course Goals
     -   Students will practice close looking with visual texts in the form of artwork.
                                                                                                           1


     -    They will learn to write carefully and persuasively about cultural forms including artworks and
          exhibitions.
     -    Students will learn to be self-conscious of what they see, how they see, who gets to see, and
          how those images impact understandings of the world and their discipline.
     -    Students will be prepared to research the work of various artists, argue for their relevance and
          contextual position and in relation to student’s chosen field of research.
                                                 Course Policies
Weekly Assignments:​ You will have weekly assignments. These assignments include looking at
artworks, reading scholarly texts, and thinking about them. The majority of readings can be found on
Canvas. You will be expected to come to class having read the texts and prepared questions and ideas
for discussion. Weekly assignments will also include short presentations. You will be writing about art
works weekly in your journals. I will review those journals throughout the semester. You will present on
artworks and scholarly texts and provide discussion questions throughout the semester. The purpose of
these presentations will be to provide brief background and context that is useful and facilitates
conversation; it is not a simple verbal report. The way that weekly presentations and discussion
questions help foster conversation will be taken into account into calculating your participation grade.
Finally, this class is about visual things. Presentations may, and probably should, include visuals, which
should be easily accessible from our classroom through Powerpoint or other organized digital formats.
Attendance and Participation: ​Attendance and active participation is crucial to both your grade and the
development of our shared classroom community. Individual class attendance and group participation
will be taken into account in calculating your participation grade. However, leaving your group in a lurch
or missing more than 6 classes may result in a zero-participation grade. Sustained lack of group
participation or missing more than 8 classes may result in failing the course. Excused absences may
include religious holidays, school-related travel, and family emergencies, but in order for these absences
to be excused, you must communicate with me and your group as far in advance as possible and provide
appropriate documentation.
Community and Conversation:​ A seminar is a semester-long conversation that builds community over
time. The success of this conversation requires that folks from different disciplines, experiences, and
perspectives come together to engage with the ideas of the course with care and respect. This means
adding your ideas to the mix, making space for others and trusting that ideas will be thoughtfully
interpreted. A conversation has many sides. Ours requires that you be present, engaged, and actively
listening to your colleagues. Our conversation requires that you approach your classmates, your
instructor, and the community we are building with respect, openness, and compassion.
Late Work: ​The final project will not be accepted late. Late work for other major assignments will lose
one letter grade per day past the due date. In general, I do not offer extensions except for unusual
circumstances. However, unusual circumstances do sometimes occur. I encourage you to be as
communicative as possible with me in the event that they present themselves to you.
                                                                                                           2


Electronics:​ Presence is paramount in this seminar. Being present is more than being physically in a
room. It requires active looking, thinking, and dialogue with your colleagues and instructor. Should you
choose to take notes on a computer or tablet, do so responsibly. Notes are not as important as
conversation. I will ask to you stop using your device, should it become clear that you are no longer
present with us.
Communication: ​Clearly, conversation, a form of communication, is critically important to your success
in this course. I encourage you to stay in communication with me and your group throughout the
semester. Feel free to communicate with me if you are encountering difficulties with the course or are
confused about assignments, materials or policies. I hold regular office hours and am able to schedule
additional appointments. My preferred communication modes are email and Canvas. Be advised that I
respond to emails once a day, usually in the afternoon.
What is a Syllabus?:​ A syllabus is a living document. It contains crucial information, but also grows and
changes with the conversation, the needs of the course, and the issues of the times.
University of Texas Honor Code: ​The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement​: If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that
documents your disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard
of hearing). Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss the
accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of
any accommodations you will need. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd​.
                                           Assignments and Grading
Participation                                                        30%
Participation is integral to this small seminar. In addition to regular attendance you are expected to
come prepared to actively discuss and engage with materials. You will keep a journal of your weekly
in-class writings, which will be collected and reviewed periodically throughout the semester and turned
in at the end. In addition you will present multiple times throughout the semester on assigned artists
and scholarly texts.
Art in the World Review                                              10%
You will be asked to participate in one art program (exhibition, lecture, panel, symposium) on campus
this semester and draft a short review (1500 words).
Response Essays                                                      20%
Over the course of the semester you will be required to write two short response essays (1500 words
each), due in hard copy at 2pm on Friday of the assigned week. These essays interrogate the week’s
                                                                                                           3


artwork and scholarly text. The essay should address how the artwork and readings facilitate a better
understanding of each other. It should outline what important questions they raise concerning identity
in the US and why they are important. Responses are not lists. They are essays with a thesis/central
guiding argument.
Final Project                                                     40%
Students will have the option to choose between two final projects. Each option is a research-based
persuasive project that includes 2,000-3,500 word written portion, a proposal, a first draft, a final
presentation and final revised essay.
                                              Course Calendar
Course Structure
Most weeks will follow this basic structure:
Mondays​: Prior to arriving to class, you are expected to have spent time familiarizing yourself with the
week’s series or artwork via resources outlined on the syllabus. One of those resources includes ​DASe​, a
searchable image library available through the Fine Arts Library. We will spend the beginning of class
looking carefully and briefly responding to a single artwork from that series in writing in your journals.
Our colleagues will present additional information on the artist, series and context of the artwork. We
will engage with issues raised by their presentation and through our independent close looking.
Wednesdays​: We will engage with the assigned scholarly text. All students are expected to read the
assigned texts carefully before arriving to class on Wednesday. Our colleagues will present additional
information on the text. We will engage with issues raised by their presentation and our close reading of
the text.
Fridays​: We will put the week’s artwork and scholarly text in conversation. We will grapple with ways
issues arise or change when the two are put into conversation. We will consider what they accomplish
and what they do not. We will ask, when put side-by-side, how they answer and engage with the
questions: What is a self-portrait? What is a photography? What is an American?
Students will be divided into four groups at the beginning of the semester and group responsibilities will
rotate weekly. For example, for Week 4 the members of Group A will be responsible for giving an artist
presentation on Monday; the members of Group B will present on the scholarly text on Wednesday; the
members of Group C will bring discussion questions on Friday; and the members of Group D will turn in
a response paper in class on Friday. Then, everyone’s responsibilities rotate for the next week. So Week
5: the members of Group D will be responsible for giving an artist presentation on Monday; the
members of Group A will present on the scholarly text on Wednesday; the members of Group B will
bring discussion questions on Friday; the members of Group C will turn in a response paper in class on
Friday.
                                                Introductions
Week 1: ​Greetings + Seeing
Wednesday, August 29:​ Greetings;​ ​UT ID Writing Exercise; Review Syllabus.
                                                                                                           4


        Thursday, August 30: 5:30pm opening reception for ​Mimi Cherono Ng'ok: Love Song #9 (I knew
        you before I met you)​ at the Idea Lab in the Gordon White Building
Friday, August 31: ​How to See Yourself...with a Camera...by 2016 at least.
    - Nicholas Mirzoeff, “How to See Yourself,” in ​How to See the World​ (New York: Basic Books,
        2016): 29-69.
        Keywords: Self-portrait, Performance, Gender, Gaze, Racialize
Week 2: ​Looking, Writing, Researching
Monday, September 3: ​No Class, Labor Day
Wednesday, September 5: ​News Flash: Art is not Scary
             - Before class watch: ​https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drzG8H1cIng
             - In class: Practice Close Reading & Writing
             - In class: A photograph is a thing: Photo Materials + Groups
             - In class: Review “A Guide to Weekly Group Assignments”
             - 5-8pm: ​Dawoud Bey: Forty Years in Harlem,​ Exhibition Opening and Book Signing
                 Christian-Green Gallery Jester Center A232A
Friday, September 7: ​Fine Arts Library Research Orientation
                                        Issues of Identity and Power
Week 3: ​Sherman’s March: The Looming Legacy of Cindy Sherman
Monday, September 10: ​Cindy Sherman, ​Untitled​ ​Film Stills,​ 1977-1980
https://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2012/cindysherman/gallery/2/mobile.php
Wednesday, September 12:
    - Laura Mulvey, “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,” Screen 16:3 (Autumn 1975), 6-18.
    - Richard Dyer, “The Role of Stereotypes,” ​The Matter of Images: Essays on Representations
        (London; New York : Routledge, 1993): 11-18.
Friday, September 14: ​Discussion and Responses
Material: Film Still
Week 4: ​Gazing at the Intersection
Monday, September 17: ​Carrie Mae Weems, ​Kitchen Table Series​, 1990
http://carriemaeweems.net/galleries/kitchen-table.html
Wednesday, September 19:
    - A.D. Coleman, “The Directorial Mode: Notes Towards a New Definition,” 1976 in ​Photography in
        Print: Writings on Photography from 1816 to Present​ Ed. Vicki Goldberg(Albuquerque, University
        of New Mexico Press, 1981): 480-491.
    - Adrian Piper, ”The Triple Negation of Colored Women Artists,” ​Out of Order, Out of Sight
        (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996), 161-173.
    - bell hooks, “The Oppositional Gaze,” ​Black Looks​ (Boston: South End Press, 1992): 115-133.
Friday, September 21: ​Discussion and Responses
Material: Photo narrative
                                                                                                      5


Week 5: ​What Does a Camera Make?: Index and Race
Monday, September 24: ​Myra Greene ​Character Recognition ​(2006-2007)
http://www.myragreene.com/charaacterrecognition
Wednesday, September 26:
Selections from
    - Michael Omi and Howard Winant, “Introduction,” in ​Racial Formation in the United States​ (3rd
        Edition, London: Routledge): 1-17. ​Ebook
    - Nicholas Mirzoeff, “The Shadow and the Substance: Race, Photography and the Index,” ​Only Skin
        Deep​ (New York: International Center for Photography, 2003). 111-127.
        Thursday, September 27: ​Facing Racism Symposium at Blanton
Friday, September 28: ​No class, Final Project Proposal Due (Groups still submit discussion questions and
Response Papers (attached word doc) via email ​nzelt@utexas.edu​)
Material: Ambrotype
Week 6:​ Picturing the Self, Picturing Belonging.
Monday, October 1: ​Njideka Akunyili Crosby
http://www.njidekaakunyili.com/
Wednesday, October 3: ​4pm Njideka Akunyili Crosby Lecture in ART 1.102
    - Stuart Hall, “Cultural Identity and Diaspora,”​ Identity: Community, Culture, Difference,​ Ed.
        Jonathan Rutherford (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1990): 222-237.
    - Watch​: ​Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, “The Danger of a Single Story,”
        https://www.ted.com/talks/chimamanda_adichie_the_danger_of_a_single_story?language=en
    - Daisy Wyatt, “Things Fall in to Two Parts: Artist Njideka Akunyili tells a New Nigerian Story,” ​The
        Independent
        https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/things-fall-into-two-parts-arti
        st-njideka-akunyili-tells-a-new-nigerian-story-8887283.html
        Thursday, October 4: 11am Njideka Akunyili Crosby Q&A Trans-Media Performance ART 3.206
Friday, October 5: ​Discussion and Responses
Material: photomontage, mixed media
Week 7: ​Making History
Monday, October 8: ​María Magdalena Campos-Pons the series ​When I Am Not Here/Estoy Allá
1994-1997 images on canvas and/or DASe.
Wednesday, October 10:
    - Selection from Michel-Rolph Trouillot,​ S  ​ ilencing the Past: Power and the Production of History​.
    - Pages 65-74 from Okwui Enwezor, “The Diasporic Imagination: The Memory Works of María
        Magdalena Campos-Pons,” in María Magdalena Campos-Pons: Everything IS Separated by Water
        (Indianapolis Museum of Art: 2007).
Friday, October 12: ​Discussion and Responses ​ Artist Visit?
        4:30-6pm María Magdalena Campos-Pons Talk in ART 1.102
Material: Polaroid 20x24
Week 8: ​Invisible​ ​White
                                                                                                            6


Monday, October 15: ​ Nikki S. Lee, the series ​Projects​ see via DASe or Google Images
Wednesday, October 17:
    - Mitsuye Yamada, “Invisibility Is an Unnatural Disaster: Reflections of an Asian American
        Woman,” ​This Bridge Called My Back​, eds. Gloria Anzaldua and Cherrie Moraga (Kitchen Table
        Press, 1981): 30-36.
    - -Dyer, Richard. “White.” ​Screen​. 29:4. (Autumn, 1988); pp. 44-64.
    - George Lipsitz, “The Possessive Investment in Whiteness: Racialized Social Democracy and the
        “White” Problem in American Studies,”​ American Quarterly​, 47: 3 (Sept. 1995): 369-387.
Friday, October 19: ​Discussion and Responses
Material: Snapshot, Disposable Point and Shoot
                             Challenging American Archetypes in Photography
Week 9: ​The American Indian
Monday, October 22: ​James Luna, ​Take a Picture with a Real Indian​ (1991-2011) google image.
    - DEADLINE for “Art in the World Review”
Wednesday, October 24:
    - Paul Chaat Smith, “Luna Remembers,” in ​Everything You Know about Indians Is Wrong
        (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009): 88-102. ​Ebook
Friday, October 26: No class, Research Day
Material: Snapshot
Week 10: ​The American Family Album
Monday, October 29: ​LaToya Ruby Frazier, the series ​The Notion of Family​ (2001-2014)
http://www.latoyarubyfrazier.com/work/notion-of-family/
Wednesday, October 31:
    - Combahee River Collective, “A Black Feminist Statement,” ​This Bridge Called My Back​. Cherrie
        Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua, eds. (New York: SUNY Press, 2015, fourth edition): 210-218.
        originally dated to April 1977.
    - Abigail Solomon-Godeau, “Who is Speaking Thus?” In ​Photography at the dock: Essays on
        Photographic History, Institutions, and Practices,​ 169-183. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
        Press, 1991.
    - Deborah Willis, Introduction, ​Picturing Us: African American Identity in Photography (​ New York:
        The New Press, 1994): 3-26.
Friday, November 2: ​Discussion and Responses
Material: Gelatin silver print; documentary photograph
Week 11: ​The American Landscape
Monday, November 5: ​Laura Aguilar, ​Nature Self-Portrait s​ eries (1996) + ​Grounded​ series (2006-7)
images on canvas and/or DASe.
Wednesday, November 7:
                                                                                                        7


    -   Gloria Anzaldúa, “Preface to the first edition”+ “The Homeland, Aztlán,”+ “La conciencia de la
        mestiza/Toward a New Consciousness,” ​Borderlands/La Frontera​ fourth edition (San Francisco:
        Aunt Lute Books, 1987/2007), 19-20; 23-35; 99-113.
    - Selections from Martin Berger, “Landscape Photography and the White Gaze,” in ​Sight Unseen:
        Whiteness and American Visual Culture​ (Berkley: University of California Press, 2005) 43-58;
        74-79 ​Ebook
Friday, November 9: No Class, Draft of Final Project Due
Week 12: Self-ish?
Monday, November 12: ​Kim Kardashian West, ​Selfish,​ 2015 on reserve at FAL
Wednesday, November 14
    - Amelia Jones, “The Rhetoric of the Pose: Hannah Wilke and the Radical Narcissism of Feminist
        Body Art,” ​Body Art: Performing the Subject​ (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998)
    - Angelina Chapin, “Why Feminists Should Argue Over Kim Kardashian’s Selfie,” Huffington Post,
        March 14, 2016, (skim comments)
        http://www.huffingtonpost.com/angelina-chapin/why-feminists-should-argu_b_9458672.html
Friday, November 16​- Discussion and Potential to Submit 3rd Response Essay
Week 13
Monday, November 19- ​Research Day
Wednesday, November 21 ​THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
Friday, November 24 ​THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
Week 14: ​Feeling Myself
Monday, November 26: ​Mickalene Thomas, Afro Goddess series images on canvas and/or DASe.
Wednesday, November 28
    - Audre Lorde, “Uses of the Erotic as Power,” ​Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches.​ Trumansburg,
        (NY: Crossing Press, 1984): 53-60.
    - Jennifer C. Nash, “Practicing Love: Black Feminism, Love-Politics, and Post-Intersectionality,”
        Meridians​, vol. 11 no. 2 (2011): 1-24.
Friday, November 30: ​Discussion and Potential to Submit 3rd Response Essay
Week 15: Presentation week (5 Minutes)
Monday, December 3
Wednesday, December 5
Friday, December 7
Week 16
Monday, December 10 Last Day of Class
      Final Projects Due: Friday, December 14, Hard copy in American Studies Office before 5pm
                                                                                                         8
