                                                              AHC 325/HIS 321    Riggsby    Spring 20 1
                        HIS 321 (28620-35)/AHC 325 (33375-90)
                                 History of Rome: the Empire
Professor Andrew Riggsby                         TA David Welch
Time: MW 11-12
Place: WAG 201
Office: WAG 103 (471-7442)                       WAG 14C
Email: ariggsby@mail.utexas.edu                  dgwelch@utexas.edu
OH: M 12-2, W 10-11                              MR 12-1
Website: piazza.com/utexas/spring2020/ahc325his321/home
Sections (you are automatically enrolled in one of these)
R9, CBA4.342; R11, GDC 1.406; F10, GDC 2.502; F11, GDC 2.502
Attendance, Preparation, and Assignments:
    Attendance at lectures and at the section you are enrolled in is mandatory.
    Readings fall into two categories. Every week there will be chapters from the main textbook
(C. Mackay, Ancient Rome, to be bought at the book store or online) or from similar modern works
(these will be provided on Piazza). These are listed at the beginning of each week and in this font.
They are to be read before the first class of the week. My lectures will assume you have read the
text already, and you will take an online quiz on the contents of the readings before that first class.
There will also be specialized readings for some individual days, mostly drawn from ancient
sources and, in some cases, images rather than texts (these will be provided directly through
Piazza or through links there). Some, but not all, of these are listed below in small font. These
should also be read/viewed before the class in question. Quizzes will cover only the weekly
readings. Exams will cover both sets of readings as well as the lectures.
    There will be an ON-LINE QUIZ on Canvas most weeks to test factual knowledge of the readings
(10% of final grade in total; your single lowest grade dropped). The quiz will normally be
available early the afternoon before it is due. IMPORTANT: Note that you must take the quiz
BEFORE the first class of the week, that is by 11:00 on Monday. Note also that there are very
struct rules for the form of answers to the quizzes. There will also be three hour-long, IN-CLASS
EXAMS. The first two of these will be taken in the sections, so your date/time will depend on which
you are enrolled in (25% each). These exams are not formally cumulative, but some awareness of
previous material may come into play. There is no final exam during exam period. You are
responsible for material in the textbook, assigned readings, and class discussion. Relying on only
one of these will result in poor marks. Finally, participation in DISCUSSION SECTIONS will make up
15% of the grade. I will drop your lowest exam and your two lowest quizzes. Note that this will
be the mechanism for dealing with missed exams and quizzes.
    If raw scores on the individual exams or simple averaging of grades do not produce a
reasonable distribution of grades according to the standard scale, scores may be increased by
application of a uniform affine transformation. Plus/minus grading IS in effect. Grades are not
affected by any of the following: your grades in other classes; your status as a classics major (or
not); what grade you want for graduate school admission, scholarship, academic standing or other
reason.
Summary of Important Dates:
Exam I: 20/21 Feb.
Exam II: 2/3 Apr.
Exam III: 4 May


                                                               AHC 325/HIS 321    Riggsby    Spring 20 2
University-wide Policies:
DISABILITIES. UT Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact SSD at 471-6259, or go to http://
www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. It is your responsibility to inform me of any authorized
accommodations by the second week of class.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY. Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a 0 grade for
that examination or assignment. Scholastic dishonesty includes any kind of cheating or
collaboration on tests, or submitting work that is not your own. For more information, contact
Student Judicial Services at 471-2841, or visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS. The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that provides The
University of Texas at Austin’s faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). An individual can either call the line
at 512-232-5050 or report their concerns using the online submission form. Trained staff members
will assist the individual in exploring available options and strategies. They will also provide
appropriate guidance and resource referrals to address the particular situation. Depending on the
situation, individuals may be referred to resources including but not limited to the Office of the
Dean of Students/Student Emergency Services, Counseling and Mental Health Center, and the
Employee Assistance Program. Fuller info at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. If you need to miss a class or other required class activity for the observance
of a religious holiday, you must notify me at least 14 days in advance so we can make alternative
arrangements for your absence. Note: the University's Religious Days Policy is online: http://
www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/
GLOBAL CULTURES FLAG. This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect all of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
This course also fulfills the Cultural Expression, Human Experience, & Thought Course area
requirement.
BASIC NEEDS (FOOD/CLOTHING/SHELTER). The office of the Dean of Students has significant resources
for students experiencing hunger and more limited ones for clothing: http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php). I am not aware of comparable housing
resources, but will update this syllabus online if I find any.
UNDOCUMENTED STUDENTS. There are a variety of academic and pre-professional services available
through the Monarch program of the Division of Diversity: https://diversity.utexas.edu/
academiccenter/initiatives/monarch-student-program/.


                                                       AHC 325/HIS 321  Riggsby Spring 20 3
Republic to Empire; no reading before classes
Wed., Jan. 23 Introduction
[no section this week]
The rise of Augustus; M11
Mon., Jan. 27 The second triumvirate
Wed., Jan. 29 Seizing power
Section Laudatio Turiae: Laudatio Turiae 1:2, 2:2
The reign of Augustus; M13, 18
Mon., Feb. 3 Narrative
Wed., Feb. 5 What is the principate?
Section Augustus’ own point of view = Res Gestae
Julio-Claudians; M14
Mon., Feb. 10 Tiberius and Caligula
Wed., Feb. 12 Claudius and Nero
Section Imperial cameos = Imperial cameos
Flavians and Antonines; M15, 16
Mon., Feb. 17 Flavians
Wed., Feb. 19 Antonines
Section EXAM
Severans and the Third-century Crisis; M17, 19
Mon., Feb. 24 Severans
Wed., Feb. 26 Chaos and break-away states
Section Historia Augusta: the “thirty tyrants”
Religion; Rives, Religion in the Roman Empire, ch. 1; Frankfurter in BwellCompRomEmp
Mon., Mar. 2 Syncretism
Wed., Mar. 4 Imperial Cult
Section Christianity Pliny/Trajan; Perpetua
Diocletian and Constantine; M21, 22
Mon., Mar. 9 Diocletian
[Wed., Mar. 11 no class]
Section Constantine
SPRING BREAK
The Christian Empire; M23
Mon., Mar. 23 The rise of the Christian Empire
Wed., Mar. 25 Julian and Theodosius
Section The altar of victory


                                                       AHC 325/HIS 321 Riggsby Spring 20 4
Fall of Rome; M24
Mon., Mar. 30 Fall of the Western Empire
Wed., Apr. 1 Justinian
Section EXAM
Law; Riggsby, Roman Law and the Legal World of the Romans, chh. 3, 5, 8, 11
Mon., Apr. 6 Making the law
Wed., Apr. 8 Going to court
Section Legal/business documents from TPSulp
Emotions; Kaster, “The Shame of the Romans”
Mon., Apr. 13 Shame
Wed., Apr. 15 Fear and anger
Section Valerius Maximus, “on trust in oneself” and “on poverty”
Slavery; Bradley, Slavery and Society at Rome, chh. 2, 5
Mon., Apr. 20 Slavery from the outside
Wed., Apr. 22 Slavery from the inside
Section Guarantees in slave sales
Information Technology; 2 chapters of Dilke in Harley and Woodward, edd., History of
Cartography, vol. 1
Mon., Apr. 27 Lists and tables
Wed., Apr. 29 measurement
Section Land surveying
Wrap-up; no reading/no quiz
Mon., May 4 EXAM
