ARH 374                                                                                Fall Semester 2019
                                          Hagia Sophia in Istanbul:
          The Space of Sacred Spectacle in Antiquity, Byzantium, and Islam
                                                       ARH 374
                                                        (19645)
                                         The University of Texas at Austin
                                                       Fall 2019
                                             Dr. Amy Papalexandrou
Class Coordinates:                             My Coordinates:
MWF 11:00 – 11:50 a.m.                         Office Hours: Immediately after class or by appointment
DFA 2.204                                      Office: DFA 2.112
                                               Email: amypapalex@gmail.com
Course Description:
It might seem strange to have an entire class devoted to a single building, but there are some world monuments that
deserve it, and Hagia Sophia (St.Sophia, Ayasofya) in Istanbul (Constantinople) is one of them. Initially constructed
in the sixth century as the largest and most opulent church of the Eastern Roman Empire, it was an architectural tour
de force of planning, structure, and decoration that went unsurpassed for more than 800 years. Its conversion into a
mosque in 1453 only added to its prestige, with the Ottoman sultans adopting it as the architectural backdrop for
their own imperial spectacles. It remains a monument with strong appeal in both East and West whether for its
historic significance or its bold magnificence. The church itself will form the core element of our investigations, but
we will use it as a springboard to explore other great monuments related to it. We will see how it influenced later
architectural developments – from the later Middle Ages to the Ottoman Empire, and to its reception by modern
architects in the 19th and 20th centuries. We’ll consider its status as world heritage monument and question its
current function and the modernization of its urban surroundings. We’ll also investigate the work of an American
architect (Robert Van Nice) who studied (and documented) the monument for nearly fifty years. Classes will take
the form of informal lectures with opportunities for discussion, visits to the Henry Ransom Center and the
Architecture/Planning Library, perhaps a debate, and an examination of domes on or near campus. I hope you will
exit the class with some knowledge about Mediterranean culture in Late Antiquity (roughly the fourth through
seventh centuries A.D.) and a new perspective on various world monuments.
Required Texts
Kleinbauer, W. Eugene, Saint Sophia at Constantinople. Singulariter in Mundo (Dublin, New
Hampshire, 1999). Available on Amazon, or **as a pdf on Canvas.
Robert L. Van Nice Archive, processing blog - (Accessible soon on CANVAS)
Additional materials (texts, images, powerpoints, films) will be posted on Canvas.
Reserve Materials:
I will put a few select books on reserve in the Fine Arts Library and possibly in the Architecture
and Urban Planning Library.
NOTE: This syllabus is subject to change.
                                                                                                                      1


ARH 374                                                                           Fall Semester 2019
Requirements:
Class meetings will focus on visual materials and discussion in class, for which you are expected
to participate regularly and actively. See below for general breakdown of grading and specific
assignments. Attention: To receive a passing grade in this course, all requirements must be
successfully fulfilled. No exceptions.
Grading, general:        Short quizzes (3)                     30% (10% each)
                         Short Paper                           20% (Due Monday, Nov. 25)
                         Class participation                   50% (various)
        Grade Scale
        Your final grade will be calculated according to the following scale:
        GRADE           %
        A (4.00)       93-100 A- (3.67)       90-92 B+ (3.33)       87-89 B (3.00)    84-86
        B- (2.67)      80-83 C+ (2.33)        77-79 C (2.00)       74-76 C- (1.67)    70-73
        D+ (1.33)      67-69 D (1.00)         64-66 D- (.67)        60-63F (0.00)      ≤59
Breakdown of grading:
As you can see, the bulk of your grade is given over to class participation. This means, first and
foremost, that you attend class and that you are an active and engaged player. It also means
taking notes in class and on readings/documentaries, which will help you on quizzes and in class
discussions. I will be communicating with you via email and/or Canvas, and I will assume you
are receiving messages about the class.
Short quizzes (3) 30% (10% each)
        Dates: Mon. Oct.7; Mon. Nov. 4; Fri. Dec. 6
        Questions will derive from lectures, readings, discussions, or films.
Short Paper (1) 20%
        3-5 pages in length, double-spaced, 12-pt font. Details to follow.
        Due: Friday, Nov. 15
Class participation: 50%
        Responses to Films/Readings: 10%
        Based on films and/or short readings
        General participation: 40%
        Your presence in class is essential. So is your participation.
         I will be taking attendance This will be duly noted and will have an adverse effect on
        your general participation grade.
Important Dates:
Quiz 1: Mon. Oct.7     Quiz 2: Mon. Nov. 4.       Quiz 3: Fri. Dec. 6. Paper due: Fri. Nov. 15 (or before)
Schedule/Reading Assignments:
Note: All readings will be on Canvas unless otherwise noted.
                                                                                                           2


ARH 374                                                              Fall Semester 2019
Week 1
Aug 28 – 30   Introductions & Class Syllabus; Late Antiquity
              Watch: ‘Meet the Romans with Mary Beard’
Week 2
Sept. 4       Roman Art & Culture
Week 3
Sept. 9 – 13  Roman Architecture & Culture; Constantine & the Tetrarchs; Gibbon
              Read: Alchermes, ‘Constantinople and the Empire of New Rome’ pp.13-36
Week 4
Sept. 16–20   Style; Constantinople – New Rome on the Bosphorus; The Hippodrome
              Read: Alchermes, ‘Constantinople and the Empire of New Rome’ pp.13-36
Week 5
Sept. 23–27   Justinian the Over-Achiever; Standard Building and Experimentation;
              Hagia Sophia -- Structure & Decoration
              Read: Ousterhout, ‘The Holy Space,’ 91-118
Week 6
Sept 30–Oct.4 Hagia Sophia as Performance Space; Icons; Review (Friday)
              Read: Pentcheva, ‘Hagia Sophia and Multisensory Aesthetics,’ 93-111.
Week 7
Oct. 7 – 11   QUIZ 1 (Monday); Henry Ransom Center Group 1(Weds); Henry Ransom
              Center Group 2 (Fri.)
Week 8
Oct. 14-18    Robert Van Nice; Marble and Mosaic; Sound and Sonic Dimensions of Hagia
              Sophia; *NO CLASS FRIDAY
Week 9
Oct. 21-25    St.Nick Church Ekphrasis and poetry; Dome of the Rock/Islamic Architecture
              Read: Naser-e-Khosraw, Book of Travels (Safernāma)
Week 10
Oct 28-Nov1 Monastery of St. Catherine, Sinai; Texas Capitol WEDNESDAY;
              Catch up and Review (Friday)
              Read: Loerke, ‘“Real Presence” in Early Christian Art’
Week 11
Nov 4 – 8     QUIZ 2 (Monday); Byzantine Progeny; Buildings that ‘Talk’
              Read: Papalexandrou, ‘Conversing Hellenism: The Multiple Voices of a Byzantine
                      Monument in Greece’
Week 12
Nov 11-15     Kariye Camii; Tyranny of Hagia Sophia; Contested Monuments;
              Read: Stewart, ‘Who Owns the Rotonda? Church vs. State in Greece’; Venice Charter
              Attention: Paper DUE Friday, Nov. 15
Week 13
Nov 18 – 22   Ottoman Art/Architecture; Sinan the Great; Modern Mosques
              Read: Necipoglu, ‘The Suleymaniye Complex in Istanbul: an Interpretation’
Week 14
Nov 25 – 29   Byzantium Appropriated: 19th & 20th Century
              Read: Bullen, Byzantium Rediscovered, excerpts
Week 15
Dec. 2 -6     Course Evaluations (Monday); Famous Domes; Šokolu;
                                                                                                3


ARH 374                                                                         Fall Semester 2019
                  Catch up and REVIEW (Wednesday); QUIZ 3 (Friday)
                  Watch: “Church and Mosque: Religious Architecture in Venice and Istanbul”
Week 16
Dec. 9            Class Conclusions
ATTENDANCE: Since there is no required textbook for this class, it is expected that all students will
attend all lectures. The material covered in class will not be found elsewhere, and exams will stress
material covered in lecture and the required reading. I consider attendance to be mandatory. You must
sign the roll sheet to be counted present; signing the roll sheet is your responsibility.
For each absence beyond 3, the final grade will be lowered an additional one-third of a letter grade.
 PLEASE NOTE THE FOLLOWING:
There will be no comprehensive final during the exam period.
While exams will stress concepts and larger issues over simple identification, you will be expected to
recognize and be able to discuss a core group of images. Building your knowledge over time has proven
to be a much more successful learning technique than cramming; for those of you unfamiliar with visual
analysis and recall, it is essential.
No make-up quizzes will be given, and students who must miss an exam must ask to be excused in
advance. An excused absence from an exam carries with it the obligation to exercise the paper option. A
grade of zero will be assigned for unexcused absences on quizzes. Other students may choose to
substitute a paper for the lower of the first two exam grades.
PAPER OPTION:
Students who are excused from an exam must exercise the paper option; students who miss an exam
without an approved excuse do not have this choice. Other students may choose to substitute a paper for
the lower of the first two exam grades.
Choose a book or article from the list that is attached to this syllabus or see me about reading another
article of your choice. Papers on unapproved topics will not be accepted. Your paper should begin with a
proper bibliographic reference to the work you are discussing and include a summary of the work under
examination as well as a critical assessment of its method, its usefulness, and, if possible, its place in the
scholarly literature.
Your paper should be 4-6 pages long, word-processed, double spaced. Keep in mind that pure description
is not analysis. Try instead to order the points you find significant into an integral whole that helps you to
better understand the coherence of the text under examination. In order to do this, you will need to think
carefully about the organization and wording of your paper. Although your paper will not be graded on
“the writing” as such, please remember that clear organization, careful wording, and well-constructed
arguments are absolutely necessary to convey your points convincingly.
Late papers will be accepted without penalty only on presentation of a medical excuse, or in cases where
a student in extenuating circumstances has made prior arrangements. Other late papers will be marked
down a letter grade for each business day beyond the due date.
                                                                                                               4


ARH 374                                                                         Fall Semester 2019
CLASSROOM CONDUCT (please read carefully):
Students should attend every class, arriving for class on time and staying in class for the full 50 minutes.
--Tardy arrivals (and early departures) are disruptive and distracting. Leaving and returning during class
is equally unacceptable. Your fellow students consider such behavior rude and annoying; as do I.
--Don’t talk in class, unless you’re talking to the ENTIRE class. I would prefer that you make your
comments to the class as a whole than to the person next to you, as this disturbs your neighbor and
distracts your professor.
--Students should leave at home or completely deactivate any and all devices that beep, squeal, ring, buzz,
or otherwise emit obnoxious sounds. This includes but is not limited to telephones, pagers, beepers, and
watches. If you have a device that goes off in class, you are expected to take it out of the classroom
immediately, and not to return during that class period.
--Save your text messages for another time. If you’re looking at your lap, I’ll assume you are texting. I
will call you out in class.
--Use your laptops only for note-taking. The misuse of these electronic gizmos is inconsiderate to your
fellow students, and it makes your professor want to place you in a lower circle of Hell. I reserve the right
to ask you to leave class if I find you using these devices inappropriately; this includes texting, checking
Facebook, playing solitaire, ordering shoes, etc. Please remember that what is on YOUR computer screen
may be very distracting to those BEHIND you.
--Check your e-mail regularly for Canvas e-mails and messages from me.
--At all times, you should be considerate and respectful towards your classmates and their opinions,
which may differ from your own.
University Policy Statements
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259 or via
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
According to the General Information catalog, “the value of a university degree depends on the absolute
integrity of the work done by each student for that degree, a student should maintain a high standard of
individual honor in his or her scholastic work” (page 98). Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
If you are not sure about what constitutes plagiarism, please check the following websites:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/faculty/plagiarism/preventing.html
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learning modules/plagiarism.html
Warning about Sharing Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, powerpoints, images, and
homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is
a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the
student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the
instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class
materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
                                                                                                              5


ARH 374                                                                         Fall Semester 2019
Other Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources to provide academic and personal assistance
and support for students:
       The University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
       The UT Learning Center: http://ugs.utexas.edu/slu
        Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
       Vick Center for Strategic Advising and Career Counseling: http://ugs.utexas.edu/vick
University Policy Statements
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259 or via
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
According to the General Information catalog, “the value of a university degree depends on the absolute
integrity of the work done by each student for that degree, a student should maintain a high standard of
individual honor in his or her scholastic work” (page 98). Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
If you are not sure about what constitutes plagiarism, please check the following websites:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/faculty/plagiarism/preventing.html
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learning modules/plagiarism.html
Warning about Sharing Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, powerpoints, images, and
homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is
a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the
student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the
instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class
materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
Other Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources to provide academic and personal assistance
and support for students:
    The University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
       The UT Learning Center: http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
       Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
       Vick Center for Strategic Advising and Career Counseling: http://ugs.utexas.edu/vick
       Student Emergency Services: deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
  CARE (Counselors in Academic Residence), Abby Simpson, 471-0392, DFA ground
                  floor, 1.204B, Mondays and Tuesdays
                  https://finearts.utexas.edu/care-counselor-fine-arts-students
                                                                                                              6


ARH 374 Fall Semester 2019
                           7
