MUS f307-2 “History of Rock”
INSTRUCTOR: Harrison Montgomery
UNIQUE NUMBER: 77595
TERM: Summer Session 2019
TIME/PLACE: SZB 524 11:30 a.m. - 12:50 p.m. MTWTHF
OFFICE HOURS: MRH 3.724, Monday 1:10 p.m. - 2:10 p.m.
EMAIL: harrison.montgomery@utexas.edu
Introduction
Like all music, the music which we have come to call "rock 'n' roll" has had a rich
history over the course of the last half a century, full of surprising narratives, twists and
turns. Once considered a musical prelude to drug-use, anarchic bohemianism, and
distressingly tight pants, rock music can now be heard wafting from your dentist’s radio
as he asks about your plans for the summer. How does a shift like this happen? How
did rock, the quintessential rebel’s soundtrack, become rock the quintessential mass-
music? When was it that electric guitars suddenly became the apogee of cool? Why
does Bikini Kill seem so relevant today in 2019 – why aren’t we all listening to Bikini Kill
right now? The more one grasps at rock music, the more slippery it seems. Over the
course of this summer course you will be grappling with these difficulties, learning how
to listen to rock music with a critical sense of its history and its relationship to systemic
and cultural networks. You will develop the tools to begin to investigate this music from
a theoretical standpoint and a critical one.
Course Processes & Expectations
In this course you will:
       • Investigate rock music through various critical lenses, some complementary,
         some adversarial.
       • Develop an understanding of Western music fundamentals insofar as they are
         germane to the general purpose of talking about rock music.
       • Cultivate a foundational knowledge of the historical streams and inflection
         points which influenced the development of rock music.
       • Explore the processes which shape and define various styles in rock music.
       • Engage in a long-form analytical project centered around a particular album,
         artist, song, or sociocultural theme.


Assignments & Course Requirements
Reading
        You are each required to use either the print or electronic copy of What’s that
Sound?: Rock Music and Its History (fifth edition), by John Covach and Andrew Florey
for this semester’s readings. (the ebook can be purchased here: https://
digital.wwnorton.com/whatsthatsound5). Additional and or substituted readings will be
posted to Canvas. These readings will form the foundation of lectures, discussions,
activities, and examinations.
Listening
        As this is a course which requires you to think through music critically, you will be
required to listen to material which relates to your reading. This material will be
available via youtube playlists published on Canvas. The listening will, like the reading,
form the foundation of activities and examinations is this class.
Discussion Posts
        Each week you will be asked to respond to a prompt derived from the material
that we have covered (listening, reading, and lectures). These responses should be
roughly 250-500 words, and should attempt to incorporate evidence drawn from each
week’s literature.
In-class Activities
        In-class activities will be handed in (either electronically or physically) by the end
of class. They will be graded for completion. Each activity will be one of two types:
        Writing Workshops: Writing workshops begin with ten minutes of writing in
response to a prompt. These are free-writing or brain-storming moments, and they are
not expected to be filled with luminous prose, finished ideas, or correct formulations.
After this period, you will exchange responses with a partner and mutually discuss for
ten minutes.
        Listening Workshops: Listening workshops begin, naturally, with music. You are
expected to listen and take notes on thematic elements which you hear, be they
explicitly musical or socio-cultural. You will then break apart into small groups and
discuss their notes in relationship to a prompt.
Quizzes
        Short examinations which will test your absorption of critical concepts. They
combine a mixture of multiple choice, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer questions,
and are to be completed over the weekend. Administered on canvas. Each quiz will


have a listening component drawn from the listening list. The lowest quiz grade will be
dropped.
Project
        The point of this course is to provide you with an opportunity to investigate
topics in the space of rock music that interest you. Because this course is limited in
class size, I am quite flexible with the final form of the project, but I’ve provided a few
examples of possible forms. If you would like to do an alternative project, please
discuss it with me before the project proposal date. All projects must go through a
series of stages, including some which may be familiar, (proposal, basic bibliography,
etc), and some which will seem unfamiliar. Completion of these stages is the majority of
the project grade. All projects will require some writing, though I am quite willing to
negotiate on length as long as significant critical engagement is made.
Potential Project Forms
        • Research Paper: A paper of roughly 4 pages which engages with a particularly
          salient song, album, or artist. This is not a biography or report — you are
          expected to develop an argument and utilize supporting evidence.
        • Performance Project: A performance of roughly 2-3 songs which engage with
          the content of the class. Requirements would include a performance for the
          class and a set of program notes of at least two pages.
        • Mini Podcast Episode/Multimedia project: A multimedia production with a
          duration of at least 7 minutes (think of a typical NPR feature or short film).
          Additionally, you must submit two pages which discuss how the work engages
          with themes of the class.
        • Web/Mobile Application Prototype: A functional prototype of some
          application which attempts to engage with the history of rock music (e.g. an
          interactive exploration of an album). Additionally, you must hand in two pages
          which discuss how the work engages with themes of the class.
        • Other: to be discussed with instructor.
Project Stages
Proposal:
        • Due: Friday, June 14
        • Description: 200 words describing the form and research area of your project.
Annotated Bibliography:
        • Due: Friday, June 21
        • Description A bibliography describing at least 5 scholarly sources. Briefly sum


  up the source's thesis and how it will be used in your work.
First Draft:
       • Due: Friday, June 28
       • Description: A sketch of your final project. At this stage you are allowed to
         have large holes in argumentation, but you will be expected to read my
         comments carefully to determine where those points are. At least half of the
         paper's final length should be submitted . Performances/Multimedia drafts
         should be submitted to me electronically via Canvas, or via a usb drive if the
         size is too large.
Final:
       • Due: Thursday, July 11 (Last Day of Class)
       • Description: By this point you should have incorporated as much of my
         feedback as you have felt necessary, and expanded the paper/performance to
         its final length.
Grade Breakdown
       • Writing Workshops (five total) — 10%
       • Listening Workshops (five total) — 10%
       • Quizzes (four total, lowest dropped) — 20%
       • Discussion posts (four total) — 10%
       • Attendance & Participation — 5%
       • Project Proposal - 2.5%
       • Project Annotated Bibliography - 2.5%
       • Project First Draft - 5%
       • Project Final - 15%
A          93–100%
A−         90–92%
B+         87–89%
B          83–86%
B−         80–82%
C+         77–79%
C          73–76%
C-         70–72%
D+         67–69%


D      63–66%
D-     60–62%
F      0–59%
Date Topic                       Pre-Class Assignment       Workshop
                                 Reading   (due by 11:59
                                           PM)
6/6  Course Expectations,
     Syllabus, Survey of Rock
     Music’s Social Dynamics
6/7  Music Fundamentals, Form,   WTS 5-28
     How Do We Organize
     Sound?
6/10 Studio Techniques, Texture, WTS 28-32                  Writing 1
     Gear
6/11 Art Music vs. Folk Music,
     Formalism, Cultural
     Hegemony
6/12 Blackface, Minstrelsy, and            Discussion Post
     Race in American Pop Music
6/13 Music and Political                                    Listening 1
     Movements: Feminism,
     Labor, Temperance, and
     Nativism
6/14 Tin Pan Alley, Early Blues, WTS 33-57 Project Proposal
     Jazz, & Gospel
6/17 Development of Modern                 Quiz 1
     Auditory Media (Telephone,
     Phonograph, Radio)
6/18 Radio and Regionalism,      WTS 58-72                  Writing 2
     More Blues
6/19 Music as an Industry, “Race           Discussion Post
     Records,” Copyright


Date Topic                         Pre-Class   Assignment          Workshop
                                   Reading     (due by 11:59
                                               PM)
6/20 The Rise of Youth Culture(s), WTS 79-95                       Listening 2
     Folk Revivalism
6/21 Rhythm and Blues, the                     Project
     Crossover Hit, Covers                     Annotated
                                               Bibliography
6/24 Early Rock and Roll (Fats     WTS 95-109  Quiz 2
     Domino, Chuck Berry, Little
     Richard), Radio DJs
6/25 Rockabilly (Elvis, Sam        WTS 112-149                     Writing 3
     Philips), Commercial
     Songwriting, Appropriation
6/26 The Rise of the Producer &                Discussion Post
     West-coast Poptimism,
     Skiffle
6/27 The Beatles & The British     WTS 151-185                     Listening 3
     Invasion
6/28 American Responses, Folk      WTS 189-215 Project First Draft
     Rock, and British Reactions
7/1  Revisiting the Blues                      Quiz 3
7/2  Psychedelia and Counter       WTS 249-288                     Writing 4
     Culture
7/3  The Beatles Part II: Art Rock WTS 293-330 Discussion Post     Listening 4
     & Conceptual Music
7/5  Min-Maxing: 70’s Dialogues
     of Progressive Rock and
     Early Punk
7/8  Rockism, 80–90’s Mass-        365-398     Quiz 4
     Culture, New Wave
7/9  Heavy Metal, Hardcore         437-447,                        Writing 5
     Punk, and the Reagan Era      457-467


Date Topic                      Pre-Class Assignment    Workshop
                                Reading   (due by 11:59
                                          PM)
7/10 Riot Grrrl, Queercore, and
     Perspectives of Gender &
     Sexuality
7/11 TBA                                  Project Final Listening 5
