art
direction
               ADV 447, SPRING 2018
                        T/TH 3:30-4:45
                   SEAN LABOUNTY
            seanlabounty@utexas.edu
                            4.302 BMC
   Office hours @ Spider house W 1-5
                     Taylor Nelson GA
                 t.nelson@utexas.edu


PREAMBLE
Have you heard the old advertising adage:
“All you need is an idea on a napkin?” ………………… Not true.
Yes, you need the big idea, but just as important is the execution, the finish. Making it look
good. Making it clean and streamline. Organized and telegraphic. Fresh and Now. Unavoidable
and show-stopping. Something people will want to hang on their wall.
Because bad ideas can still look good. And yes you will have to work on some bad ideas over
your career. It pretty unavoidable.
Art direction is a labor of love, because its hard, hard work. Talent, ideas, style,
intelligence all matter but hard work always wins out in the end. I have seen bad art
directors become great and award winning by putting in the work day in and day out. And I have
seen too many talented people waste away because they are lazy, party too much or feel enti-
tled. So keep a good attitude and keep chopping wood.
But don't get me wrong talent matters, of course. As does style. Some people are lucky and are
born with some innate understanding of what is the NOW. Some (very few) have “cool” parents
in creative industries that culture their kids. Other grew up in
Manhattan or Paris or Tokyo and are swimming in a sea of current and fresh.
But you can still learn it by living it. The best way to be a great art director is be an artist, outside
of work / school. Make art everyday. Paint, write, dance, sculpt, film,
photograph, make a collage, sew a quilt for all I care. Your home work will be living a life of art.
Seeking out new styles and inspirations.
A great art director wears a lot of hats. Basically many different arts. Most importantly is Design.
At work almost half of your time will be on the computer designing and comping. Directing pho-
tography. Directing Film. Mastering Typography, color, and Composition. The Directing of art
that is.
Yes the computer is important but the best art directors still use their hands. Sharpie and a
sketch pad is still the best way to think and dream. Scissors and glue. hammer and nail. Whatev-
er you can create with your hands.


All of this must be done inside a certain fence, as in on-brief and to strategy. The right tone and
personality for the brand while still being new and own-able. And also being able to sell your
ideas to higher ups and clients. Be passionate and make what you love and your passion and
love sells it for you. This class should feel like art class. Should be a lot of fun.
HOW
We only meet 3 hours a week so our time is critical. This will be an important place to learn,
share, collaborate and critique work. We all learn from each other. So be critical but positive,
passionate and most importantly participate. Work hard and have fun. But don't expect office
hours to make up for time and effort missed in class and though out the week.
Passion is not just about excitement, it is about doing the job right. Be on time. Hand projects in
on time. Five minutes late is a day late. Late projects are subject to a 50% grade reduction on
the first day. and 0% grade on the second day.
We will jump in agency-style. Finding new ideas and thinking across all media platforms. A wide
variety of projects: Working with hands. Working with your brain. Some from briefs. Some from
the past.
We live in a cool new time. the old cliche advertising of the 80s is dead. New media and
therefore new content potential is everywhere. Where art direction can be brave. Where it can
be disruptive. Where it can be fresh and stand out.
This class will be part lecture, part studio time and part public critique. Open and honest and yet
sometimes painful. But from that pain will come growth and learning. Sometimes you have to fail
upwards. Keep trying till you find the right way. We will all work together and help each other
think of new ideas and new methods.
Student responsibilities:
1. Students are responsible for all material covered in class and all assigned readings
2. and viewings.
3. Students must complete readings and assignments by the time specified.
4. Check Canvas frequently and make sure your e-mail address is current with the university so
   that you can receive emails sent through Canvas. It’s a student’s responsibility to maintain this
   email address and ensure that it is correct and able to receive messages. Check junk mail too.
5. Any question about grades must be submitted in writing 5 days of when the grade is posted
   to Canvas.


6. This course upholds the values of the University Policy of Scholastic Dishonesty. Students who
   violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
   the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. for more informa-
   tion consult the Dean of Students website.
7. Technology can be a pain. So plan accordingly. Work posted or handed in late is late, regard-
   less of technology errors, computer crashes, corrupt files, or lack of wifi. I honor the Canvas or
   Email timestamps, depending on the specified submission format. Forgetting to attach files,
   or email bounce backs, are not excuses.
MUSTS
You must do all of these well to complete the class. More specific instruction in class.
1. DESiGN CHALLENGES
Short assignments with (usually) a 1-class turnaround. These assignments are meant to cement
concepts that we’ve discussed in class, and they allow you to experiment and explore on your
own. I’ll give you the topic, goal, or copy, you’ll put something great together.
2. TYPOGRAPHY PROJECT
After studying the history of type and learning how to use type, we will take on an a type only
design.
3. DESIGN PROJECT
Using the principles and elements of design learned in class you will build a design system.
3. PHOTO PROJECT
Concept, plan and shoot your own photography idea.
4. FILM PROJECT
Concept, plan and shoot your own short film idea.
5. AD POSTERS
Design motivational posters for other art directors to learn from
6. All VISUal SERIES
All visual poster campaign for a brand
7. PARTICIPATE
Critique. Be critiqued. Do good things. Talk about the work of others. Then do great things.


RECCOS
I very highly recommend a few selections that should be on every art director’ bookshelf.
They’ll come in handy this semester and beyond. These texts are not required for class.
BOOKS
GRAPHIC DESIGN: THE NEW BASICS by Ellen Lupton
DESIGNING BRAND EXPERIENCES by Robin Landa
LOGO FONT AND LETTERING BIBLE by Leslie Caraga
DIY DESIGN IT YOURSELF by Ellen Lupton
THINKING WITH TYPE by Ellen Lupton
ENVISIONING INFORMATION by Edward Tufte
DIY DESIGN IT YOURSELF by Ellen Lupton
FLOW: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF OPTIMAL EXPERIENCE by Csikszentmihalyi
DESIGN ANNUALS
PANTONE SWATCH BOOK.
GRADES
Design history 5%
Design challenges 10%
Typography project 15%
AD Poster series15%
All visual campaign 15%
Photography project 15%
Film Project 15%
Work Ethic 10%
Attendance and participation are musts. More than two unexcused absences means 10% off
your final grade for each additional unexcused absence. remember, projects are due at the be-


ginning of class that they’re due. One minute late is a day late. You will receive half the credit
you would have earned if it were on time. Two days late and it’s an automatic zero. Weekend
days count as days.
Final letter grades are calculated as follows:
A 93.5 to 100 A- 89.5 to 93.4 B+ 86.5 to 89.5 B 83.5 to 86.4 B- 79.5 to 83.4 C+ 76.5 to 79.4
C 73.5 to 76.4 C- 69.5 to 73.4 D+ 66.5 to 69.4 D 63.5 to 66.4 D- 59.5 to 63.4 F 0 to 59.4
I curve, I drop the occasional challenge, and I round up final grades. Why? Because I’m a nice
guy. That’s all the help you get. There are no extra points given because you’re “SO CLOSE” to
an A, or to passing, or to the Dean of the department. So, don’t ask.
INFO
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabili-
ties at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Scholastic Dishonesty Statement
The Department of Advertising has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibili-
ties of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the
Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the College of Communication. By enrolling in this
class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described in that document. If
the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is
your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibili-
ty of failure in the course an/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Campus Policy on Holy Days:


By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assign-
ment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to com-
plete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for
your learning.
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible
for reading your email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your email address. You should check
your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instruc-
tions for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Emergency evacuation recommendations:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate build-
ings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assem-
bling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occu-
py. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Policy on Campus Carry:
In the development of the policies adopted by President Fences to comply with the law in a way
that prioritizes the safety of everyone on the campus, the concealed carry of handguns is strictly
prohibited in my office.


WHEN
Part of the process of understanding the creation of visual communication in a changing world
is that you prepare yourself for uncertainty and surprises. Schedules change daily in our indus-
try. While I will try to maintain the schedule, it is subject to change, depending on class
progress. Understand this notion and be professional.
TUESDAYS                                                     THURSDAYS
                                                             30 AUG Introduction
04 SEPT G.A.D.                                               06 SEPT G.A.D.
11 SEPT Design                                               13 SEPT Design
18 SEPT Design                                               20 SEPT Design
25 SEPT Design                                               27 SEPT Design
02 OCT Typography                                            04 OCT Typography
09 OCT Typography                                            11 OCT Typography
16 OCT Typography                                            18 OCT Typography
23 OCT Photography                                           25 OCT Photography
30 OCT Photography                                           01 NOV Photography
06 NOV Photography                                           08 NOV Photography
13 NOV Film                                                  15 NOV Film
20 NOV Film                                                  22 NOV Thanksgiving Day – no class
27 NOV Film                                                  29 NOV Film
04 NOV Film                                                  06 DEC Film


WHO
SEAN LaBOUNTY
seanlabounty@utexas.edu
BMC 4.302
Education:
       Bachelor of Arts, Science, May 1997
       NYU Film 2003
Dimassimo (DIGO)
1997– 1998 Art Director / Crunch Fitness, Game Shark, Solgar Vitamins
Kirshenbaum & Bond
1998-2002 Art Director / Target, Sony, Hennessy, Moet, Olympics
NYU Film / Started Fashion Label / Freelance
2002-2004 Freelance A.D. for Cliff Freeman, Wieden and Kennedy, SS+K and EVB
Mohegan Sun, ESPN, Fathead, Michael Jordan
Hanft Raboy
2004-2006 Creative Director / Match.com, Hertz, Chemistry.com
Leo Burnett NY
2006-2007 VP/Creative Director / Global Samsung
Young & Rubicam NY
2007-2011 Creative Director / LG, Land Rover, Dell, Met Life
DDB
2011-2012 Creative Director / NY Lottery, NYC Ballet, Drugfree.org
GSD&M
2012-2014 Creative Director / Southwest, Seton, Jarritos, Walgreen’s, PGA
McCann
2014-2015 Creative / Cuervo, Bushmills, Microsoft, Nikon
Awards: CANNES LIONS, D&AD, ONE SHOW, CLIOS, AICP, AICP NEXT, NEW YORK
FESTIVALS, YGA.
