Single Author: Bob Dylan                                   Summer 2019
Instructor: Brian Doherty                                  Office: Parlin 326 471-8798
                                                           Office Hours 8:45-9:45 Mondays
                                                                              11:30-1:30 Thursdays
Required Text:
Dylan, Bob. Chronicles, Volume One.
Other Readings will be made available in a course reader, posted as links to online
articles, or as pdf files.
Measurement and Evaluation:
Quizzes. Best 5 of 7 for grade.                                                                     10%
Test on Dylan, his Times and Influences. (June 20)                                                  20%
3 short writing assignments. 1-2 page each.                                                         10%
Portfolio on your assigned song.                                                                    20%
Participation in class discussion and on canvas.                                                    10%
Formal Analytical Paper on Dylan and his work, or
Analytical Reading/observation journal on your Dylan class life                                     30%
Attendance in Class is required. Students may miss up to 3 classes with no penalty. For
each missed class beyond 3, there will be a 5 point deduction from the student’s
cumulative grade. This includes absences for any reason.
Prerequisites: Six semester hours of upper division coursework in English.
Plus and minus grades will be used in the class. A = 93-100; A- = 90-92.9; B + = 88-89.9; B = 83=87.9; B- = 80-82.9; C+
= 78-79.9; C = 73-77.9; C- = 70-72.9; D = 65-69.9. Below 65 = F.
Please be aware of University policies and services for students with disabilities:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Please be aware of the University Standard for Academic Integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Brief Course Description:
          Bob Dylan is a figure in popular culture who had a radically transformative effect
on American and world culture. His historical position is largely due to the excellence of
his vision, music, and lyrics, and is partially the result of the chance meeting of style,
personality, event, and intangibles.
         Like all great artists, Dylan is in large part an accumulation of influences and other
musical models. He is someone who was open to influences and receptive to the
structures of music and meaning that he was able to arrange and re-arrange in his own
way. The study of Dylan is in many ways an examination of America through the 60s
and the increased prominence of music as an art form in the 20th Century.


Schedule of Readings/ Assignments
June 6: Song #1. Dylan the poet. Dylan the musician. Dylan the myth. Dylan the
monster. Distribution of song for your portfolio. Short analysis of song “Masters of
War.”
        7: Collect surveys. Readings from Dylan’s Greenwich Village Days (from The
Mayor of McDougal St). “House of the Risin’ Sun.” Discussion of “folk music” and why it
matters. More Dylan interpretations of classic songs.
        10: Bob Dylan. Chronicles, Chapter One. Early interviews with Dylan, with Studs
Terkel. “Blowing in the Wind.”
        11: Two early songs: “A Hard Rain’s Gonna Fall” and “Only a Pawn in Their
Game.” Eudora Welty short story about Medgar Evers assassin. “Where is the Voice
Coming From?”
        12. Chronicles, Chapter Two: “The Lost Land.” [Head’s up!—74 pages].
        13: Excerpt from Woody Guthrie, Bound for Glory (in reader). “Song to Woody.”
        14: Friday Film Day. Woody Guthrie: Ain’t Got No Home. “American Masters”
profile of Woody Guthrie (90 Minutes).
        17: Arthur Rimbaud. Readings in course packet. Rimbaud’s “The Drunken Boat”
and a passage from A Season in Hell. Dylan’s “Hey! Mr. Tambourine Man.” “It’s Alright
Ma, I’m Only Bleeding.”
        18: One more song filled with symbolism: “Visions of Johanna.” Greil Marcus.
Bob Dylan and liner notes.
        19: Chronicles Chapter 3. “New Morning.”
        20: Test on Readings. Dylan’s emergence as an icon, Guthrie, etc.
        21: Don’t Look Back. D.A. Pennebaker’s documentary film of Dylan’s 1965 tour
of England.
        24: Bob Dylan: Portrait of the Artist. Chronicles chapter 5. Song, “Pirate Jenny,”
by Brecht and Weil.
        25: Electric Dylan. Analysis of the Newport Folk Festival and why amplified Dylan
caused such a ruckus. Reading from Elijah Wald’s Dylan Goes Electric.
        26: “The Ballad of the Thin Man.” “The Lonesome Death of Hattie Carroll.”
“Maggie’s Farm.” “Subterranean Homesick Blues.”
        27: “Like a Rolling Stone” as “game-changer” song. Mark Polizzotti, “The
Language that He Used” (29-57).
        28: Todd Haynes’ film I’m Not There.
July    1: Other songs on Highway 61 Revisited and Blonde on Blonde.
        2: Sean Wilentz, “Bob Dylan in America.”
        3: Song as short story. Three songs from Blood on the Tracks.
        5: Martin Scorcese’s film, Rolling Thunder Revue. Available on Netflix.
        8: Chronicles, Chapter Four: “Oh Mercy.” [warning: 80 pages]


          9 Bob Dylan and the Nobel Prize for Literature. Reading: Richard F. Thomas,
“Speechless in Stockholm.”
          10: Song Portfolios due. Show and tell and listen.
          11: Last Class Day. Maybe some more show and tell on portfolios? Discussion of
formal papers of non-journal writers. Cookies?
Policies: Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone), or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to
uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the
student's own work. For additional information on Academic Integrity, see
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Other: additional policies, as desired (Q-drop, cell phone/computer, e-mail correspondence, BCAL, writing
center).
Web Site: Canvas
