University of Texas School of Architecture
Vertical Studio: ARC 694
(to) wonder:
Instructor: Danelle Briscoe
                     “Enchantment is a state of openness to the disturbing-captivating elements in everyday experience.
                     Enchantment as a window onto the virtual secreted within the actual. Enchantment, in the model I am
                     defending, as operative in a world without telos. I have been suggesting not only that an array of minor
                     experiences in contemporary life enchants us but also that enchantment is a mood with ethical potential.
                     More specifically, my contention is that enchantment can aid in the project of cultivating a stance of
                     presumptive generosity (i.e. of rendering oneself more open to the surprise of other selves and bodies and
                     more willing and able to enter into productive assemblages with them”
                                                                - Jane Bennett, The Enchantment of Modern Life: Attachments, Crossings, and Ethics (2001)
                     “Ecology must stop being associated with the image of a small nature-loving minority or with qualified
                     specialists. Ecology in my sense questions the whole of subjectivity.”
                                                                - Felix Guattari, The Three Ecologies (1989)
Overview
Political theorist Jane Bennett writes of “a contemporary world sprinkled with natural and cultural sites that have the
power to enchant.” From this position, the studio will critique current modes of ‘wonder’ as potentially generated from
biotic tendencies in architecture—where design relates or results from living systems, especially in their ecological
relations. The work will aim to explore and evoke natural processes and foster a responsive, dynamic self-organization
position. In testing this design framework, projects have the opportunity to address the ethical generosity projected by
Bennett while confronting inspiration from different fields of knowledge, namely the informational paradigm in biology
and natural science. Importantly, this studio will endeavour to study basic principles of natural systems and
phenomena; prioritizing their tectonic nature and rule set, rather than application of such as a formal metaphor. But as
Bennett suggests, wonder may find association with modes of generosity, such as: animated matter, virtual in the real,
hybridity, crossings, refrains and repetition with difference.


Project
The studio will be split into three stages of development or exercises that all lead into the final project. For the first half
of the semester, two small projects will be concerned with openness and an ethical generosity of living systems
intended as complex conditions. The design exercises will initially explore the implications of wonder or tales of
enchantment for architecture through close examination of a selected plant ecology. Drawing and making of an idea
will be undertaken alongside the Bennett reading. Intensity, experimentation and quality of drawing is an important
aspect of the studio. Drawings will be wondrous and form a basis to discuss Enchantment. For the second exercise,
site mapping through drone scan, app capabilities and phenomenal site investigation of the Zilker Botanical Garden
(ZBG) will transition architectural scales toward the design of an outdoor covered classroom, or livingROOM. This will
start to suggest an architectural language and palette as it pertains to the main project to follow. For the second
exercise, an additional focus on unhewn cedar will give design impetus as a material generator. A design research trip
will take the studio to the San Antonio Botanical Garden as a precedent for the final project.
The second half of the semester will focus on another addition to the Zilker Botanical Garden site. Gardens and
greenhouses typically need little more than plants and flowers (and the critters they attract) to awe and inspire visitors,
but the project will take wonderment one-step further through the design of a path, entrance canopy, conservatory, and
supplemental research Greenhouse. Given this small scaled work of architecture (5000sf), the project will in the end be
a call for specifics of affective geometry that articulate inside and out, materiality and detail.
Content
            Emphases (in terms of the Four Streams outlined for Vertical studios) will be:
                      Ordering Systems: 15%
                                  (geometry, form, generativity)
                      Human Factors: 10%
                                  (programmatic exploration, experience, meaning)
                      Construction: 15%
                                  (Methods, Materials, Fabrication/Assembly, Mechanisms, Infrastructure, Building Services)
                      Contexts: 50%
                                  (ecology, landscape)
Schedule
            week                  Project
            wk 1-3                Enchantment
            wk 3-8                LivingROOM
            wk 8-15               GreenHOUSE
            wk 13                 All Studio Visual Communications Pin-up
            wk 15                 final submission/review
Requirements
            Class times will typically be               1:00 – 5:00pm MWF
            Office hours (GOL 4.314):                   10am – Noon, Monday (or by appointment)
            Contact                                     briscoed@utexas.edu           512.810.3133


Readings | References
            Bennett, Jane. The Enchantment of Modern Life: Attachments, Crossings, and Ethics, Princeton University Press,
            Princeton, 2001, Chapter 1.
            Benyus, Janine M. Biomimicry: Innovation Inspired by Nature, Harper Perennial, New York, 2002.
            Negroponte, Nicholas. The Architecture Machine: Toward a More Human Environment, MIT Press, Cambridge and
            London, 1970.
            Gould, JL, and Gould, CG, Animal Architects: Building and the Evolution of Intelligence, Basic Books, New
            York, 2007.
            Marx, Leo. The Machine in the Garden: Technology and the Pastoral Ideal in America. Oxford University Press, 1964.
            On Reserve in the Library:
            Pawlyn, Michael. Biomimicry in Architecture.
            Ramaswamy, Sakthivel. Biomimicry : an analysis of contemporary biomimetic approaches.
            Neeraj Bhatia ... [et al.] Coupling: strategies for infrastructural opportunism / InfraNet
            Lab/Lateral Office
Basis of assessment
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic areas. While each
project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived from a
broader, more subjective set of issues.
Grading for studio courses is broken into three components: 1/3 grasp (ideas combined with an appropriate process of inquiry), 1/3
process (the consistent and rigorous development of ideas) and 1/3 resolution (the understanding of the project and its archi tectural
implications).
A/ A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft , and
personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete
on all levels.
B+/ B/ B- : above average
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
excellence.
C+/ C/ C- : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete
in one or more areas. (Please note: a C or better is required for the course to count towards the graduate student’s program of
study.)
D+/ D/ D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.
F : failure
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when
you have excessive unexcused absences.
X : (excused incomplete)
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequat e
cause for assigning this evaluation.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS for absences, late work and late arrivals.


Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused absences may be dropped from the cour se
without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than three unexcused absences is a full letter drop in your final grade for the
course. Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class.
A student who is absent from a class for the observance of a religious holy day may complete the work missed within a reasonable
time after the absence, if proper notice has been given in advance of the days to be missed. A student who fails to complete missed
work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical need. You will be requested to
provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be d etermined.
Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for Students with Disabilities, also found via the web at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Security, safety and the studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of
everyone in it. Please see your instructor, if there are any problems (music, visual pollution) that you are unable to resolve on your
own. All spraying of fixative, spray paint or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for
a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Please be mindful not to admit any uninvited
visitors and keep all exterior doors locked after hours.
Be smart. Be safe.
Training
Beginning this fall, all students, faculty and staff who wish to use the SOA woodshop are required to take EHS’s new on-line training
(https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ehs/class.WBX?s_course_comp=0&s_course_prefix=OH&s_course_number=0500 ) and pass a short
exam at the end. As this training is supplemental to SOA’s woodshop training, no one is excluded or grandfathered from the
requirement; both are required in order to use the woodshop’s tools and equipment. As part of our efforts to comply with this
mandate, the woodshop will soon have a card reader installed at the entrance, similar to those on Goldsmith’s and Sutton’s exterior
doors. We will thereafter keep the door to the woodshop locked (from the outside) at all times. Those who have taken the on-line
EHS training will be able to use gain access to the woodshop during operating hours by simply swiping their UT ID cards at the door;
those who have not taken the on-line training will not be allowed to enter the woodshop. NO EXCEPTIONS CAN BE MADE.
