The Information Society, Spring 2018
RTF 331N and AMS 325
T Th 9:30-11:00, BMC 4.204
Dr. Sharon Strover, CMA 5.124
sharon.strover@austin.utexas.edu; hours: Th 11-2 and by appointment
Soyoung Park, Teaching Assistant, CMA 6.156
soyoung.park@utexas.edu; hours: MW 12:30-2:00
Course Overview
This course provides an overview of the forces shaping many of the communication and
information practices that together have come to be called the Information Society. It also
provides an environment in which you can formulate research questions and work with a small
group on answers and approaches to your questions. In this sense, the course has an exploratory
angle to it, one that you can direct.
Although I originated this course and have taught it in different ways at different times, I believe
there are some very pressing issues around information and “datafication” that require new
attention now. I intend to provide you with some background literature and exposure to various
perspectives on these issues. Alongside this, there will be opportunities for you to undertake
original inquiries in small groups to generate additional data, information and insights. There is an
explosion of interest in many of these questions - think of the Facebook/Cambridge Analytical
scandal, of the availability of citizen video in police altercations as well as citizen altercations
(think ‘BBQ While Black’) that have shed light on racist behaviors. The arrival of subtle sensors in
our physical environment have led some to claim we are becoming a surveillance state. In the
meantime, many people happily avail themselves of the growing number of media systems (think
Netflix) integrated into our lives that seamlessly recommend, process requests and searches and
deliver valuable services even as they log our transactions into large, shareable databases.
So, what will we do? First, we will investigate political, economic, technological and social changes
that established the groundwork for various dramatic shifts in the tools we use, the quality and
pace of work and leisure, the way we communicate with each other and conduct our lives. We
particularly examine some technological challenges posed by “datafication.” In the US, public
policy typically lags technological change, but it maintains a role in shaping the outcomes
associated with technologies. Some of the contemporary problems associated with privacy and
recent data breaches will be among those we will examine in terms of policy responses as well as
individual responses.
How work has changed is essential to both the definition of the Information Society and our
expectations for how the economy will function in the future. As well there are increasing
instances of cities and countries striving to become “Information Cities” or “Smart Cities” or
“Information Societies” in very deliberate fashion, and many of their goals have to do with what
sort of work force and resources they cultivate locally. Finally, there are numerous questions
associated with building the physical and human “infrastructure” implicit in the Information
                                                                                                     1


Society. Your work in this course will grapple with some of the contemporary policy debates
regarding infrastructure alongside these other topics.
Overall, our goals in this course will be to (1) understand definitions of the Information Society and
their implications; (2) survey the key forces driving the Information Society and understand why
they are transformative; (3) identify and explain the data-associated economic and policy shifts
and outcomes associated with the Information Society; and (4) assess and evaluate some of the
cultural, social, ethical and economic tensions associated with these trends.
Course Requirements
Most of the course readings will be available in a required course packet from Jenn’s Copies or
online. We will use our Canvas site for assignments, grading, and basic communication. Please
make sure your email is available to Canvas. While most reading materials will be found in the
reading packet or on the course site, some additional web-based readings may be assigned to you
during the course or other copies of articles provided to you in class. Since this is a relatively small
class, please come to class having completed the readings assigned for that week and be
prepared to discuss them.
I will adjust readings periodically depending on the research projects you design. There is a lot of
material, much of it very new, on the topics noted earlier. I plan to work with you in the first few
weeks of the class to identify your group research interests and to assign readings based on your
interests. That said, I have developed a loose structure around some elements of the Information
Society that should interest us.
Here’s what I envision your role to be:
1. You will be asked to submit responses to discussion questions in forums on the site and to post
responses to others’ work. You may receive some assignments that require you to present your
responses either individually or in a small group to the rest of the class. You also will be required
to pose some questions to the class, primarily around readings.
2. You will subscribe, at least for the semester, to the Benton Foundation Headlines listserv for
communication topics. This is available at https://www.benton.org/headlines. The service is a
very digestible headline service that you can scan quickly, with links to topics so that you can read
additional material as you wish. It will provide you with contemporary news on events and
developments related to the subject matter of the course.
3. The class is discussion-based, with some lecture. Since you are expected to participate, you are
expected to attend class. More than three unexcused absences will result in a lower grade.
4. About mid-way through the class, you will write a summary of a book that you have read on a
topic related to the course. I will provide a list from which you can choose.
                                                                                                       2


5. You will be working with a small (2-3 people) research group. Your group *must* meet with
me on at least two occasions to plan your work and to get my advice and feedback on your
progress. Your research will unfold as a proposal, a brief presentation to the class, a final
presentation to the class, and a final piece of work submitted to me. The work itself may be a
written paper, a project of some sort, or something else. You can be creative here! You are also
expected to provide constructive feedback on other groups’ projects, and to attend all final
presentations.
6. You must attend at least two “outside” talks on a topic related to the course material. There
are many, many talks around UT – and in Austin - and several in Moody in particular, that will be
related to the subject matter we address this semester. You will write a short (one page)
summary of the talk and your responses to it. These should be posted on the appropriate
discussion forum on canvas.
7. You will complete a peer evaluation assessing the members of your work group and your own
performance during the term.
The research projects plus your report on a book will comprise the major writing assignments, in
addition to some smaller assignments (including the summary of talks, etc.).
The specific writing assignments will be posted on the course site. Since this is a writing intensive
course, you will receive feedback on your written work and also engage in some peer review. The
short papers will be evaluated in terms of written content, style, grammar and spelling, and
format. There will be opportunities to submit drafts of your research paper for preliminary
feedback, and there also will be opportunities to submit rewritten work, albeit within strict time
limitations (2 days). Please note the statements below regarding help from the Writing Center
and regarding plagiarism.
Class Etiquette
I assume you are in class because you would like to listen to people and pay attention to what is
going on. Therefore, do not use your cellphones or other small electronic devices for any purpose
during the time we are in class. Please either turn them off or put them on vibrate (if it is a quiet
vibrate) and keep them out of sight. It is only 75 minutes without your phone!
As well, it is distracting if you are surfing the web, checking email or otherwise engaged with your
laptop computer during class time. If you plan to open a laptop in the class, you must sit in the
first row of the room near the instructor and use it only for course-related work. This policy may
be rescinded if it does not function well.
                                                                                                      3


Grading
Final grades will be based on the following:
                                                              %
Class participation + attendance                              10
Short forum posts in response to questions, etc.              10
Book Report (individual)                                      25
Research group work
        Proposal (written)                                    5
        meetings with me (2);                                 10 (5 each)
        presentation to class about research ideas            10
        final presentation to the class                       10
        final submission                                      15
Attending outside talks                                       _5__
TOTAL                                                         100%
Course Schedule
 Week         Topic                       Reading                            Activity/Notes
                                         Defining an Information Society
 Week 1       Introduction to the         Manuel Castells, An                Personal quick
 1/22         course                      Introduction to the                surveys
              (Discuss syllabus, goals,   Information Age, 138-
              assignments, and            149, in The                        Getting to know
              requirements of the         Information Society                each other
              course)                     Reader
                                                                             Discussion of
              Comparing the               Recommended: Daniel Bell, pp.      research project
              agricultural and            500-515.
              industrial revolutions to
              the ‘Information
              revolution’
 Week 2       Foundations: Structural     There may soon be Three Internets  (1) Research
 1/29         issues of the Internet;     (NYT, December 2018)               questions due on
                                                                             Tuesday
              The Splintering Internet:   Sandvig, The Internet as the Anti-
              China, US, and the EU;                                         (2) Discussion of
                                          Television, 225-245, in Signal
                                                                             research questions
                                          Traffic
              Structures of Distribution                                     on Thursday
              Wireline, wireless          Easterling, Broadband, in          Talk from Sam
                                          Extrastatecraft: The power of      Woolley on
                                          infrastructure space, 95-138.
                                                                                                4


                                                                   Tuesday, 1:30, LBJ
                                Recommended: Charles Acland,       Room in CMA, 5th
                                Consumer electronics and the       floor
                                building of an entertainment
                                infrastructure, 246-265, in Signal
                                Traffic
                           Why does Information matter?
Week 3 Democracy                Milton, J. Areopagitica (1644);    Short paper due
2/5    What is the role of      http://www.dartmouth.edu/~milto Thursday
       information in           n/reading_room/areopagitica/text.
       democracy? How does      html                               We will share
       technology make a                                           recent work on
       difference?              Schudson, M. Transparency in a     FB Russian ads
                                transformed democracy, in 228-     form 2015-2017
                                259, in The Rise of the Right to
                                Know.
                                Case: Russian Facebook ads,
                                misinformation
Week 4 Democracy, cont.         Benkler, Faris and Roberts, The     Short paper due
2/12                            propaganda feedback loop, in        Thursday
                                Network Propaganda, 75-99.
                                                                    Kick off Friday
                                                                    for
                                Opportunity to investigate          Misinformation
                                misinformation – hackathon,         session
                                                                    “Designing
                                                                    Good AI +
                                                                    Human Hybrid
                                                                    systems to curb
                                                                    misinformation”
                                                                    10-1, PCL
                                                                    learning lab
                                                                                      5


Week 5 How does visual          Marwick, Memes, Contexts, 2013,       Talk from Nico
2/19   information offer new    12 (4), 12-13.                        Carpentier this
       opportunities to                                               week, Thursday
       communicate?             Shifman, The cultural logic of
                                photo-based meme genres, Journal      Second session
       Memes, Pinterest,        of Visual Culture, 2014, 13 (3), 340- for “designing
       Instagram - Visual       358.                                  Good AI +
       Dimensions: the virtual                                        Human Hybrid
       environment, the “real”                                        systems to curb
       environment.                                                   misinformation,
                                                                      ” 11-1, Friday,
                                                                      PCL
Week 6 Work                     What It’s like to deliver packages
2/26   The Gig Economy:         for Amazon. Murphy, A., The
       premises and problems    Atlantic, Dec. 2018
                                U.S. Patent example: Jones et al.,
                                Wal-Mart application, July 10, 2018
Week 7 War,                     Easterling, Stories, in               Watch
3/5    Simulation               Extrastatecraft: The power of         Slaughterbots in
       Drones and virtuality    infrastructure space, 137-161         class
                                (“War” & “Liberal”)
                                Payne, Nintendo War 2.0, in
                                Playing War: Military video games
                                after 9/11, 35-68.
                                Matheson and Allan, War Blogs
                                and the War in Iraq, in Digital
                                Dynamics: Engagements and
                                connections.
Week 8 Information &            Virginia Eubanks, Automating
3/12   inequality:              eligibility in the heartland, in
       Definitions & Scope;     Automating Inequality: How high-
       Bias and discrimination; tech tools profile, police, and
       Surveillance ;           punish the poor,39-83.
                                                                                       6


          SPRING BREAK ! this week
Week 9  AI and Machine           Couldry and Powell, 2014 (July-      Book
3/26    Learning cont.           December), Big data from the         summaries due
                                 bottom up, Big data & Society, 1-5.  on Thursday
Week 10 Robots
4/2
Week 11 Play - children & adults Judith Shulevitz, Alexa, should we
4/9     Privacy issues           trust you? Atlantic, Nov. 2018
        Studying Alexa and       Van Dijk, Poell and De Waal,
        personal assistants;     Governing a responsible platform
        public and private space society, in The Platform Society,   Talk from Robin
                                 137-162.                            Mansell, London
                                                                     School of
                                                                     Economics, on
                                                                     Thursday, 3:30
Week 12 Privacy cont. and other  Examine materials at ethicalOS.org,
4/16    issues                   Ethical Operating System ,
                                 McGonigal and Woolley, 2018.
        GDPR – a model?
                                 Excerpts from the General Data
                                 Protection Regulation (in the
                                 European Union).
Week 13 Presentations
4/23
Week 14 Presentations
4/30
Week 15 Wrapping up                                                  Final project due
5/7                                                                  Thursday
                                                                     Peer evaluations
                                                                                       7


Regarding Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty,
please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/.
 Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone 471-6222, offers individualized
assistance to students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students
may come in on a drop-in or appointment basis.
Services for students with disabilities http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office at 471-6259 or
drop by at SSB, 4th floor.
Sources (for syllabus and beyond)
Barber, B. (1996). Jihad vs. McWorld: How globalism and tribalism are reshaping the world. New
York: Ballantine.
Beck, J. C., and Wade, M. (2006). The Kids Are Alright: How the Gamer Generation Is Changing the
Workplace. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Bell, D. (1983). The information society: The social framework of the information society. In
Forester, T. (Ed.), The microelectronics revolution: The complete guide to the new technology and
its impact on society. Cambridge: MIT Press, 500-549.
Benkler, J., Faris, R., Roberts, H., (2018). Network Propaganda. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
                                                                                                         8


Brown, J. S., and P. Duguid (2000). The Social Life of Information. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Castells, M. (1996). The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Castells, M. (2001) The Internet Galaxy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Couldry, N. and Powell, A. (2014 July-December). Big data from the bottom up, Big data & Society,
1-5.
Dolfsma, W. (2000) How will the music industry weather the globalization storm?. First Monday,
5(5). https://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/rt/printerFriendly/1461/1376
Easterling, K. (2014). Extrastatecraft: The power of Infrastructure Space. New York: Verso.
EthicalOS Toolkit. (2018). Accessed at https://ethicalos.org/wp-
content/uploads/2018/08/Ethical-OS-Toolkit.pdf.
Eubanks, V. (2018). Automating Inequality. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Florida, R. (2004). The Rise of the Creative Class: And how it's transforming work, leisure,
community and everyday life. New York: Basic Books.
Gillespie, T. (2007). Wired Shut: Copyright and the Shape of Digital Culture. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Goldsmith, J., and Wu, T (2006). Who Controls the Internet?: Illusions of a borderless world.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York: NYU
Press.
Johnson, S. (2005). Everything Bad Is Good for You: How today's popular culture is actually making
us smarter. New York: Riverhead Books.
Keen, A. (2007). The Cult of the Amateur: How Today’s Internet is Killing our Culture. New York:
Doubleday.
Lessig, L. (2006). Code and Other Laws of CyberSpace: Version 2.0. New York: Basic Books.
Mann, C. (2000, September). The heavenly jukebox. Atlantic Monthly, 39-59.
Mansell, R. (2000). New media competition and access: The scarcity-abundance dialectic. New
                                                                                                  9


media & society, 1 (2), 155-182.
Mansell, R. and Wehn, U. (1998). Knowledge Societies: Information Technology for Sustainable
Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Marwick, A. (2013). Memes. Context.org. Accessed at
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/1536504213511210
Matheson, D. and Allan, S. (2010). War Blogs and the War in Iraq, in Murdock, G. and Golding, P.
(Eds.) Digital Dynamics: Engagements and connections.
Mitchell, W. (2004). Me++: The Cyborg Self and the Networked City. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Murphy, A. (2018, December). I used to write for Sports Illustrated, now I deliver packages for
Amazon. Accessed at https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2018/12/what-its-like-to-
deliver-packages-for-amazon/578986/.
Negroponte, N. (1995). Being Digital. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Payne, M. (2016). Playing War: Military video games after 9/11, Nintendo War 2.0. New York: NY
University Press, 35-68.
Riggs, K. (2004). Granny @ Work: Aging and new technology on the job in America. New
York: Routledge.
Sandvig, C. (2015). The Internet as the Anti-Television, 225-245, in Parks, L. and Starosielski, N.,
Signal Traffic, Champaign: University of Illinois Press.
Sassen, S. (1999). Digital networks and power. In Featherstone, M., and Lash, S. (Ed.), Spaces of
Culture: City, nation, world, London: Sage, 49-63.
Schudson, M. (2015). The Rise of the Right to Know. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Shifman, The cultural logic of photo-based meme genres, Journal of Visual Culture, 2014, 13 (3),
340-358.
Schiller, D. (1999). Digital capitalism: Networking the global market system. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Shirky, C. (2008). Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing Without Organizations. New
York: Penguin.
Shulevitz, J. (November, 2018). Alexa, should we trust you? The Atlantic. Accessed at
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2018/11/alexa-how-will-you-change-us/570844/.
                                                                                                     10


Van Dijk, J., Poell, T. and De Waal, M. (2018). The Platform Society, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, chapter Governing a responsible platform society, 137-162.
Wayner, P. (1998, July). Plugging in to the Internet: Many paths, many speed.
https://www.nytimes.com/1998/07/02/technology/plugging-in-to-the-internet-many-paths-
many-speeds.html
Webster, F. (Ed.) (2004). The Information Society Reader. New York: Routledge.
                                                                                                11
