   REE_345         Environmental Studies in Siberia: history and culture on the shores of the
                                              Lake Baikal
                                         Course Description
         This course focuses on the past and present environmental issues in Russia and the US.
Students explore geography, economics, history, and culture through an environmental lens, as
well as engage in comparative analysis of policies and resource security (the US and Russia). Each
topic includes a lecture by a professor from Irkutsk State University.
      Students take classes in the city of Irkutsk, the capital of Eastern Siberia, which is located
two hours away from Lake Baikal, a World Heritage Site. Throughout the course students enjoy
a range of local excursions, including day trips to the lake and surrounding areas. In addition,
participants have the opportunity to master Russian language and delve into cultural aspects of
life in a vibrant Siberian city
                                           Course objectives
     1) Understand major developments in Russian environmental history;
     2) Evaluate research on Russian environmental history;
     3) Interpret how modern global society addresses environmental issues
     4) Understand the Russian Federation’s participation in and stances on global conventions
         on environmental issues since the 1990s (e.g., Kyoto Protocol, Russia's position on
         climate change).
     5) Learn to analyze and critically evaluate ideas, arguments, and points of view on
         environmental history and policy through comprehension, analysis and critique of course
         readings
     6) Analyze and critically assess links of culture and environmental management
                                              Reading List
     o An Environmental History of Russia (2013). Paul Josephson, Nikolai Dronin
     o Implementing International Environmental Agreements in Russia (Issues in
         Environmental Politics) by Geir Honneland and Anne-Kristin Jorgensen, 2003
                                                                                                     1


    o Eurasian Environments: Nature and Ecology in Imperial Russian and Soviet History,2018
    o Cows, Kin, and Globalization: An Ethnography of Sustainability (Globalization and the
       Environment) Susan Crate, 2006
    o Course Packet
                                             Grading
       1. Pre-departure meetings and lectures (X14)
       2. International Travel Safety Training (X1)
       3. Course Readings                        (X12)
       4. In-country Course Lectures/Discussions (TBA)
       5. Russian Language Class                 (X16)
       6. Cultural Excursions
       7. Weekly Field Journal (X4)
       8. Final Research Paper & Presentation
Total course classroom hours: 48
Each week class meets for 12 hours (4x per week for 90 minutes) = 48 academic hours total
12 hours are assigned for the excursions
                                         Course Outline
Topic 1: Russia on the Global Map of Natural Resources: Economic Geography of Russia and
Introduction to Siberia
Topic 2: The Development of Natural Resources in Russia, Ecological Issues
Topic 3: The Climate Zones and Ecosystems of Russia
Topic 4: Natural Resources Management: Sustainable Approaches
Topic 5: Sustainable Lifestyles: Siberian Flora, Natural Medicine and Buryat/Russian Traditions
                                                                                               2


Topic 6: International Impact of Soviet and Russian Environmental Disasters/Ecological
Catastrophes (Aral Sea, Chernobyl, etc.)
Topic 7: Baikology: Lake Studies Through Time ( Baikal-Tahoe Collaboration)
Topic 8: Environmental Impact on Public Health: Drinking Water, Air Pollution.
Topic 9: Water Security: Protection and Treatment (Comparative Study)
Topic 10. Environmental Legislation in Russia: NGOs and Government: Governing Bodies and
Civil Involvement. Activity of international environmental organizations (e.g., Greenpeace) in
Russia.
Topic 11: Climate Change: Russian Perspective
Topic 12: Approaches to Waste Managements (Comparative Study)
Topic 13: Tourism and Environment (Comparative Study)
Topic 14: Environmental Discourse Over Time: Propaganda, Film, Literature in the US and
Russia
Topic 15: Impact of Economic Development on Indigenous Communities: Environmental
Perspective
Topic 16: Siberian Identity: Influence of Religion and Environment
Course Presentations
                                                                                               3
