 International Advertising (ADV 334, Unique# 05965)
 Tuesday and Thursday from 12:30 – 2 PM
 Location: GSB 2.126
  Note: The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the
  instructor may be necessary.
    Instructor: Octavio Kano-Galvan                                    TA: Pratik Shah
                                                                                                    th
    Office: BMC 4.308                                                  Office: Station 4.326, BMC 4 Floor
    Email: Octavio.KanoGalvan@austin.utexas.edu                        Email: Pratik.Shah@utexas.edu
    Office hours: Tuesday and Thursday 8:30 – 9:30 am and by           Office hours: Wednesday from 12 to 2 pm and by
    Appointment                                                        Appointment
“Globalization is the process by which markets integrate worldwide.”
- Michael Spence, an economist
“Global is shallow, the local deep”
- Ulf Hannerz, an anthropologist
  COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
  This course is designed for students to understand persuasive communication strategies for
  international markets. Markets are no longer bound with their physical locations thanks to the rapid
  development of communication technologies. Or are they? To successfully address the global market,
  marketers and advertisers need to fully understand “local” challenges coming “deep” from cultural,
  economic, regulatory and competitive differences. Based on theoretical and practical understanding of
  the dynamic interplay between global and local forces, students will acquire theoretical as well as
  practical understandings of how to accomplish global marketing communication goals. Thus, the core
  objective of this class is to develop an ability to analyze and map out persuasive communication
  strategies that are effective in international markets.
  COURSE FORMAT
  This course consists of lectures, in-class activities, two exams, and the final project (i.e., a
  combination of an individual and team assignment). Students will also have an opportunity to apply
  what they learn to real-world examples via the final project. There will be additional materials that
  are available on Canvas as the semester progresses.
  EXPECTATIONS
  Students are expected to attend all lectures and actively participate in the in-class discussions. Please
  note that any undocumented absence will not be excused. Students are expected to arrive to class on
  time and to stay for the entire class period, or until dismissed. Random arrivals and exits are
  unprofessional and distracting. Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence
  from class. NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED.


REQUIRED TEXTBOOK
Mueller, Barbara (2017), Dynamics of International Advertising (3rd Ed.), New York: Peter Lang
Publishing Co.
Note: Additional readings may be posted, so be sure to check Canvas frequently.
EXAMS
There will be two in-class exams during the regularly scheduled class period. Exams are designed to
evaluate students’ understanding of core concepts or ideas covered in the lectures, the textbook, class
discussions, and in-class activities.
An optional, comprehensive final exam will be offered as a make-up option for anyone who has missed
one of the two in-class exams and for anyone who wants to improve their course grade. The final exam
will replace the lowest regular in-class exam, only if it is higher. Otherwise, it will not be included in the
calculation of the final grade. You must take the final exam if you have not taken one of the regularly
scheduled in-class tests. The specific time/date and the location will be announced.
ATTENDANCE (IN-CLASS ACTIVITIES)
There will be an undetermined number of in-class activities (i.e., in-class exercises or quizzes). These
assignments are designed to help students keep up with the pace of the class and to improve their
understanding of the course material. These activities will be distributed and completed during the class
time. The in-class activities cannot be made up unless the instructor excuses the absence in advance. If
you are absent and have a valid excuse (i.e., serious illness or family emergency), you must bring the
appropriate documentation on your first day back.
INDIVIDUAL/GROUP ASSIGNMENT
The individual/Group assignment, solely by you and your group, requires you and your group to write a
business-style recommendation for the persuasive communication strategies of a US company. In this
recommendation, you need to analyze the markets in foreign countries or any market outside of the US.
Based on this analysis, you need to recommend and present to the class a persuasive communication
strategy. Details for this assignment will be distributed during the class.
FINAL PROJECT (TEAM ASSIGNMENT)
The final project is designed for students to put into practice what they’ve learned and their own
innovative thoughts about international advertising strategies. The final project consists of two parts.
First, in the team assignment, you will collaborate with your peers in preparing a business-style
presentation. To persuade consumers in foreign markets, you first need to effectively persuade the CEO
of the brand. With your team members, you will prepare a presentation, and during class, your group will
present your project. The quality of both the contents of the project and the way in which you, as a
group, verbally present your project will be evaluated. One or Two classes will be dedicated to a
discussion of the format of this project, grading criteria, and real-world examples of the international
advertising strategy project. Also, by the time the project is initiated, I will hold extra office hours for you
to discuss the progress of your project. Your team needs to submit a short progress report in order to
make sure that the project is on the right track.


A detailed rubric for the individual assignment will be provided when the assignment is
announced.
Second, it is extremely important to successfully collaborate with your team members in the advertising
industry. This is because you are highly likely to work as a team throughout your career. Successful
collaboration requires your contribution to the overall project success. Thus, your performance in the
team assignment will be assessed based on the peer evaluations and the part of the project which you
are responsible. So, you need to submit your careful evaluations of your team members’ contribution to
the final project.
PARTICIPATION
To enhance students’ understanding in the marketing and advertising research processes and methods,
you need to participate and contribute in class.
*Please note that the credit(s) that you will receive for this activity is part of the total grade as you can
see below. It is NOT extra credit in addition to your total grade.
COURSE EVALUATION
Your grade in this class will be based on:
  Attendance (In-class exercise & quizzes)                    10 %
  Two Exams (each 18%)                                        36 %
  Participation                                               14 %
  Final Project
      Individual Contribution Grade                           20 %
                                                              *This is assessed based on the peer evaluation
      Team Grade                                              20 %
                                                              *This grade is shared by all the team
                                                              members
  Total                                                       100 %
The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
A= 94-100, A-=90-93, B+=87-89, B=84-86, B-=80-83, C+=77-79, C-=70-73, D+=67-69, D=64-
66, D-=60-63. *Grades will not be rounded up or down. For example, an A- is inclusive of all scores
90.000 through 93.999%.
COURSE SCHEDULE
The following schedule is tentative in the sense that if we hit on a topic that sparks a great deal of interest, we will
stay with it longer than the schedule below would seem to allow. This means we all need to stay alert to changes in
the schedule, project assignments, and so on. To ensure each class is successful, it is essential for you to attend class
and to work on the assigned project prior to class.
Changes to the schedule may be also made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
much advanced notice as possible).
The syllabus is a living document and will need to maintain a degree of flexibility to adapt to changing
circumstances.
August 29:                  Introductions and class presentation
September 3 and 5:          Chapter 1 Growth of International Business and Advertising and Chapter 2 The
                            International Marketing Mix
September 10 and 12:        Chapter 3: The International Marketing and Advertising Environment and Chapter 4: The


                            Cultural Environment
September 17 and 19:        Team 1 and 2 presentations
September 24 and 26:        Chapter 5: Coordinating and Controlling International Advertising and Chapter 6: Creative
                            Strategy and Execution
October 1 and 3:            Chapter 7 Advertising Media in the International Arena and Chapter 8: Research in the
                            International Arena
October 8 and 10:           (Yom Kippur 9) Team 3 and 4 presentations
October 15 and 17:          First Exam and Team 5
October 22 and 24:          Teams 6 and 7 presentations
October 29 and 31:          Teams 8 and 9 presentations
November 5 and 7:           Teams 10 and 11 presentations
November 12 and 14:         Chapter 9: Advertising Regulatory Considerations in the International Arena and Chapter
                            10: Ethics and Beyond Corporate Social Responsibility and Doing Business in the Global
                            Marketplace
November 19 and 21:         Second Exam and Team 12 presentation
November 26:                (27 – 29 Thanksgiving holiday break) International case study discussion*
December 3 and 5:           International case study discussion*
GLOBAL CULTURES FLAG
This course is designated with the Global Cultures flag. That is, in this course, students will explore the
practices, beliefs, and histories of various non-U.S. cultural groups with the goal of encouraging
students to reflect on their own cultural experiences, within a global context.


UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HORNOR CODE
 The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
 individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
 values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
 POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
 The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying
 academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
 dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
 postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the
 same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
 By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
 dishonesty damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
 work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
 penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
 DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
 Please notify me in advance of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
 disability-related need. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
 accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for
 Student with Disability at 512.471.6259 (voice) or 512.232.2937(video phone), or at
 http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
 RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY (ABOUT ABSENCE)
 The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from
 attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
 holyday, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may
 not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment
 from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who misses
 classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holyday
 should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be
 made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
 « Please do visit the following website in advance for more information and the possible
 documentation that is required for your absence notification.
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php
 DEADLINE & STANDARDS
 Enlisting aid from anyone outside the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and will
 be dealt with accordingly.
