                                    Integrated Communication for Sports
                           ADV 305s, (06220) PR305s (06795), ADV391k (06675)
                                                 Spring 2019
 Class Meets: MW 11-12:30. CMA 2.306
 Instructor: Steve Wille (Professor Wille] Office: CMA 4.304
 Email: swille@austin.utexas.edu
 Office hours: Wed 9:45 to 10:45 and by appt.
 TA: Dilara Dagoglus
 Email: dilara.dagoglu@utexas.edu
 Office: TBD
 Office Hours: TBD
                                         Course Description
The course provides a foundational perspective on how brands use integrated marketing communications to
connect with and impact their target audiences through sports as well as how sports organizations (leagues,
teams, tours, etc.) use integrated communications to reach prospective fans and customers.
 What will I learn?
             • How an integrated approach to marketing communications enables impact and
                 efficiency compared to non-integrated approaches
             • How major brands use this technique within their sports marketing to blend a large
                 variety of of tactics
             • How sports advertising offers unique benefits to large brand advertisers
             • How sponsorship provides an opportunity for brands to associate with popular sports,
                 teams and athletes
             • How sport organizations seek profit and use analytics together with integrated
                 marketing communications to drive fan enthusiasm and business results
             • How sports organizations use business storytelling to maximize the effectiveness of
                 marketing communications
 Learning Outcomes
     1. Be able to discern whether a marketing communications effort is integrated or non-integrated
     2. Be able to envision how particular integrated marketing techniques might fit a market situation
     3. Understand how sports organizations use tools like analytics to decide on marketing communications
         direction
     4. Be able to build integration into various tactics that might make up a brand or sports organization
         campaign
     5. Be able to identify within a sports organization’s activities, productive narratives and then use a
         knowledge of business storytelling to bring those narratives to life.
                                                          1


         How will I learn?
         A combination of lectures, discussions, readings, case examples, industry guests, short assignments
         and two group projects will be used to achieve the learning outcomes. How our course topic is
         playing out in real time will be accomplished with the use of Sports Business Journal discussions.
         Pre-requisites for the course: University GPA of 2.25 or higher
         How to succeed in this course:
          Successful students in their class keep up with the readings and come to class prepared to participate
          in lively discussion. Your enthusiasm and love for sports is a plus, but remember we will be looking at
          the course material from the perspective of a business’s trying to thrive – a very competitive game in
          its own right with a great deal of strategy and nuance
                                          Course Requirements
Required Materials
Most readings will be made available on Canvas. One required textbook will be used primarily in the second
half of the course:
         1) The Sports Strategist Irving Rein, Ben Shields, Adam Grossman
         Oxford University Press
         ISBN 978-0-19-026744
         Copyright 2015
         2) Sports Business Journal: Students are required to take an on line semester subscription to Sports
             Business Journal within a discounted program offered by the publication. Sign up information will
             be posted on Canvas.
         3) Arkaive App: Attendance will be taken using the free Arkaive App. Students are required to
             purchase the additional feature which allows them to check their recorded attendance at any time.
             Student issues with unrecorded attendance who do not have the app will not be considered. Issues
             regarding unrecorded attendance must be brought up to the TA within a week of the date in
             question.
Class Participation
Class participation is essential and ranks at the top of factors students use to define a valuable course. Class
participation forms part of your grade in this class. Credit for the 6 participation points available will be based
upon the student turning in 3x5 index cards (which students should always carry a supply of) with their name,
EID the topic they contributed to and a description of the contribution. Two points will be awarded for each
appropriately completed and accepted card.
Attendance
Attendance is required for all class meetings and contributes a potential of 4 points to your final grade. In-
class assignments will get a score of zero in the case of unexcused absences. For each unexcused absence
after the second instance, a student will lose one of the available 4 attendance points. An excused absence is
defined as a documented illness, documented University-related absence (sports team travel) and religious
holidays (prior notification required). Excused absence for illness requires health provider documentation.
                                                           2


  Attendance is recorded and maintained in the required Arkaive app. You are required to purchase the feature
  that allows you to keep up with your attendance records. Discrepancies must be reported to the TA within a
  week of the recorded absence in question. Though we often remind students to check in to Arkaive as class
  begins, the responsibility to check in rests solely with the student. Lack of a reminder is not an excuse for not
  checking in. The time window to check in to Arkaive may either be at the beginning of class or the end of class
  at the Instructor or TA’s discretion
  Assignments
   1. Approximately 15 Class Prep Assignments tied to class topics will be given, often in the form of a Canvas
        Discussion or Canvas Quiz. (Quizzes are designed to make sure top line content is absorbed and to alert
        the instructor to areas of reinforcement . Discussions are designed to prepare students to express a variety
        of views in the upcoming class.) If greater or fewer number of class prep assignments are ultimately given,
        the available points will be divided by the number or assignments ultimately given
   2. Other Class Prep Assignments include 3 Sports Business Journal Days which require reading a number of
        issues and submitting a written summary of 3 articles prior to a class discussion, Additionally, a Bio
        Assignment is included (Quizzes are designed to make sure top line content is absorbed and to alert the
        instructor to areas of reinforcement . Discussions are designed to prepare students to express a variety of
        views in the upcoming class.)
   3. Two group projects will be assigned, One requires students to research and analyze brand integrated
        efforts to market through sports using the Super Bowl as a vehicle. The second one asks students to
        analyze a sport team’s marketing situation and develop plausible narratives and communications
        examples using storytelling practices discussed in class.
  Exams
  Two exams will be given, one near the middle and another non-cumulative one at the end of the term.
  Typically, they are a mix of multiple choice and True/False but may contain other types of questions at times.
  Each counts for 25% of the final grade
   Grading for this Course
   The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to
   which you have done so.
    Graded Elements                                             Points possible            Percent of Total Grade
   Class Prep Assignments:                                     150                       15
   Attendance                                                  40                        4
   Participation                                               60                        6
4.  Exam 1                                                     200                       20
5.  Exam 2                                                     200                       20
6.  Group Project 1                                            150                       15
7.  Group Project 2                                            200                       20
                                                   Total       1000                      100
   Course Outline
   All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
                                                              3


 https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
 schedule.
 Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility
 to note these changes when announced by email, Canvas Announcement or announced in class.
wk   day mo      date    Topic                                                              Out of Class Activity                                Assignments Due                              Project dates
                                                                                            Complete Reading 1: Defining Integrated Marketing
   0 w   Jan          23 Course Overview/Expectations                                       Communciations
          Topc 1 Integrated Marketing Communications                                                                                             Complete Quiz 1 by Sunday, Jan 27, 5 pm
   1 m                28 What is Integrated Marketing Communications?                                                                                                                         Project 1 Team Formation
     w                30 IMC Case: Bud Light                                                                                                     Complete Bio Assignment 2                    Brands Assigned
   2 m   Feb      4-Feb IMC Case: P&G                                                                                                                                                         Project 1 Assigned
     w                 6 Why IMC and Managing IMC
         Topic 2 Advantages of Sports for Brand Advertisers
                                                                                                                                                 Complete Discussion or Quiz 4 by Sunday 5 pm
   3 m                11 Large, Live, Involved Audiences with program integration Available Complete Reading 2: The Case for Advertising in Live Sports
                                                                                                                                                 Feb 10Events
     w                13 Examples of Benefits in Action
                                                                                            Review issues to date of Sports Business Journal,    Complete Sports Business journal Article
   4 m                18 Sports Business Journal Day                                        use directed search if prompted                      Summary Assignment 5 by
         Topic 3 Brand Use of Sponsorship to Market Through Sports
     w                20 Difference From Advertising,                                       Complete Reading 3: Sponsorship                      Complete Discussionor Quiz 6
   5 m                25 Image Transfer and Association
     w                27 Exclusivity, Activation and Ambush Marketing                                                                                                                         Project 1 Due
                                                                                            Review issues to date of Sports Business Journal,    Complete Sports Business journal Article
   6 m   Mar           4 Sports Business Journal Day                                        use directed search if prompted                      Summary Assignment 7
         Topic 4. Endorsement and Cause Marketing
     w                 6 Benefits/Drawbacks of Two Comon Strategies
                                                                                            Prepare for review by identifying areas you would
   7 m                11 Review                                                             like to see focused on
     w                13 Exam 1
     m                18 Spring Break
     w                20 Spring Break
         Topic 5: Fan Avidity                                                                                                                    Assignments Due
   8 m                25 Definitions, Precursors, Symptoms and Resulting Behaviors          Complete Reading 4: Fan Avidity                      Complete Discussion 8                        Project 2 Asssigned
         Topic 6 Crafting a Distinct Identity
                                                                                                                                                 Assignment: Earn points by "identifying" by
     w                27 Identity Day, More than graphics, benefits, Factors in Designing   Complete Reading 6: Sports Strategist Chapter 2      wearing your favorite team's gear
   9 m   April         1 ImplementingIdentity, Institutional Rhetoric, The Refresh Dilemma
         Topic 7 Stortytelling and Narrative
     w                 3 The nature of Stories, Narrative as choice                         Complete Reading 5: Sports Strategist Chapter 3      Complete Discussion or Quiz 9
  10 m                 8 Characters and plot
     w                10 imagery and setting
                                                                                            Review issues to date of Sports Business Journal,    Complete Sports Business journal Article
  11 m                15 Sports Business Journal Day                                        use directed search if prompted                      Summary Assignment 10
         Topic 8: Winning not a Businesss Strategy. Follow the Money
                                                                                            Complete Reading 6: Sports Strategist Chapter 1,
     w                17 Industry Needs, Revenue Focus, Ticket Sales and Issues             and Ticket Sales Reading                                                                          Project 2 Due
  12 m                22 Moneyball and Analytics Concepts and Uses                          Complete Reading 7: Sports Strategist Chapter 5      Complete Discussion or Quiz 11
     w                24 TBD
         Topic 9 The Sports Organization Communications Plan
                         Components, Business Objectives, Marketing Objectives, Target
  13 m                29 Markets, Positioning                                               Complete Reading 8: Promotion Planning               Complete Discussion or Quiz 12
     w   May           1 Communications Objectives, Channel Strategy, Tactics, Measurement
  14 m                 6 Review
     w                 8 Exam 2
                                                                                                           4


                                           Policies
Classroom Policies
Electronic Devices Subject to Banishment
Devices will be allowed as we begin the semester but are subject to being banned if non class
use is significant and persistent. Don’t be the person who contributes to this action being taken.
A lack of involvement in class discussion is the first tell-tale sign that the experts are right.
None of us can learn in class and surf at the same time!
Behavior expectations
Behavior that diminishes the learning experience of others will not be tolerated. These include
repeatedly arriving late, leaving early, visibly demonstrating non engagement, excessive
conversations during lectures. Offenders are subject to being dismissed from a given class and
repeated such behavior may lead to a student being dropped from the class. To enable
communication and engagement, students are required to occupy the seats closest to the front
as available. Failure to do so will prompt a warning, after which disciplinary action may be
taken.
Grading Policies
[Description of your general approach; e.g. assignments are flexible but grades are firm; there is
no curve; etc.]
           Grade         Cutoff
           A             94%
           A-            90%
           B+            87%
           B             84%
           B-            80%
           C+            77%
           C             74%
           C-            70%
           D             65%
           F             <65%
Late work
All late work runs the risk of most likely earning none of the available points for the
assignment. Exceptions will only be made under extreme circumstances. If you turn work in
late, do not expect to earn points on it.
                                                   5


Student responsibilities:
   • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
        with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
        overwhelming.
   • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
        others. • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy
        that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
   • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
        someone is excluded.
   • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each
        other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
    Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor
    Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
    values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very
    seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that
    you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be
    guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
    the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
        University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
    http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
    If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
    the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
    law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
    institution. For more information, see:
    http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
    Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we
    all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or
    exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to
    meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of
    resources on campus:
                                                   6


 Services for Students with Disabilities
     This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
     there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you
     have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
     arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
     committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do
     so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
     confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with
     Disabilities,    512-471-6259       (voice) or     1-866-329- 3986          (video phone).
     http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising,
     avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
     help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
     helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is
     learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings
     like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
     http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger
     Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are
     welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
     specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in
     15 different subject areas. For more information, please
     visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
     If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
     Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call
     can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
     instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
                                                  7


     Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
     harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
     federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning
     and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
     misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
              1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
              2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
                  harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
              3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
     “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX
     to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX
     related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking
     with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to
     ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for
     support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
     advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
     visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside.
 •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
     Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
     building.
 • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
     the first week of class.
 • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
     re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
     University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
 • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
     be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                    8
