                     ALD 328: APPLIED HUMAN LEARNING
                                   Spring 2020
                              Monday, 1-4 SZB 426
                                  Unique #09525
Instructor: Dr. Mary Claire Gerwels
Office: SZB 538K
Office Hours: by appointment
Phone: 512-554-8556
E-mail: mcgerwels@austin.utexas.edu
PURPOSE: This course covers learning theory, motivation, and assessment as
they are applied in the elementary school classroom. You will have the
opportunity to evaluate theory and research to develop the best teaching
methods for your classroom.
TEXT: Packet of Readings from the Co-op.
 Date           Topic                             Due
 Jan. 27        Introduction & Service-Learning
 Feb. 3         Teaching & Learning
 Feb. 10        Constructivism/Critical Thinking
 Feb. 17        Creativity                        Service-Learning Project Part
                                                  1 draft
 Feb. 24        Self-regulation: Emotions         Service-Learning Project Part
                                                  1 edited
 Mar. 2         Self-regulation: Cognition
 Mar. 9         Motivation                        Observation paper 1
 Mar. 16        Spring Break!
 Mar. 23        Mindfulness and Stress            Critical Incident 1
                Reduction
 Mar. 30        Resilience
 Apr. 6         Special Education and RTI
 Apr. 13        Stereotypes                       Service-Learning Project Part
                                                  2
 Apr. 20        Testing                           Critical Incident 2
 Apr. 27        Parent Involvement                Observation paper 2
 May 4          Service-Learning Presentations    Service-Learning Project Part
                                                  3; TBSI certificate
Check Assignments on Canvas for complete directions for all graded work.


                               General Requirements
Class participation is important. Participation means that you come to class on
time, stay until the end, and contribute to activities and discussions in a
professional manner. It also means that you are not checking your phone or
browsing on the web during class at any time, except during a break. Please
keep your phones out of sight. Laptops should not be open during class
unless they are being used for an activity.
Class attendance is expected, but if you must be absent you must turn in a 5-
page paper that 1) outlines the readings from that week and 2) provides a
description of the activities we did in class that day. You will need to ask a peer
to take notes for you when you miss class in order to have information for
the second part of the paper. The paper will be reviewed and sent back if it
does not meet requirements. Remember, the paper substitutes for 3 hours of
class time plus annotations (i.e., you don't have to do annotations that week), so
it should reflect that amount of work. It is incumbent upon you to remember this
policy and to submit the paper within one week of your absence. Failure to turn
in the paper will result in a 5-point deduction on your final grade.
                               Annotation Drills (10%)
It is important that you read the articles for class each week so that you can
contribute to our discussions. When reading the articles, I want you to
occasionally write comments and questions in the margins (annotations) that you
can share with the class during discussions. Shortly before the beginning of
class, I will check your reading packet for annotations. If you forget your readings
packet you will get a zero for that day, so please remember to bring your
readings to class! Annotations are graded on a pass/fail basis. Highlighting
does not count as annotations.
                       Classroom Observation Papers (30%)
There are two observation papers that are to be completed and uploaded to
Canvas by the beginning of class on the designated date. You are to choose one
of the topics we have already covered and follow the directions (found on
Canvas in Modules) with that topic in mind. A rubric for the papers is in the
assignment directions on Canvas. The papers cannot exceed 6 pages (not
including references, pictures, graphs or other additional material).
                           Service-Learning Project (40%)
The service-learning project is broken into three parts; proposal, data and
conclusions, and presentation. The first two sections are worth 15% each and the
presentation is worth 10%.


                                Critical Incidents (20%)
You will write two critical incident reports, which will allow you to reflect on
something that has happened in your internship classroom. You will follow the
protocol that is on Canvas in the assignment to write each of these. Each must
be no more than 2 pages long and must use the 4 steps as subheadings.
                                   Writing Standards
Each piece of written work must be double-spaced, using at least 1-inch margins
and standard font (e.g., Times New Roman).
                                       Late Work
I reserve the right to deduct points for late work, up to a 10-point deduction per
day. If you need to turn in late work, you must fill out a late request form (found in
Modules on Canvas) by emailing it to me at least 24 hours in advance of the due
date. I will determine if you will be granted the extra time for the assignment and
will email you to confirm.
                              Writing Flag Requirements
You will get credit for a writing flag course and so must do a significant amount of
your work in formal, written form. Another condition is that at least one of your
papers is to be edited by your instructor and your peers. The Service-Learning
Project Step 1 will be used to fulfill this requirement. You will need to have a peer
edit it for content, style, grammar, punctuation, and spelling before you submit it
for a grade. It will then be uploaded on Canvas as a draft. You will then submit a
corrected copy on Canvas for a grade.
                 Online Behavioral Management Certificate - TBSI
You will complete an online module, called the Texas Behavior Support Initiative
(TBSI) through Region 4 that will fulfill a Texas legislative requirement. You will
be introduced to the website in class, but you will have to complete the module
on your own, which takes about 2 hours. Full instructions about how to access
the module are in the assignment on Canvas. You will not get credit for ALD
328 until you have uploaded a PDF copy of your certificate of completion to
Canvas. Your certificate is due on the last day of class by midnight.


                                          Grades
The following scale will be used to determine grades:
          A                     94-100                  C+                 77-79
          A-                    90-93                   C                  74-76
         B+                     87-89                   C-                 70-73
          B                     84-86                   D                  60-69
          B-                    80-83                   F                Below 60%
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the communication component
of the university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication
skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and personal responsibility.
February 5 is the last day to add or drop a class for a possible refund.
                                      University Policy
If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need
accommodations please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD).
Please refer to SSD’s website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with SSD,
please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the
semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations and needs in this
course.
Religious Holy Day Observance: If an assignment falls due on a day when you
are observing a religious holy day, I will work with you to find a time to submit the
work. If it falls on a class meeting day you may do the make-up paper to excuse
the absence. You must let me know in advance of the absence (see late work
requests).
                                     Safety Information
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with
all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction
of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions
by the following: The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office. Other important Emergency Information can be found
at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: Use this resource to help fellow UT
members about whom you have concerns BCAL: 512-232-5050
