AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith                                    Fall 2018
                                                    Fall 2018
              AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technologies – Unique # 20885
                      Monday / Wednesday 10:00am – 11:30am WIN 1.138 & PAC 3.204
Instructor:     Matthew R. Smith
Office Hours: M, W: 1:00pm – 2:00pm and by appointment
                T, TH: 10:00am – 11:00am and by appointment
Email:          matt.smith@austin.utexas.edu
TA:             Alex Gendal, alexgendal@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course is a lecture / lab course designed to introduce students to the basic concepts, methods,
and systems utilized in the field of Live Entertainment. The primary focus is to explore core
technologies and illuminate how each area of work within Projection, Lighting and interactivity relates
and is connected to others. Through a mixture of lectures and lab classes the students will be
introduced to the tools and techniques prevalent in four specific applications of Live Entertainment:
projection, conventional & intelligent lighting, 3-D previsualization, and interactive & generative
imagery. Topics include the historical landmarks of interactive performance, projection system
design, media servers, common signal and data formats, imagery creation for live performance, and
current trends in live event technology. Student activities include: programming lights, controlling
media servers, and designing an interactive projection system.
LEARNING OUTCOMES:
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
• apply principles and elements of design;
• create and implement original lighting designs;
• effectively troubleshoot an interactive system;
• critically examine projection techniques
COURSE MATERIALS:
•   8GB maximum USB drive
•   Pencil
•   1 – notebook (small or medium in size, easily accessible for notetaking and may be used during
    quizzes)
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
• Quizzes (10%): A total of 5 quizzes will be administered throughout the semester.
•   Project 1 (10%):   QLab – complete preliminary show file
•   Project 2 (20%):   QLab – performance
•   Project 3 (10%):   Hog 4 – complete LightConverse project folder & connectivity with Hog 4 PC
•   Project 4 (20%):   Hog 4 – performance
•   Project 5 (10%):   disguise – proof of concept & feedback
•   Project 6 (20%):   disguise – performance


AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith                                      Fall 2018
GRADING:
Quizzes                                                                                              10%
Project 1                                                                                            10%
Project 2                                                                                            20%
Project 3                                                                                            10%
Project 4                                                                                            20%
Project 5                                                                                            10%
Project 6                                                                                            20%
                                                                                                    100%
If you submit your assignment late it will not be reviewed in class.
All work is due as specified in the assignment listed in canvas. Work not completed prior to the
canvas deadline will be considered late.
Any work turned in late, regardless of the excuse, will result in a grade reduction of one full letter for
each calendar date it is late (an A would become a B and so on).
In summary:
Every assignment has a due date and time.
I do accept work after the due date, however, assignments automatically lose one full letter
grade for every calendar date submitted late and they will not be reviewed in class.
Any work turned in more than 4 calendar days late will receive an automatic F. If you are having difficulty
completing your work on time, please speak to me privately prior to the deadline, so we may discuss a
possible arrangement.
                       All assignments will be graded within 7 days of submission date.
Grading Scheme
A- Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work must be completed
on time and with a very high quality of demonstrated skill and technique. There is an evidence of
significant development across all dimensions of learning. The result at this level demonstrates activity
that goes significantly beyond the required course work in one or more areas.
B- Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work must be completed on
time with consistently high quality in course work. There is an evidence of marked development
across all dimensions of learning.
C- Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with generally
good quality in course work. There is evidence of some development across all dimensions of
learning.
D- Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work completed,
with inconsistent quality in course work. The evidence of development across all dimensions of
learning is unclear.
F- Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned work completed,
or very low quality in course work. Development evidence is not available.
Please Note: If you are concerned about your grade – check in with us regularly so that we can
determine where you’re at, and what might need to be done to correct any problems. Do not wait
until the end of the semester!
                                              Page 2


AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith                                      Fall 2018
ATTENDANCE:
ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Being a professional requires a habit of discipline and rigor.
Professionals in the arts achieve at the highest level when they work with determination and
dedication to detail. Your attention to attendance and lecture information gathering is an important
element of establishing professional standards and practices. The course lectures and discussions will
involve a significant amount of information that will not be available in any other form (textbook,
handouts); therefore, regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of the class.
If you need to miss class for legitimate reasons it is your responsibility to contact me directly with this
information. Sending a message by way of another student of an impending absence does not
constitute a legitimate notification.
For each unexcused absence after your first three, your final grade will be lowered by one letter
grade. Seven unexcused absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
Please be on time for class. If you are more than 5 minutes late for class you will be counted as
tardy. Every two instances you are tardy will be counted as one time absent.
Privacy
What we say about each other’s work during this class should remain in the classroom. It will not be
published in a blog or on any other personal website, tweeted, or posted on social networks. Please
respect each other’s work.
Resources
reference online:
www.figure53.com
www.highend.com
www.disguise.one
UTIM Wiki
CLASS CALENDAR
Instructor reserves the right to adjust the calendar to fit the needs of the class.
Week 1:
 Wednesday: August 29th
 -Introduction
 -Syllabus overview
 -Tour
Week 2:
 Monday: September 3rd
 LABOR DAY – NO CLASS
Week 2:
 Wednesday: September 5th
 -Projection Design overview (role of designer, engineer, operator)
 -Samples of projection designs shown (Matt & Alex)
 -Projection Engineering overview (projection plot, section, system diagram & equipment list)
 -Samples shown (Matt & Alex)
 -Discussion: how to choose playback system
                                             Page 3


AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith                          Fall 2018
Week 3:
 Monday: September 10th
 -QLab overview (interface, audition window, screens vs surfaces, mapping)
Week 3:
 Wednesday: September 12th
 -QLab continued (cue lists, auto-continue & auto-follow, effects, fades, audio)
Week 4:
 Monday: September 17th
 -QLab continued (sample work from Matt & Alex)
 -QLab Q&A (specific ideas or challenges)
Week 4:
 Wednesday: September 19th
 -*DUE – Project 1*
 -QLab Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Jon on a per project basis)
Week 5:
 Monday: September 24th
 -Projection Equipment in detail (projectors, signal distribution)
Week 5:
 Wednesday: September 26th
 -Projection Equipment in detail (projection surfaces, mounting & rigging hardware)
Week 6:
 Monday: October 1st
 -*DUE – Project 2*, Presentation Day
Week 6:
 Wednesday: October 3rd
 -Project 2 Presentations continued
 -Lighting Design overview (role of designer, engineer, operator)
 -LightConverse overview (interface, editor, visualizer, 3D model library)
Week 7:
 Monday: October 8th
 -LightConverse continued (adding fixtures & props)
 -LightConverse continued (object textures, custom object scaling)
Week 7:
 Wednesday: October 10th
 - Hog 4 PC overview (console layout, windows, fixture library)
                                           Page 4


AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith              Fall 2018
Week 8:
 Monday: October 15th
 -Hog 4 PC continued (patching, user numbers, programmer, cue lists)
Week 8:
 Wednesday: October 17th
 -LightConverse Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Alex on a per project basis)
 -Hog 4 PC continued (LightConverse connectivity, cuelist introduction)
Week 9:
 Monday: October 22nd
 -*DUE – Project 3*
Week 9:
 Wednesday: October 24th
 -in-class work day
Week 10:
 Monday: October 29th
 -in-class work day
Week 10:
 Wednesday: October 31st
 -*DUE – Project 4*, Presentation Day
Week 11:
 Monday: November 5th
 - Project 4 Presentations continued
Week 11:
 Wednesday: November 7th
 - disguise overview (interface, timeline, menus, feedmap)
Week 12:
 Monday: November 12th
 -disguise continued (cues, play variations, projector calibration)
Week 12:
 Wednesday: November 14th
 -disguise continued (UV maps)
Week 13:
 Monday: November 19th
 -disguise Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Alex on a per project basis)
Week 13:
 Wednesday: November 21st
 -THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS
                                             Page 5


AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith                                     Fall 2018
Week 14:
 Monday: November 26th
 -in-class work day
Week 14:
 Wednesday: November 28th
 -*DUE – Project 5*
 -in-class work day
Week 15:
 Monday: December 3rd
 -in-class work day
Week 15:
 Wednesday: December 5th
 -*DUE – Project 6*
Week 16:
 Monday: December 10th
 -Project 6 Presentations continued
 -LAST CLASS DAY
                POLICIES OF THIS COURSE AND THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
     • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
                                             Page 6


AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith                                     Fall 2018
     “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
     of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student,
by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their
writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation,
and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal
growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
                                             Page 7


AET 316: Foundations of New Performance Technology / Smith                                     Fall 2018
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
         first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
         enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                             Page 8
