                            PREHISTORIC TECHNOLOGIES
                          ANTHROPOLOGY 324L --- FALL 2018
                                Mondays 3:00-6:00, T5D 1.102
Instructor:             Fred Valdez                     471-0060 office
                        SAC 4.162                       471-5946 lab.
                        Hrs.:M 2-3 & by apt .           fredv@mail.utexas.edu
Co-Instructor:          Sharon Hankins
                        Contact information provided at class meeting.
READINGS/TEXT: Rice, Prudence                   1987 Pottery Analysis, a Sourcebook.
                        The University of Chicago Press
                        Other refs. to be reviewed/discussed/etc. at class meetings.
COURSE CONTENT: Prehistoric technologies will review various technological
developments from earliest prehistoric times into the recent past as an initial backdrop for
this course. The development, process, and methods of stone tool making serves as one
example. The control and use of fire, the processes of pottery making, aspects of lithic
technology, leatherworking, etc. are all among the topics of lectures and discussions. This
course intends as a primary interest to study the development, the construction, and the
use of prehistoric pottery.
COURSE GRADING: The course will be graded based on four (4) tests, two (2)
pottery firings, and class attendance/participation. The tests are valued at 15% each (of
the final grade), firings are valued at 15% each, & attendance is valued at 10%. PLEASE
note that there are NO MAKE-UPS. All tests are based on readings and lectures.
Attendance and participation are aspects that requires in-class and extra-class activity
particularly as related to firings. For a special circumstance, any “make-up” test will be
evaluated with 10 points taken off the final score.
Tests are multiple choice, true-false, short answer, and fill-in-the-blank. The tests are not
cumulative, there is no “final exam” for this course. When tests are returned, any
questions or need of modification to the evaluation must be done within the current or
next class meetings of the returned test. Test results will not be reevaluated at the end of
the semester. Any questions, confusion about the course grading, etc. should be
clarified/settled with Prof. Valdez as soon as possible.


                             ANTHROPOLOGY 324L
                   FALL 2016 -- SCHEDULE OF CLASSES*
Dates                  Topics, Subjects, Tests, Readings
Sept. 10 – Sept. 24    Intangible Technologies: Political-Social Organization,
                       Economic Systems, Religion/Ideology, Communication
                       Non-Perishables: LITHICS. Recognizing lithic
                       terminology and practical aspects of lithic tool-making.
                       Perishables: bone, wood, basketry, cloth, etc. and
                       Technologies in Action
September 24           Test 1
Sept. 24 – Oct. 8      Non-Perishables: CERAMICS. A detailed review and
                       practical aspects of gathering clay, processing clay, etc. to
                       firing. An emphasis on “prehistoric” technology.
October 8              Test 2 = Terminology
Oct. 8 – Nov. 29
November 29            Test 3 = Terminology
                       1st Firing = Nov. 5-13
Nov. 29 – Dec. 5
December 5             Test 4 = Terminology
                       2nd Firing = Dec. 3-11
*This schedule is an approximation of dates for topics, tests, etc. Any significant
changes will be announced as early as possible. Included within the schedule is
the showing of films, slides, guest presentations, and any other activities deemed
appropriate for this course.
