AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                                    Fall 2018
                                                     Fall 2018
                          AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media – Unique # 20975
                          TD 354T: Drafting Lighting and Media – Unique # 26089
                                Tuesday / Thursday, 12:30pm – 2:00pm WIN 1.138
Instructor:      Matthew R. Smith
Office Hours: M, W: 1:00pm – 2:00pm and by appointment
                 T, TH: 10:00am – 11:00am and by appointment
Email:           matt.smith@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course serves as the introductory 2D drafting course for Projection, Lighting and Interactivity
(PLAI). Throughout the semester students will learn drafting standards, practices and techniques
utilized within the field of live entertainment with the use of VectorWorks CAD software. Students
will work through a series of exercises designed to teach lighting and projection fundamentals
including: beam angle / field angle, drafting line weights, projection throw calculations, and
distribution of light. Students will learn how to draft lighting and projection plots, sections and
system diagrams. This course will provide a solid foundation for those students interested in taking
the 3D Previsualization course offered in the Spring semester.
LEARNING OUTCOMES:
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
• create and implement original design ideas;
• apply designs utilized for live performance;
• effectively draft in 2D;
• critically examine drafting techniques
COURSE MATERIALS:
•    USB drive or external drive
•    Pencil
•    1 – notebook (small or medium in size, easily accessible for notetaking)
SUGGESTED TEXTS:
•    Vectorworks for Entertainment Design, by Kevin Lee Allen
     ISBN: 978-1138418240


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                                    Fall 2018
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
•   Project 1 (15%): 2D Drafting – “Groundplan”: Draft a complete groundplan inside Vectorworks.
•   Project 2 (20%): 2D Drafting – “Projection”: Draft a complete Projection Plot and Projection Section
    inside Vectorworks.
•   Project 3 (15%): 2D Drafting – “Projection System Diagram”: Draft a complete Projection System
    Diagram.
•   Project 4 (25%): 2D Drafting – “Drafting Package”: Create a complete drafting package including
    projection and lighting. Scripts will be assigned. (Plot, Section, System Diagram and supporting
    paperwork)
•   Project 5 (25%): 3D Drafting – “Projection Cones”: Utilize 3D toolsets to solve common projection
    placement concerns.
GRADING:
Project 1                                                                                            15%
Project 2                                                                                            20%
Project 3                                                                                            15%
Project 4                                                                                            25%
Project 5                                                                                            25%
                                                                                                    100%
If you submit your assignment late it will not be reviewed in class.
All work is due as specified in the assignment listed in canvas. Work not completed prior to the
canvas deadline will be considered late.
Any work turned in late, regardless of the excuse, will result in a grade reduction of one full letter for
each calendar date it is late (an A would become a B and so on).
In summary:
Every assignment has a due date and time.
I do accept work after the due date, however, assignments automatically lose one full letter
grade for every calendar date submitted late and they will not be reviewed in class.
Any work turned in more than 4 calendar days late will receive an automatic F. If you are having difficulty
completing your work on time, please speak to me privately prior to the deadline, so we may discuss a
possible arrangement.
                       All assignments will be graded within 7 days of submission date.
Grading Scheme
A- Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work must be completed
on time and with a very high quality of demonstrated skill and technique. There is an evidence of
significant development across all dimensions of learning. The result at this level demonstrates activity
that goes significantly beyond the required course work in one or more areas.
B- Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work must be completed on
time with consistently high quality in course work. There is an evidence of marked development
across all dimensions of learning.
                                              Page 2


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                                     Fall 2018
C- Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with generally
good quality in course work. There is evidence of some development across all dimensions of
learning.
D- Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work completed,
with inconsistent quality in course work. The evidence of development across all dimensions of
learning is unclear.
F- Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned work completed,
or very low quality in course work. Development evidence is not available.
Please Note: If you are concerned about your grade – check in with us regularly so that we can
determine where you’re at, and what might need to be done to correct any problems. Do not wait
until the end of the semester!
ATTENDANCE:
ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Being a professional requires a habit of discipline and rigor.
Professionals in the arts achieve at the highest level when they work with determination and
dedication to detail. Your attention to attendance and lecture information gathering is an important
element of establishing professional standards and practices. The course lectures and discussions will
involve a significant amount of information that will not be available in any other form (textbook,
handouts); therefore, regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of the class.
If you need to miss class for legitimate reasons it is your responsibility to contact me directly with this
information. Sending a message by way of another student of an impending absence does not
constitute a legitimate notification.
For each unexcused absence after your first three, your final grade will be lowered by one letter
grade. Seven unexcused absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
Please be on time for class. If you are more than 5 minutes late for class you will be counted as
tardy. Every two instances you are tardy will be counted as one time absent.
Privacy
What we say about each other’s work during this class should remain in the classroom. It will not be
published in a blog or on any other personal website, tweeted, or posted on social networks. Please
respect each other’s work.
Resources
reference online:
www.vectorworks.net
www.student.myvectorworks.net
CLASS CALENDAR
Instructor reserves the right to adjust the calendar to fit the needs of the class.
Week 1:
  Thursday: August 30th
  -Introduction
  -Syllabus overview
  -Free software download
                                             Page 3


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                 Fall 2018
Week 2:
 Tuesday: September 4th
 -Drafting examples shown
 -UT Theatre Spaces (shared on Canvas)
 -Vectorworks introduction (software layout, menus, settings)
Week 2:
 Thursday: September 6th
 -2D toolset
 -Top/plan view
 -layers
 -classes
 -class default settings
Week 3:
 Tuesday: September 11th
 -Title block
 -EXERCISE: sample groundplan
Week 3:
 Thursday: September 13th
 -Q & A: groundplan exercise
 -In-class work day
Week 4:
 Tuesday: September 18th
 -*DUE – Project 1*
 -Projector Hardware show and tell (raster, native resolution, lens options)
 -Projection Plot overview
 -Video Screen Tool overview
Week 4:
 Thursday: September 20th
 -Projection Section overview
 -2D polygon tool
 -fill, gradients
Week 5:
 Tuesday: September 25th
 -EXERCISE: pick a surface / pick a projector
Week 5:
 Thursday: September 27th
 -EXERCISE: TBD
                                          Page 4


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                    Fall 2018
Week 6:
 Tuesday: October 2nd
 -Q & A: projector / surface exercise
 -In-class work day
Week 6:
 Thursday: October 4th
 -*DUE – Project 2*
 -Projector Hardware show and tell (signal distribution)
 -Projection System Diagram overview
Week 7:
 Tuesday: October 9th
 -Projection System Diagram continued
 -Creating custom symbols
Week 7:
 Thursday: October 11th
 -EXERCISE: TBD
Week 8:
 Tuesday: October 16th
 -Q & A: TBD exercise
 -In-class work day
Week 8:
 Thursday: October 18th
 -*DUE – Project 3*
 -Lighting Design overview
 -Drafting examples shown
 -Stanley McCandless
Week 9:
 Tuesday: October 23rd
 -Lighting instrument show and tell (ERS, fresnel, intelligent)
 -M&M’s
 -Scripts assigned
Week 9:
 Thursday: October 25th
 -Instrument insertion tool
 -Label Legend Manager
 -Defining hanging position
 -Defining instruments
                                          Page 5


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                Fall 2018
Week 10:
 Tuesday: October 30th
 -Supporting paperwork
 -Lightconverse as previsualization tool (showcase gel, angle of incidence)
Week 10:
 Thursday: November 1st
 -Script discussion
 -Q & A: design choices, challenges
Week 11:
 Tuesday: November 6th
 -Research Board Presentations
 -Q & A: how to achieve desired effect
Week 11:
 Thursday: November 8th
 -Visual Research Analysis (samples shown, discussion)
Week 12:
 Tuesday: November 13th
 -EXERCISE: “design on a dime”
Week 12:
 Thursday: November 15th
 -In-class work day
Week 13:
 Tuesday: November 20th
 -*DUE – Project 4*
Week 13:
 Thursday: November 22nd
 -THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS
Week 14:
 Tuesday: November 27th
 -Mapping Matter
 -Multiple extrude tool
 -Video Screen Tool revisited
 -3D environment workflow
Week 14:
 Thursday: November 29th
 -Q & A: 3D environment workflow
 -In-class work day
                                            Page 6


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                                   Fall 2018
Week 15:
 Tuesday: December 4th
 -In-class work day
Week 15:
 Thursday: December 6th
 -*DUE – Project 5*
 -LAST CLASS DAY
                 POLICIES OF THIS COURSE AND THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
     • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
     “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
     of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]
University Resources for Students
                                             Page 7


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                                  Fall 2018
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student,
by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their
writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation,
and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal
growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
                                             Page 8


AET 339: Drafting Lighting and Media / Smith                                                   Fall 2018
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
         first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
         enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                            Page 9
