ARC 327R (UG) + ARC 386M (G)
Sustainability: Why this Way?
University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
Spring 2019:        Wednesdays 9am-12pm.
Instructor:         Aleksandra Jaeschke
Office Hours:       Wednesdays 1pm-3pm and by appointment
Email:              jaeschke@austin.utexas.edu


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
Overview
Seminar Agenda
In 2008, California introduced the first-in-the-nation Green Building Standards Code to encourage sustainable construction
practices. While the adoption of this set of rules (and other similar provisions across the country) marked a significant moment
in the process of the greening of building regulations, it represents only one moment in the nation's history of environmental
action, and in that of code-making. Two parallel narratives, and their eventual mergence are the subject of this seminar and
serve as a springboard for a critical discussion about sustainability. The first is an account of the rise of environmental
awareness and of how it was gradually standardized by law-makers, interpreted through technology, and shaped by the
market. The second is a story of the agendas that shaped the American house (we will focus on the single-family house as an
example), and the regulations that govern it. The goal is to expose the wide-ranging consequences of their convergence; the
combined influence of building regulations and financial incentives on environmental awareness and environmentally-driven
design as practiced today.
In other words, this seminar is an exploration of the genealogy and repercussions of ideas, technologies, and norms that
have contributed to the current understanding of sustainability and practice of sustainable design in architecture.
The seminar is divided into two blocks. The first part provides an account of ecological ideas, socio-economic agendas,
regulatory programs, and design attitudes as they emerged, influenced each other, and affected environmental action and the
character of the American house. The second part investigates the regulations used to standardize sustainable building
practices and financial incentives used to promote specific types of green technologies.
The objective of this seminar is to help you develop a critical position towards the mechanisms that affect ideas and modes of
practice and provide you with instruments to question them as you develop your own position on sustainability in general, and
an attitude towards the role of specific environmentally-driven design strategies, technologies, and standards.
2


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
Overview
Seminar Road Map
01 | January 23       Sustainability: Why these Ideas, Technologies, and Norms? Introduction
02 | January 30       Open-Ended: How to Think about Sustainability? 1
                      From Welfare & Safety, to Ecology: before the 1970s
03 | February 6       Welfare & Safety
                      Themes: 1. Before the 1920s: Safety First - Tenement House Acts & the National Building Code
                      Recommended by the National Board of Fire Underwriters (1905). | 2. 1920s: Building the Market
                      - Recommended Minimum Requirements for Small Dwelling Construction, Department of
                      Commerce’s Bureau of Standards (1922). | 3. 1930s-1945: Post Depression - The Federal Housing
                      Administration (1934).
04 | February 13      Ecology
                      Themes: 4. 1945-1950s: Prosperity & Suburban Expansion - The National Housing Act (1949) &
                      Minimum Property Standards for Properties of One or Two Living Units, FHA (1958). | 5. 1960s:
                      Comfort vs. Degradation - Standard 55 Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human
                      Occupancy, ASHRAE (1966) & the National Environmental Policy Act (1969).
                      Environmental Protection & Sustainable Development: 1970s - 1980s
05 | February 20      Environmental Protection
                      Themes: 1. 1970s: Containing Crisis - Energy Policy and Conservation Act (1975) & California
                      Energy Conservation Standards (1978).
06 | February 27      Sustainable Development
                      Themes: 2. 1980s: Manifestos - The Brundtland Report (1987).
                      Green Economy & Green Building Standards: 1990s – present
07 | March 6          Green Economy
                      Themes: 1. 1990s – mid-2000s: Green Metrics - The Energy Policy Act (1992) & USGBC’s
                      Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Certification (2000).
3


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
08 | March 13         Green Building Standards
                      Themes: 2. Mid-2000s – 2010s: Speculation - California Green Building Standards Code (2008) &
                      the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (2009)
                      Essay Assignment Announced.
00| March 20          Spring Break: Rest, Reflect, Write
09 | March 27         Open-Ended: How to Think about Sustainability? 2
                      Quid pro Quo: Technological Artifacts & Financial Incentives
10 | April 3          Technological Artifacts
                      Themes: 1. Artifacts and Technics.
                      Essay Assignment Due.
11 | April 10         Financial Incentives
                      Themes: 2. Incentivize to Convince or Legislate to Coerce? | 3. Incentives: Building the (Green)
                      Market. | 4 Green Artifacts and Technics: Side-Effects.
                      Research Project Assignment Announced.
12 | April 17         Open-Ended: How to Think about Sustainability? 3
                      The Meta-Code: The Impact of the Structure & Form of Regulations
13 | April 24         The Code Makers
                      Themes: 1. The Rule: Who Protects the (Interior) Environment? Focus: Materials. | 2. The Matrix:
                      Where are the Rule Makers and What is Their Agency? Focus: Water.
14 | May 1            The Structure & Form
                      Themes: 3. The Stack: What is Regulated and Why in Multiple Codes? Focus: Air. | 4. The Inner
                      Workings: How are the Appropriate Solutions Achieved? Focus: Vegetation.
15 | May 8            Sustainability: How Else? Conclusions
16 | May 15           Final Research Project Presentations
                      Research Project Assignment Due.
4


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
Except for the main essay and research project, students will be expected to discuss case studies, watch selected
documentaries, regularly read provided texts, and write short responses. Specific readings and tasks will be provided on
weekly basis. There will be no final exam.
In each assignment, you will be asked to critically assess the adopted definitions of sustainability (and embedded in them
attitudes towards the environment), but also investigate broader (and most of the time hidden) ecological consequences of
these attitudes.
The course will feature guest lectures and screenings of documentaries focused on environmental thought, art, and activism;
code-making; green construction; and the role of the real-estate market. Screenings and guest lectures might require an
occasional change of schedule. Details will be announced in advance on canvas.
5


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
Resources
Selected Readings
Baer, William C. 2011. “Customs, Norms, Rules, Regulations and Standards in Design Practice.” In Companion to Urban Design,
    edited by Tridib Banerjee, and Anastasia Loukaitou-Sideris. New York: Routledge.
Braham, William W. 2016. Architecture and Systems Ecology: Thermodynamic Principles of Environmental Building Design
    in Three Parts. Abingdon, UK; New York, NY: Routledge.
Ben-Joseph, Eran. 2005. Code of the City: Standards and the Hidden Language of Place Making. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bijker, Wiebe E., Hughes, Thomas, and Tevor J. Pinch, eds. 1987. The Social Construction of Technological Systems. Cambridge,
    MA: MIT Press.
Caradonna, Jeremy L. 2014. Sustainability. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Crist, Eileen. 2007. "Beyond the Climate Crisis: A Critique of Climate Change Discourse.” Telos 141 (Winter 2007).
Daniels, Thomas L. 2009. "A Trail across Time: American Environmental Planning from City Beautiful to Sustainability." Journal
    of the American Planning Association, vol. 75, no. 2 (Spring 2009): 178-192
Grober, Ulrich. 2012. Sustainability. A Cultural History. Devon, UK: Green Books.
Hughes, Thomas. 1994. “Technological Momentum.” In Does Technology Drive History? edited by Merritt Roe Smith, and Leo
    Marx. London, UK; Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moe, Kiel. 2014. Insulating Modernism: Isolated and Non-isolated Thermodynamics in Architecture. Basel: Birkhäuser.
Moore, Steven A., and Barbara B. Wilson. 2014. Questioning Architectural Judgment: The Problem of Codes in the United States.
    London. UK; New York, NY: Routledge.
Mumford, Lewis. 1964. “Authoritarian and Democratic Technics.” Technology and Culture, Vol. 5, No. 1, (Winter).
Pollan, Michael. 1991. Second Nature: A Gardener's Education. New York: Grove Press.
Tabb, Phillip, and A. Senem Deviren. 2013. The Greening of Architecture: A Critical History and Survey of Contemporary
    Sustainable Architecture and Urban Design. Burlington, VT: Ashgate.
Timmermans, Stefan, and Steven Epstein. 2010. "A World of Standards but not a Standard World: Toward a Sociology of
    Standards and Standardization." Annual Review of Sociobiology 36: 69–89.
Waddington, C. H. 1977. Tools for Thought. London, UK: Jonathan Cape.
Worster, Donald. (1977) 1996. Nature's Economy: A History of Ecological Ideas. Cambridge, MA; New York, NY: Cambridge
    University Press.
Winner, Langdon. (1985) 1999. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” In The Social Shaping of Technology, edited by Donald MacKenzie
    and Judy Wajcman. Buckingham, UK; Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press.
6


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
Procedures
Evaluation & Policies
General Culture
Being on time is required. Participation is expected. Asking questions is highly encouraged. We want to have an open and
engaging conversation. Laptops can only be used for taking notes. Texting and eating are distracting and disrespectful. Drinks
are fine, stay hydrated! Please, step out if you have to make an emergency call.
Communication & Submissions: Canvas & Emails
Canvas will be used for communication of the logistics and content of the course, as well as for submission of assignments,
feedback, grading, and attendance. Direct emails will be used for one-to-one communication.
Please, set up your Canvas preferences to receive an email (or text message) notification as soon as a Canvas Announcement
has been posted online. Make sure that the email you provided on Canvas is active and that you regularly check your inbox.
Grading
All students are expected to participate in all activities and comply with all the requirements for the length of the semester.
There are four components to the grade:
1. Reading & Written Responses 15%
2. Essay 30%
3. Research Project and Final Presentation 40%
4. Case Study Presentation & Participation in the discussions 15%
Grade Descriptions
A/A-                Excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual rigor, craft, and
personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- Above Average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential
for excellence.
C+/C                Average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is
incomplete in one or more areas.
7


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
C-/D+/D/D-           Poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-appropriate. Student
does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F                    Fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned
when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X                    Excused Incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an
adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with
an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which
the student is enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the
course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or
family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating
communication with the instructor to determine due dates. If a student is late (10 minutes after the start of class) three (3)
times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor via email prior to class if lateness
or absence is known in advance.
Religious Observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be
penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far
in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
Academic Integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
8


ARC 327R + ARC 386M | UTSOA Spring 2019 | Sustainability: Why this Way? | Instructor: Aleksandra Jaeschke
Care Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools
they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or
academically. Abby Simpson is the CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the
CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her.
Abby Simpson | BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to obtain a letter that documents the disability from the
Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users
who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
9
