                                        PR/ADV 378
                     POP STAR ACTIVISM from the Beatles to Lizzo
                                    MW 3—4:15, BEL 328
Dave Junker, junker@austin.utexas.edu
BMC 4.378; T 11-1, R 1-3 or by appointment
TA: Jiahua (Bella) Yang, jhyang@utexas.edu
BMC 4.332; T 9-1 or by appointment
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Popular music is big business. In the U.S. alone, revenues exceed $20 billion per year
and more than double that when global sales are added. Big stars like Taylor Swift,
Drake and Beyoncé make well over $50 million a year. But are they selling anything
besides music? The answer, of course, is yes, and in some cases, they’re selling a lot
more than sex appeal, fashion or consumer products. From the Civil Rights Movement to
#MeToo and beyond, many musicians have leveraged their talents and influence to call
out injustice and advocate for social and political change. This makes pop music activism
a fascinating case study in public relations, political advocacy, and identity-based social
movements.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    • To learn elements of public relations and persuasive communication related to
       entertainment PR, image management and branding, issue management and
       advocacy, cause marketing, corporate social responsibility, diversity and
       identity-based social movements, cross-cultural communication and influencer
       marketing
    • To learn more about social justice movements (such as black civil rights,
       feminism, LGBTQ+ and LatinX advocacy), anti-war movements and climate
       activism movements , and the communication challenges of advocating for them
    • To sharpen your critical thinking, critical listening and communication skills
    • To help you become more critical and empowered as media consumers, and more
       effective and ethical as media producers
    • To introduce you to some awesome music that will enrich your life
MATERIALS
    •  Playlists via Spotify. Spotify for Students is only $4.99/month and if you don’t
       like it you can cancel your subscription when the class is over.
    •  Documentary Films and Music Videos. All movies will be available via Netflix,
       Amazon or another streaming service for free or a small fee. Examples include
       “The U.S. vs. John Lennon”; “What Happened, Miss Simone?”; “Dixie Chicks: Shut
       Up and Sing”; “Stay Woke: The Black Lives Matter Documentary”; “Tongues
       Untied”; “State of Pride”; “Ice on Fire” and “An Inconvenient Truth.”
    •  Selected music videos on YouTube
    •  Online news articles available without a fee.
    ASSIGNMENTS
       • Two in-class exams with a combination of multiple choice and essay questions


       •   Short paper on the use of music in a TV advertisement
       •   Curated playlist and strategy brief for political, social or environmental issue
           (group project)
       •   4-5 written responses to course content, critical issues, the playlists
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADE DISTRIBUTION
 Responses                                      10%
 Ad Analysis                                    20%
 Two Exams                                      25% per exam
 Final Playlist Project                         20%
                      COURSE CALENDAR
 Grading Scale
                      Exam dates are fixed but the daily calendar may need adjustments.
 A       94-100%
                      Any changes will be communicated clearly and with sufficient
 A-      90-93
                      notice to accommodate preparing for exams. Pay attention to
 B+      87-89
                      announcements in class and in Canvas for reading, listening and
 B       84-86
                      film-watching assignments.
 B-      80-83
 C+      77-79
                      COURSE CALENDAR
 C       74-76
                      Exam dates are fixed but the daily calendar may need adjustments.
 C-      70-73
                      Any changes will be communicated clearly and with sufficient
 D+      67-69
                      notice to accommodate preparing for exams.
 D       64-66
 D-      60-63
  Wk     Dates           Topic                Homework and Activities
  1      Jan 22          Intro to Pop Star    Read: Canvas Articles
                         Activism             Listen: Playlist 1
  2      Jan 27, 29      John and Yoko        Listen: Playlist 2
                         and the Activist     Watch: “The U.S. vs. John Lennon”
                         60s
  3      Feb 3, 5        The Legacy of 60s    Read: Excerpt from “Advertising Revolution”
                         Movements and        Watch: Nike ad, other ads
                         John and Yoko        Listen: Playlist 3
  4      Feb 10, 12      Nina Simone and      Read: Canvas Articles
                         Black Civil Rights   Watch: “What Happened, Miss Simone”
                                              Listen: Playlist 4
                                              Ad Analysis Paper due Feb. 12
  5      Feb 17, 19      From CRM to BLM      Read: TBA
                                              Watch: “Stay Woke: The BLM Documentary”
                                              Listen: Playlist 5
                                              *Guest David Ikard, Professor of African
                                              American and Diaspora Studies, Vanderbilt
                                              University
  6      Feb 24, 26      TBA and Review       Exam 1 Feb. 26


  7      March 2, 4     The Women’s              Read: TBA
                        Movement to              Watch: selected videos
                        #MeToo                   Listen: Playlist 6
  8      March 9, 11    Riot Grrrl, Girl         Read: TBA
                        Power and                Watch: selected videos
                        BlackGilrMagic           Listen: Playlist 7
         SPRING         SPRING BREAK             SPRING
  9      March 23,      The Case of The          Read: Texas Monthly Article
         25             Dixie Chicks             Watch: “Shut Up and Sing”
                                                 Listen: Playlist 8
  10     March 30,      Music and LGBTQ+         Read: Articles on Canvas
         April 1                                 Watch: “Tongues Untied”
                                                 Listen: Playlist 9
  11     April 6, 8     Music and LGBTQ+         Read: Articles on Canvas
                                                 Watch: “State of Pride”
                                                 Listen: Playlist 10
  12     April 13, 15   From the Chicano         EXAM 2 April 15
                        Movement to              Read: Articles on Canvas
                        LatinX                   Watch: “The Big Squeeze”
  13     April 20, 22   Environmental            Read: Articles on Canvas
                        Activism and             Watch: “Ice on Fire”
                        Climate Change           Listen: Playlist 8
  14     April 27, 29   TBA
  15     May 4, 6       TBA                      Playlist due May 6
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE: The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY: The University defines academic dishonesty
as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and
any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information
to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's
learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Please read more information
at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external site.).


STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon
request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities.
For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS: Notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I
will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
timeframe.
COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student.
If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in
your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support: Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-
F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor. 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services
Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
 SAFETY, SECUAL MISCONDUCT, DISCRIMINATION
 IF you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
 Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call
 can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
 instincts and share your concerns.
 TITLE IX REPORTING
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based
      discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct,
      dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
      institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
      environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct
      occurs in our community, the university can:
          1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
          2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have
              experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
          3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible
      Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to


      report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
      Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed
      in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty
      or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they
      are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
      remedies without making an official report to the university,
      email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting
      options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office
      at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you
to report such misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis
of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship,
veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender
expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will
report it.
    •   Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
        The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve
        complaints of sexual misconduct and discrimination.
            o   File a report of discrimination via online form
            o   Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
    •   Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
        The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible
        for enforcing federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs
        and activities that receive federal financial assistance from the Department of
        Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office
        for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
    •   Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
        The Equal Emplloyment Opportunityy Commission (EEOC) is responsible for
        enforcing federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant
        or employee on the basis of a protected class, including discrimination on the
        basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-
        4000.
