HIS 317L/AAS312                                                                                                                  Spring 2020
Instructor: Madeline Hsu                                                                                                  TA: Rupali Warke
                                              Introduction to Asian American History
Focusing on the migration and settlement of Asians in North America, this course explores major themes
concerning the histories of immigration, race, gender, ethnicity, class, labor, and international relations. We will
trace the trajectory of American racialization of Asians from exclusion as inassimilable aliens to post-World War II
celebrations as the model minority through changing conceptions of racial difference, evolving laws and
government institutions, and shifting representations of ethnic identities and communities. Working with primary
sources by and about Asians, we will explore how Asians have influenced understandings of national belonging and
citizenship, ethnic identity and community, assimilation and acculturation, multiculturalism, labor and economic
development, political participation, and transnationalism in influencing the emergence of the United States as a
nation of immigrants.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following
four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal
responsibility, and social responsibility.
This course also carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of American cultural experiences. A substantial portion of your grade stems from assignments
concerning the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
Course Aims and Student Learning Objectives: By successfully completing this course, students will be able to:
1.        Identify major concepts, problems, and historical questions in Asian American history and be able to
connect them to broader themes in U.S. history;
2.        Chart historical changes and continuities in the lives of Asian Americans over the past four centuries.
3.        Demonstrate competence regarding how race, ethnicity, gender, class, and sexuality have influenced Asian
American experiences;
4.        Compare and contrast the experiences of different groups of Asian Americans, and identify how these
diverse experiences intersected with that of other racial and ethnic groups, including African Americans, Latinos,
and White Americans, among others; and
5.        Apply key issues in Asian American history to understand current social justice issues.
Textbooks: For purchase at the University Co-op, on reserve at PCL.
Shelley Lee, A New History of Asian America (Routledge, 2014).
Cathy Schlund-Vials et al ed., Asian American: A Primary Source Reader (Yale University Press, 2016). Denoted as CSV
          in reading assignments. On E-reserve.
Additional required readings will be posted to Canvas.
Grade Distribution: Final grades will be allocated as follows: A 93-100; A- 90-92; B+ 88-89; B 83-87; B- 80-82; C+
78-79; C 73-77; C- 70-72 and so forth.
                    15% Class attendance and participation
                    20% Midterm (March 13)
                    30% Final Exam (May 14, 9:00 am-12:00 noon)
                    10% Family Immigration Narrative (Ja. 29)
                    25% 4-5 page primary source analysis (May 8)
Lecture and Reading Assignment Schedule (Subject to Change)
Week 1: Introduction: Orientation/Orientalism
Week 2: Introduction: Asians and Americans
Week 3: Asia’s Eastern Frontier
                                                                         1


Week 4: Labor and Trade
Week 5: Racism and Exclusion
Week 6: Asiatic Exclusion
Week 7: American Empire and Forging Communities
Week 8: Midterm
                                          SPRING BREAK March 14-22
Week 9: Second Generations and Citizenship
Week 10: World War II
Week 11: Cold War Racial Liberalism
Week 12: New Immigrants
Week 13: Representations/Representing
Week 14: Civil Rights and Model Americans
Week 15: A Post-Racial 21st Century?
Final exam: May 14, 9:00 am-12:00 noon. Bring two bluebooks.
ACADEMIC HONESTY: Academic honesty is integral to UT’s honor code. You are expected to complete your
own work. If you have any questions about academic guidelines you may call my office, 5-9303, or email me. You
should follow University guidelines regarding plagiarism and student conduct. For further information see:
http://uwc.fac.utexas.edu/~virgil/essay/research/plagiarism.html
                                                          2
