                                                                          HI 317L & AFR 317D
                                               Introduction to African American History
                                                      University of Texas-Austin, Fall 2018
                                                            Tuesday/Thursday 12:30-2:00pm
 …contrary to what you may have heard or learned, the past is not done and it’s not over, it’s
   still in process, which is another way of saying that when it's critiqued, analyzed, it yields
                                    new information about itself.
                                           --- Toni Morrison
Instructor: Dr. Ashley D. Farmer
She/ Her/ Hers
How to contact Dr. Farmer:
         • Via Email: adf@austin.utexas.edu
         • Via Phone: 512-475-7971
         • In Person at Office Hours: Wednesday, 1:30 to 3:30pm
                o Sign up for an appointment here: https://ashleyfarmer.youcanbook.me- (this link is
                   also on Canvas)
                o Office Location Gordon-White Building; 3.200J
Teaching Assistant: Alan Mattay
Pronouns: He/Him/His
How to contact TA:
         • Via email: alan.mattay@utexas.edu
         • In person at Office Hours: Tuesdays, Thursdays in Bellmont Hall (BEL) 11am-12pm or by
             appointment
Course Description:
The course is a survey of African-American history from the slave trade to the recent past. It is an
introductory examination of the black experience and is designed to bring to life the voices and
history of African Americans. The class is organized chronologically, with an emphasis on the ideas,
actors, and organizations that contributed to the African American experience. By the end of the
semester, students should have a basic understanding of how African Americans have contributed to
the making of America, the problems that they face, and how African Americans have defined
themselves, their history and culture, and their struggle for equality.


                                                                                                         2
Course Flag- Cultural Diversity in the United States
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the university core
curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal responsibility,
and social responsibility.
Required Texts:
    A. Deborah Gray White, Mia Bay, and Waldo E. Martin, Jr. Freedom On My Mind: A History of
        African Americans with Documents – Combined Volume
            • Available at UT CO-OP or online
    B. Barbara Ransby, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement: A Radical Democratic Vision
        • Available at UT CO-OP or online
        • Also Available online via UT libraries
    C. All other readings will be made available via the course website (CANVAS)
Grading:
Class Participation/History “Labs”        15%        Freedom Reflection- Part 1      10% (canvas)
Midterm Exam                              20%        Quiz                            10% (in-class)
Final Exam                                25%        Freedom Reflection- Part 2      10% (canvas)
Film Analysis                             10%
Class Participation:
Regular attendance in class is necessary in order to gain a firm grasp of the basic concepts of the
course. In addition, there will be several history “labs” that will count toward your participation grade
for the course. These are in-class individual and/or team exercises that offer you an opportunity to
build critical reading and reasoning skills that you can use whether or not you continue to study
history. Some of these will be announced. Others will take place in-class at various points during the
semester. Whatever form they take, they are designed to help you evaluate the merits of historical
texts and images, understand the tools with which community members make historical arguments,
and form your own opinions about major historical and social questions.


                                                                                                         3
                                                 th
Freedom Reflection Part 1: Due September 5 via CANVAS by 5pm
This is your chance to think about your existing knowledge of African American history and how it
shapes your understandings of race and social justice today. For this assignment:
    1. Log on to Canvas
    2. Find the “Freedom Reflection I” assignment
    3. Post a 500 word (minimum) reflection online that speaks to:
           a. How would you rate your knowledge and comfortability talking about African
              American History.
           b. Which aspects of history you think account for racial discord in America today.
           c. How you think these historical issues can be addressed in society today.
Quiz: IN CLASS on October 3rd
There will be one quiz during the course of the semester. The quiz will cover material from lectures,
textbooks, and other readings. Quiz questions will take a variety of forms ranging from document or
image analysis, textual analysis, and/ or multiple choice. The quiz will be completed in class will be
timed.
Midterm Exam: IN-CLASS- October 24th
The midterm exam will be administered in class and will consist of short and long answer questions
about the material covered in the first half of the semester.
Film Analysis- ONLINE Viewing and Worksheet- Due by Friday November 29th via CANVAS
Documentaries offer a powerful look into the black experience. For this assignment you will log onto
UT Libraries and watch the documentary, Whose Streets? As you watch you will answer questions on
a workshop to be submitted on CANVAS by the deadline. Instructions for how to view the film can be
found on the syllabus under the November 26nd listing below.
Final Exam: IN CLASS- December 5th
The final exam will be held during exam period as dictated by the registrar. It will consist of multiple
choice, short answer questions, and a choice of long-format essays.
Freedom Reflection- Part II: Due via Canvas on December 9th by 5pm
We will cover more than four centuries worth of different approaches to African Americans’ quest for
freedom. After you have reviewed the material, you will add to this discussion by positing your
position on black liberation past and present. For this assignment:
    - Log on to Canvas
    - Find the “Freedom Reflection II” assignment
    - Post a min 500 word reflection online that speaks to:
           o How you would now rate your knowledge and comfortability talking about African
              American History.
           o Which approaches to black liberation you found most valuable through our course.
           o How you think this approach can address contemporary issues African Americans face.
           o Three things you will do differently (at the individual, family, and community level)
              now that you have new information about the black liberation struggle.


                                                                                                        4
                                       Rules, Regulation, and Respect:
Late Assignment Policy:
Please contact the TA well in advance of an assignment’s due date if you think that you will have
difficulty meeting a particular deadline. All assignments submitted late without written permission
will automatically be marked down per the policy listed on the grading rubric.
Academic Integrity:
    A. Plagiarism:
The University's Institutional Rules (Section 11-802(d)) define plagiarism as including, "but not limited
to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any other means material that is
attributable in whole or in part to another source . . . and presenting that material as one's own
academic work offered for credit." In other words, “handing in someone else's work and taking credit
for it as if it were your own.” (Source: History Department statement on Academic Integrity).
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
    B. Submission of Online Assignments:
There are no group assignments in this course. All assignments submitted for this course should be
the work of each individual and reflect their personal knowledge and analysis of course material.
Students should not work together or use other forms of technology to complete assignments. If the
instructor or TA finds that a student has violated these rules they will be subject to the penalties as
mandated by the university.
    C. In-Person quizzes and exams
We will have two in-person quizzes and two in-person exams during the course. The following are
not permitted in the classroom or on your desk during exam time: baseball caps, cell phones, laptops,
non-exam papers. If the instructor or TA finds that a student has violated these rules they will be
subject to the penalties as mandated by the University.
Accessibility:
This course is intended for all students at UT Austin. This includes those with mental, physical, or
cognitive disabilities, illness, injuries, impairments, or any other condition that tends to negatively
affect one’s equal access to education. If, at any point in the semester, you find yourself not able to
fully access the space, content, and experience of this course, you are welcome (but not required!) to
contact me by email, phone, or during office hours to discuss your specific needs. I also encourage
you to contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone)
or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.


                                                                                                        5
Preferred Names and Pronouns:
Courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor by the university. I will gladly honor your
request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holy Days
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. Students will be
excused from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. University policy requires
students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
E-mail Correspondence:
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible
for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
also responsible for keeping the university informed about changes to your e-mail address.
Email communication with the instructor and the TA should be considered formal, similar to other
professional correspondence. You should remember to include a proper salutation and sign your
name at the end of the email.
Instructor and TA Email Policy: We will both usually answer emails within 24 hours except during
university-specified holidays. Typically we will not respond to emails between 9pm and 8am. Please
keep this in mind when corresponding with the teaching staff.


                                                                                               6
                            Week 1: What is African American History?
Thursday August 29th: Introductions and Class Requirements
                  Week 2: From Africa to America & African Slavery in America
Tuesday September 3rd:
       • “From Africa to America,” Freedom On My Mind
       • Belinda, “The Petition of Belinda,” Freedom On My Mind
 Thursday September 5th: Freedom Reflection I due via Canvas by 5pm
       • “African Slavery in North America,” Freedom On My Mind
       • Olaudah Equiano, “The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano,” Freedom On
          My Mind
                        Week 3: African Americans in the Age of Revolution
 Tuesday September 10th:
       • “African Americans in the Age of Revolution,” Freedom On My Mind
       • Phyllis Wheatley, “A Poem to the Earl of Dartmouth,” Freedom On My Mind
Thursday September 12th:
       • Cassandra Pybus, “From Epic Journeys of Freedom Runaway Slaves of the American
          Revolution and Their Global Quest for Liberty” (CANVAS)
                 Week 4: Slavery and Freedom in the New Republic & Slave South
Tuesday September 17th:
       • “Slavery and Freedom in the New Republic,” Freedom On My Mind
Thursday September 19th:
       • “Black Life in the Slave South,” Freedom on My Mind
       • Solomon Northrop, “Solomon Northrop Describes New Orleans Slave Auction” (CANVAS)


                                                                                           7
                                     Week 5: The Civil War
Tuesday September 24th:
      • “The Northern Black Freedom Struggle and the Coming of the Civil War,” Freedom On My
          Mind
      • Frederick Douglass, “What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?” Freedom On My Mind
Thursday September 26th:
      • “Freedom Rising: The Civil War,” Freedom On My Mind
                                     Week 6: Reconstruction
Tuesday, October 1st:
      • Reconstruction: The Making and Unmaking of a Revolution,” Freedom On My Mind
Thursday, October 3rd: QUIZ #1- IN CLASS
      • Williard Gatewood, “‘The Remarkable Misses Rollin’”: Black Women in Reconstruction
          South Carolina” (CANVAS)
                                Week 7: Black Life and Jim Crow
Tuesday October 8th:
      • “Black Life and Culture in the Nadir,” Freedom on My Mind
      • “The New Slavery in the South,” Freedom On My Mind
Thursday October 10th:
      • Chapter 1, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
                                     Week 8: The New Negro


                                                                                          8
Tuesday October 15th:
      • “The New Negro Comes of Age,” Freedom On My Mind
      • Chapter 2, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
Thursday October 17th:
      • Chapter 3, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
                                Week 9: War at Home and Abroad
Tuesday October 22nd:
      • “Fighting for a Double Victory in the World War II Era,” Freedom On My Mind
      • Chapter 4, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
Thursday October 24th:
      • MIDTERM IN-CLASS
                          Week 10: Civil Rights Movement(s)
Tuesday October 29th:
      • “The Early Civil Rights Movement,” Freedom On My Mind
      • “Rosa Parks, Jo Ann Robinson, and the Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955-1956” (CANVAS)
Thursday October 31st:
      • Chapters 5 and 6, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
                               Week 11: Civil Rights Movement(s)
Tuesday November 5th:
      • Chapter 8, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
      • Diane McWhorter, “The Enduring Courage of the Freedom Riders” (CANVAS)
Thursday November 7th:
      • Chapter 9, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
                           Week 12: Black Power and Empowerment


                                                                                             9
Tuesday November 12th:
      • “Multiple Meanings of Freedom; The Movement Broadens,” Freedom On My Mind
      • The Black Panther Party, “October 1966 Black Panther Party Platform,” Freedom On My
         Mind
Thursday November 14th:
      • “Poor People’s Campaign: Non-Violent Insurrection for Economic Justice” (CANVAS)
      • Chapter 10 and 11, Ella Baker and the Black Freedom Movement
                             Week 13: The Challenge of Conservatism
Tuesday November 19th:
      • Racial Progress in the Era of Backlash and Change,” in Freedom On My Mind.
      • Joshua Guild, “To Make that Someday Come: Shirley Chisholm’s Radical Politics of
         Possibility” (CANVAS)
Thursday November 21nd:
      • “Combahee River Collective Statement,” Freedom on My Mind
                         Week 14: African Americans in the New Century
Tuesday November 26th: ONLINE FILM ANALYSIS
      • Film Viewing: Whose Streets?– online
      • Instructions for film viewing
            1. Log onto Canvas and download the film viewing handout located in Week 14 folder
            2. Search for “Whose Streets?” in UT libraries
            3. Use your UTEID To log in and view the film
            4. Answer the questions as you watch
            5. Submit this page via CANVAS any time before Friday November 29th
Thursday November 28th: HOLIDAY/ NO CLASS
                        Week 15: African Americans and the New Century
Tuesday December 3rd:


                                                                                            10
      •   “African Americans and the New Century,” Freedom On My Mind.
      •  “The Despair of Hurricane Katrina,” (CANVAS)
      •  Darnell Moore, “Black Freedom Fighters in Ferguson: Some of us are Queer” (online)
Thursday December 5th: FINAL EXAM IN-CLASS
