           The University of Texas at Austin                    Department of Middle Eastern Studies
               ARA 601C Intensive Arabic I                         ‫السنة األولى‬/ ‫اللغة العربية‬
                                   !‫أهال وسهال بكم الى الصف الثاني‬
        For instructor and TA names, office location, office hours, and email please see Canvas.
                This document contains important information and represents an agreement
                 between the instructor and the students.
                You are responsible for knowing all the information contained in this document.
                You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION FOR THIS CLASS:
     CELL PHONES, TABLETS AND COMPUTERS OFF EXCEPT WHEN PERMITTED BY INSTRUCTOR.
     LATENESS AND USING ENGLISH WITHOUT PERMISSION WILL AFFECT YOUR PERFORMANCE AND
      YOUR GRADE.
     ALL WRITTEN AND TYPED ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE DOUBLE-SPACED AND LEGIBLE.
     WE EXPECT TO BE INFORMED OF ABSENCES BEFORE CLASS BEGINS. NO GUM PLEASE.
     Beverages are permitted. In Arab culture, if you bring food, you must offer to share it. 
Course Materials:
   1. Alif Baa, Introduction to Arabic Letters and Sounds (Third Edition) by Brustad, Al-Batal & Al-Tonsi. This book
      comes with a CD (the contents therein are downloadable to your iPod for review while
      running/exercising/driving) and a companion website (for doing homework), and we will be using all three
      every night. We will be using this text for the first month of class. The book is available at the UT COOP on
      Guadalupe Street.
   2. In addition to purchasing the Alif Baa book, you must enroll in your instructor's course at the companion
      website for an additional charge of $24.95. Please refer to the class Canvas site for detailed instructions on
      how to do this.
   3. Al-Kitaab fii Tacallum al- cArabiyya, Part 1 (Third Edition) by Brustad, Al-Batal & Al-Tonsi. This textbook is also
      available at the UT COOP. We will switch to this textbook after finishing Alif Baa and will use it for 2 semesters
      and for part of 2nd year Arabic.
   4. For Al-Kitaab, Part 1, you must also enroll in your instructor's course at the companion website for an additional
      charge of $24.95.
   5. Canvas:: In this class, we will use Canvas—a web-based course management system at
      http://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, communicate online, and post assignments and
      grades. You will receive emails with important course information from your instructor via Canvas’s email tool,
      so be sure to check your email frequently.
Course Objectives:
      By the end of Arabic 601C you will, in-shaa'a-llaah:
                                                                                                                        1


         1. have mastered the Arabic alphabet and sound system, be able to recognize all Arabic sounds and have made
         substantial progress in pronouncing them properly, and be able to write accurately from dictation;
         2. be able to initiate basic social interactions, exchange basic information, take leave, and be aware of essential
         cultural aspects of social interaction in the Arab world;
         3. be able to talk (in simple or occasionally conjoined sentences) about yourself, your education, your family,
         your city, and your likes and dislikes with native speakers of Arabic accustomed to interacting with learners;
         4. comprehend simple print texts on familiar topics (e.g., basic biographical information, signs and
         announcements, lists and schedules, menus, etc.);
         5. comprehend simple audio/video texts of up to two minutes on familiar topics (basic biographical
         information, family, education, weather, etc.);
         6. be able to compose simple paragraphs about yourself, your family and friends in colloquial and standard
         Arabic;
         7. be able to use the computer to type in Arabic
         8. be able to differentiate between formal and spoken Arabic, recognize both registers, and use basic
         expressions in at least one variety of spoken Arabic;
         9. have an active vocabulary of about 300 Arabic words in colloquial and standard Arabic, covering a range of
         topics including family, education, and travel, as well as function words expressing concepts such as negation,
         desire, and possibility;
         10. use some of the cultural expressions used in greetings and leave-taking and be aware of the importance
         of such expressions in interaction; and
         11. be aware of most the countries that constitute the Arab world and some important cities.
This course will introduce you simultaneously to FuSHaa “formal Arabic” along with one variety of spoken Arabic (either
MaSri “Egyptian” or Shaami “the Arabic variety spoken in Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, & Palestine”) or Iraqi depending on
your instructor’s choice. Our aim here is to prepare you to function in a range of situations and expose you to the
varieties of Arabic and the many ways in which these varieties interact in real-life communication. In so doing, we
embrace a dynamic view of Arabic reflecting authentic communication with and among native speakers across various
contexts and geographical areas in the Arab world. While it is impossible to capture all the nuances of spoken Arabic
in a single course, you will be introduced to tools that will enable you to function successfully within this exciting
sociolinguistic environment.
Grade Distribution:
 Class Participation              15%                                     Skit                 5%
 Homework                         15%                                     Culture Portfolio    5%
 Homework Correction              5% (when we start using Al-Kitaab)      Oral Interview       5%
 Online Quizzes                   10%                                     Final Exam           15%
 Tests                            25%
Below you will find more detail on each of the above components of your class grade, as well as a section on final grade
calculation and grade policies. Additionally, you will find a section on how to do well in this class, which includes a
section on principles for effective group work and finally, a section on UT and department policies applicable in the
class.
Grade Distribution/Course Requirements in Detail:
Class Participation                          (15%):
                                                                                                                          2


Class time will be devoted to activating the vocabulary and structures that you have prepared at home through your
homework. At least 75% of class time will be spent doing activities in pairs and small groups. Thus, active participation
in class is paramount for significant language proficiency gains and good in-class performance. This part of your grade
will be based on a daily “class participation” rating assigned by your instructor and TA according to the following
criteria:
   5- You are actively engaged in developing your Arabic proficiency and communicating in Arabic as much as
      possible with your partner/classmates/teachers from the moment you walk into the class until you leave it. You
      cannot expect to receive a 5 automatically. You have to earn a 5. Full credit will be given when you:
       a- are ready to begin class on time,
       b- are well prepared for the class. This means that you have listened to recorded materials on the companion
          website/CD, learned the new vocabulary well enough to be ready to activate it in class without referring to
          your book, read the grammar explanations carefully and done the homework drills based on these
          explanations before coming to class,
       c- are alert,
       d-participate actively when we are working together as a class,
       e- make maximum use of pair/group work time by
                          understanding the learning objectives of tasks assigned,
                          staying focused on those objectives,
                          continuing to work with your partner on the task objectives even if you “finish” an assigned
                             task before the allotted time is up (Ask your TA or instructor for additional instructions if you
                             aren’t sure what to do next), and
      f- maintain the “Arabic as much as possible” policy.
      g- contribute to and maintain a supportive, friendly, positive understanding and accepting environment in class.
          Learning another language presents challenges to everyone and we should not contribute to a discouraging
          environment with discourteous and disrespectful behavior. An example of this would be laughing at another
          student when he or she makes a mistake.
   4- You are present but lacking in one of the above criteria for full credit in participation.
   3- You are present but lacking in two of the criteria.
   2- You are present but lacking in three of the above criteria.
   1- You are present but lacking in more than three of the above criteria. For instance, you come late to class, submit
      incomplete homework, use English to say something that you could say in Arabic and are not focused on the
      assigned task during group work.
   0- You are absent or more than 20 minutes late
Principles for Group Activities
         Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them; each of you can learn with and from everyone
          else.
         Work with different people on a regular basis.
          Come prepared. Do not be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to fully participate in the
          work. If you are not prepared for class let your instructor know beforehand and s/he will arrange for you to
          learn by listening on that day.
                                                                                                                             3


        Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to finish. Most activities are designed to elicit creative play
        with vocabulary and structures on which we are working. If you do the minimum, you will get only minimum
        benefit. Take advantage of class time by pushing yourself to be creative and say and write as much as you can.
       Speak in Arabic while you are engaged in the activity. If you feel frustrated, raise your hand and ask for help.
       When your group finishes the task, raise your hand to let the instructor know.
       The instructor may call time before everyone is finished. If your group does not finish, you may want to take
        a few minutes after class to study the rest of the exercise.
   Attendance Policies:
         If you are absent from class you will receive a “0” for that day’s participation. Your lowest 3 grades for
          participation will be dropped when calculating your final grade at the end of the semester.
         More than ten absences—whatever the reason—will result in an "F" for the course.
         Please inform your instructor by email of an absence as soon as possible before—not after—the class you
          will miss. The absence will not be excused but informing your instructor of an absence helps considerably in
          planning for daily class activities.
   Tardiness Policy
   Arriving late to class is disruptive, so please make every effort to be in class and ready to start working when class
   begins. Participation points will be deducted for tardiness. If you arrive more than 20 mins. late for class you will
   receive a “0” for that day’s class participation and it will count as an absence in applying the absence policy. For
   each 5 minutes that you are late, 1 point will be deducted from your participation grade.
   Classroom Conduct Policies:
        Use of cell phones is not permitted. Turn your cellphone off completely when in class.
        Please do not chew gum in class.
        Food is not permitted in the classroom. Drinks in spill-proof mugs and bottles with tops are allowed.
Homework         (15%)
Expect to spend about two (2) hours on homework for every class session. To prepare for the learning that takes
place through practice in class, you will listen to, read and study new material at home. This material will not be
presented in class. To help you process this material, you will have daily written assignments due at the beginning of
class on the day designated in the schedule. The amount of effort you put into your at-home preparation and your
homework is an important part of your homework grade. Pay close attention to your instructor and/or TA’s comments
on your assignments and follow up promptly in office hours or after class if you have questions about your homework
grade.
Homework assignments will be rated on a scale of 1 to 5 (5 = excellent; 4 = good but not your best effort; 3 = mediocre;
2 = poor; 1 = very poor). You will be rated on the overall quality of your work, not merely on the number of correct or
incorrect answers. Note that you do not need to have everything 100% correct on your homework in order to get a “5”
rating as long as you have made your best effort. Your lowest three (3) homework ratings will be dropped when
calculating your final grade. Please also note that you will not automatically get a 5 just for doing the HW. You need
to earn higher scores and demonstrate that you’ve worked adequately to deserve them.
On each homework assignment,
                                                                                                                        4


1.      write your name in Arabic as soon as you are able to do so,
2.      write the homework number (from the assignment schedule),
3.      staple pages together in the upper right hand corner of the page , and
4.     leave room for feedback from your instructors on the homework. Write on every other line.
      Failure to do any of the above will lower your homework grade by at least ½ point.
         We expect you to write out your homework assignment in full sentences. You will not receive full credit for
          submitting only the words from a fill-in-the-blank exercise or submitting a Xeroxed copy of the exercise from
          the book. The aim of the homework exercises is not only to build your vocabulary, but also to recycle and
          reinforce the vocabulary and grammatical structures that you already know. By writing out the exercise in full,
          you will notice details of the language (such as spelling and grammatical details) that you may have missed the
          first time around. Furthermore, you incorporate your new vocabulary in context rather than producing a simple
          list, and you increase your writing speed. Because a simple list only meets one aim of the exercise, we consider
          it incomplete, and you may lose points on your homework grade for this reason.
         We encourage you to study and brainstorm together while doing homework assignments, but participation
          must be equal, and each student must hand in her/his own paper. Copying homework someone else did is a
          violation of the Honor Code.
         Generally, late homework will not be accepted. However, if there are exceptional extenuating circumstances
          that will prevent you from turning in homework on time, contact your instructor to discuss the possibility of
          getting advance permission to submit late homework.
         Note that the assigned homework at the companion website is required homework. Failure to complete the
          online portion(s) of the homework will result in points being deducted from your homework grade.
A note about http://www.georgetownuniversitypresstextbooks.com/ companion website:
Put your best effort into the work you do on the website and do not take short cuts. Your instructors can monitor how
you perform on each assigned exercise on the website. Last year, we discovered that some students were simply
clicking the “submit” button before actually attempting to answer any of the questions in the online drill. Presumably,
they did this in order to get to the right answers before attempting to answer the questions. You will NOT learn this
way.
To benefit from the web site to the utmost extent you need first to read the explanations and examples of the
vocabulary and grammar in the book. Then you can complete the drills on the website based on what you have
understood. When you have completed the drill, you can submit your answers so that you can get feedback on your
performance on this drill. If you do not attempt, but simply copy the answers given on the web site, you are not
developing that understanding, and hence not learning!
Please note that your teachers will be monitoring your use of the web site. Students who do not complete the drills
thoroughly but try to take short cuts will not receive credit for it. We are implementing this policy in order to give you
an incentive to do what is best for your learning.
Also, please note that, when doing the drills on the Al-Kitaab companion website, you are free to redo any drill as many
times as you wish to help you improve your percentage of correct answers. Therefore, take advantage of the fact that
you can re-attempt any drill many times before you decide to move on to the next drill.
                                                                                                                         5


The first month of class requires an extra time investment on your part while we are doing the sounds and letters
activities. Expect to spend up to an extra hour per day on homework during this month. This investment will pay off
later; learning to connect the sounds and letters well helps you memorize vocabulary better, avoid spelling problems,
and communicate effectively with native speakers with clear pronunciation.
IMPORTANT: Using the answer key of Alif Baa or Al-Kitaab in doing homework assignments is a violation of the UT
Honor Code and will be treated accordingly.
Any grade disputes must be brought to the instructor’s attention within a week of the assignment. After a
week, the grade cannot be disputed and/or changed.
Homework Correction               (5%)
In the second part of the semester, when we begin the Al-Kitaab textbook, you will be asked to make corrections on
your written homework. Mistakes on homework are a natural part of the learning process. However, for you to fully
benefit from your mistakes, you need to go back and correct them. The homework rating system in the class is designed
to reward you for doing just that. When you submit your homework the first time, your instructor or TA will underline
or circle mistakes to be corrected and label them with correction symbols using the correction code (posted on Canvas).
When you get your homework back you are expected to go over it and correct the mistakes (using a different color
ink or pencil) on the original homework paper and next to what you wrote originally, and then resubmit it according
to the daily assignment schedule.
To get full credit for your homework corrections you must attempt to correct every mistake pointed out to you. If you
don’t understand why something is wrong, write a note to your TA/teacher on your homework asking for more help.
Homework corrections will receive a grade on a scale of 0-5 based on completeness and satisfactory
corrections. No credit will be given for for incomplete corrections. Please make sure to use a different color of ink on
corrections.
Late corrected homework will not be accepted. Your lowest two (2) grades for homework corrections will be
dropped when calculating your final grade.
Tests             (25%)
There will be four (4) tests over the course of the semester, worth a total of 25% of your final grade. If you will
miss/have missed a test, contact your instructor as soon as you know that you will be missing/have missed it. Requests
for make-ups will be considered on a case-by-case basis. If you have not contacted your instructor within 24 hours after
the test has been given to discuss the possibility of a make-up, you will receive a “0.” The tentative dates for the tests
are September 20, October 4, October 25, and November 15.
 Skit             (5 %)
You will be asked to prepare one skit with a partner (6 minutes) towards the end of the semester. Skits provide you
with the opportunity to show what you have learned and what you can create with the language. Further information
about the skit's format and evaluation will be provided at least one week before the skit is due.
Culture Portfolio          (5%)
                                                                                                                         6


In addition to your language work, you will create an electronic Culture Portfolio with four entries all written in English.
The culture portfolio is your opportunity to engage with Arab culture outside the classroom in order to explore and
improve your knowledge of the cultural and social contexts in which Arabic is spoken.
You are required to post your culture portfolio entry (300 words in English per entry) on Canvas. We hope that you
will enjoy reading the portfolio entries of your classmates in addition to writing your own. More details of this
component of the course are posted on Canvas, and the due dates for each entry will be provided on the weekly
schedule. (The tentative due dates are September 13, October 2, October 28, and November 8.)
 Oral Interview            (5%)
Towards the end of the semester you will have an oral interview of about 20 minutes with a partner from class. This
assessment will consist of a pre-activity (which will help you prepare), the conversation itself, and an in-depth follow-
up activity, in which you will comment on the content of your conversation, as well as observations you have made
about your language skills.
Online Quizzes             (10%)
You are required to have a computer/tablet with you every day, and you will be taking quizzes on Canvas that will
test your knowledge of vocabulary and/or grammar that you are supposed to prepare for. There is no make up for
these Quizzes and they may/may not be announced in advance. You should be ready to take a quiz at any point.
Final Examination          (15%)
The final examination will be comprehensive and will test reading, writing, and listening in addition to vocabulary and
grammar. The final exam will be given as a uniform exam for all sections of ARA 601C. The Registrar’s Office has not
yet set dates for the exam and the make-up exam. We will inform you of the dates as soon as they become available
to us. You are expected to take the final during the uniform scheduled time.
The listening comprehension section of the exam will be given on the last day of classes. The written section of the
exam will be during the final examination period. The Registrar’s Office will publish the Final Exam Schedule
approximately three weeks prior to the end of the semester. DO NOT PLAN TO LEAVE TOWN UNTIL AFTER THE LAST
DAY OF THE FINAL EXAM PERIOD.
Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies:
Number/Letter grade equivalents are:
 94-100       A        87-89.9          B+      77-79.9        C+     67-69.9        D+        Below 60 F
 90-93.9      A-       84-86.9          B       74-76.9        C      64-66.9        D
                       80-83.9          B-      70-73.9        C-     60-63.9        D-
        Grades on the border between two letter grades (89.9 for instance) may or may not be rounded up to the
         next higher letter grade, at the instructor’s discretion.
        Your final class grade will be based on your final weighted average in the class (including the final exam
         grade).
        In order to continue to the next level of Arabic, you must have a grade of C or better. A grade of C- is not
         sufficient to pass to the next level.
        If you take the course Pass/Fail, you may not register for the next level of Arabic.
        No Incompletes will be given for this course.
        Auditing is not permitted.
                                                                                                                          7


                                        How to Do Well in this Class
                                         Prepared by Dr. Kristen Brustad
This class is a group effort! We can make much more progress as a class than as individuals by creating an Arabic-
speaking community, of which you will be a fully participating member. The following suggestions will help you get
the most out of the course:
1. Be an active learner. The approach we use here at UT depends on you learning new material at home, and
encourages you to use analytical and logical thinking to master grammar a little bit at a time. You will learn better and
remember more when you are able to answer your own questions. Active learners often have questions that reflect
their engagement with the material. Take initiative in class and on homework: this effort will be rewarded both in
your grade and in your language ability. Feel free to write us questions on specific language features in your daily
homework—just remember to be specific.
2. Put yourself out there. Language learning requires you to make mistakes, both in your assignments and in front of
your peers. In this class, you will never be penalized for a mistake that you make when trying something new. You will
be corrected in class. Feedback from your instructors is intended to support you as you develop your language
proficiency, and not as criticism.
3. Personalize vocabulary. You will remember vocabulary when you “own” it. Make words relevant to your life by
thinking of what you can say about yourself with them. Write extra sentences that are meaningful to you so that the
vocabulary becomes “yours” and expresses something about your world.
4. Prepare for active participation in class by anticipating what you will do. You should soon be able to predict what
kinds of activities will be performed and how. As you study new material and complete assignments before each class,
think about how you will use the new material. This will help you to prepare for the activities we’ll be doing in class.
5. Develop your memorization skills. Experiment with different techniques, combining listening, speaking and writing
together as much as possible. Cross-train: Try the following and find what combination of techniques works best for
you:
      listening to words and repeating them aloud—not once but ten or twenty times, until the word is easy for you
         to pronounce
      using flashcards—but without English definitions, and make yourself say the word aloud and use it in a phrase
         or sentence
      writing out vocabulary over and over—but remember to pronounce it out loud while you write!
      putting the words in sentences or a paragraph or story
      studying in groups and quizzing each other
      using word association techniques
      using an audio recorder to record your own dictation of phrases and then review
6. Study out loud, and repeat new words many times. The only way to train your brain and your mouth to speak this
language is by doing it aloud. Certain muscles need to be strengthened before they will be able to produce some Arabic
                                                                                                                         8


sounds correctly; studying aloud and exaggerating these sounds will help your muscles develop! Pronounce new
vocabulary words at least fifteen times, until you can say them easily and it feels natural.
7. Guess. Think about how you acquired your native language: you did not use a dictionary. Rather, you learned new
words by guessing their meaning from context, and you learned how to produce sentences by imitating and using
patterns. As adult learners, we can take some shortcuts, but guessing skills remain central to language acquisition. Do
not leave blanks on the homework, but also do not allow yourself to become frustrated with the homework; give it
your best shot, and move on. If you are not sure you have understood a sentence in the homework, you may write a
translation or a question on your homework for your instructor and/or TA to check or answer.
8. Correct yourself. Good language learners learn from their own successes and mistakes as well as those of others.
Correcting mistakes is an essential part of the learning process. In this class, you will never be penalized for a mistake
that you make when trying something new. When your instructors and classmates are speaking, be an active listener
by listening both to what they are saying and how they are saying it. Correcting the mistakes of others in your head or
in your notebook is also good practice.
9. Extend language learning beyond the classroom. Practice Arabic as much as possible. Study with classmates: ask
each other questions, brainstorm about assignments, go over materials – and do this in Arabic as much as possible.
Look out for films and cultural activities on campus and around town and go attend them. Talk to yourself in Arabic!
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your own, or that you did
not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. For more information about the UT Honor Code, please refer
to the site for Student Conduct and Academic Integrity found here:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent, or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking country, or 3)
who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to enrollment in this course must contact
the Arabic Coordinator, Dr. Olla Al-Shalchi at olla@austin.utexas.edu immediately to determine whether they can
be placed in this course. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Disabilities Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each
course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business
days before an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed.
See website below for more information: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/accommodations-and-services/.
Use of Canvas This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site
is created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and
announcements. Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu/ Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-
9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm. We strongly recommend that you subscribe to canvas notifications for
announcements and messages as Canvas will be the primary method of communication between the instructor
and students.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students All students should become familiar with the University's
official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order
to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
                                                                                                                         9


policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-
electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-
232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation
  The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
  Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
       Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
          a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
          nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
       Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
          class.
       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
       Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University
          of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
       Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
          www.utexas.edu/emergency
Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault
It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin to foster a campus environment that is free from intimidation and
one in which students may be educated to their fullest potential. Therefore, the University will not tolerate any forms
of harassment, physical abuse, threats of violence, physical assault, or any form of sexual assault, including but not
limited to acquaintance or date rape. Title IX makes it clear that violence and harassment based on sex and gender is
a Civil Rights offense subject to the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to offenses
against other protected categories such as race, national origin, LGBTQ identity, etc. If you or someone you know has
been harassed or assaulted in any way, you can find the appropriate resources here: https://titleix.utexas.edu/file-a-
report.
Voices Against Violence Program
(512) 471-3515 for information, counseling and advocacy.
UT Austin Police:
http://www.utexas.edu/police/
Dean of Students:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
Student Counseling & Health Services
http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Campus Carry
1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do not attempt to
question or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to handle this situation.
2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited, including some portions
of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible for knowing the locations that exclude concealed
                                                                                                                       10


handguns and to plan their daily activities carefully.
3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus. "About" the
person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or
handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster
must completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
4. All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times when the consequence of
your activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are going to a Rec Sports area, have a class
that requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact with other students, you might expose the handgun.
Remember that there is no storage on campus except in a privately owned vehicle.
5. Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand those passions.
However, regardless of your opinion about the legislation, you are required to follow the laws laid out by the State of
Texas, and the policies of The University of Texas at Austin. We also ask that everyone show respect toward other
members of the university community who have different views.
Important Dates
September 3rd is the last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration require the
approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
September 13th is the last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare and extenuating
circumstances. It is also the last day to drop a class for a possible refund and the last day a graduate student may,
with the required approvals, add a class.
October 31st is the last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval, withdraw from the University
or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons and 2) is the last day an undergraduate
student may change registration in a class to or from a pass/fail basis.
November 25th is the last day a graduate student may change registration in a class to or from a credit/no credit
basis.
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). Senate Bill
1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped
at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that
number.”
                                                                        ً       ً
                                         !‫وسهال يف صف اللغة العربية‬            ‫أهال‬
                                      Ahlan wa sahlan to Arabic class!
                                                                                                                      11
