EUS W356
Würzburg, Summer 2019
German History and Constitution
Unique Number: ? Summer 2019
Instructor: Dr. Peter A. Süß
E-mail: peter.suesz@uni-wuerzburg.de
Class Day/Time: M, 4 PM-6 PM (start: 4:15 PM, end: 5:45 PM)
Class Room: Philosophiegebäude Room 19, Campus Hubland Süd, Am Hubland
Office Hours: by appointment only
Office Location: Philosophiegebäude, Hubland Süd, 7 / U / 1, basement on left
Course Goal
The goal of this course is straightforward: to improve your knowledge of German History and
Constitution.
Course Objectives
By the end of this semester you should
 possess a fundamental knowledge of German history that lead to the current political
    situation
 understand the rationales of German constitution and the German democracy‘s way of
    functioning.
Course Content
In a first chronological section, the projected lecture will outline Germany’s historical
development within the last 200 years since the end of the „Holy Roman Empire of German
Nation“ in 1806 until the contemporary situation of the reunified „Federal Republic of
Germany“. Thus it will deal with many different aspects of German history starting with the
„German Federation“ in the 19th century, the foundation of a new „German Empire“ in 1871
and the First World War. It then describes the situation of Germany during the Weimar
Republic, the „Third Reich“/the Second World War and the German post-war development,
when our nation was divided into two states both being integrated in totally different political
and ideological systems – the western world respectively the communist block. Recent
problems and political changes of the last decade are also intended for discussion.
In a second section, the lecture explains the current German constitutional system, based on
the so called „Basic Law“ or „Grundgesetz“. You will learn about our elements of
constitution as the Federal President, the „Bundestag“, i.e. the first chamber of our parliament,
the „Bundesrat“, i.e. the second parliamentary chamber, the Federal Chancellor and the
Federal Constitutional Court. The structural principles of our state which are democracy, rule
of law, social welfare and federalism will be subject of the course as well as the influences of
the party system now predominant in Germany.
Language in Class
The language of the class is English, but you should feel free to switch temporarily to
German.
Texts/Readings
No general reading required, but constitutional texts and organisation charts handed out in
class will be the basis for discussion in the following meetings.
Participation
For the topic is dealt with consecutionally you will need to participate in all class sessions.
Participation includes taking an active part in class discussion, asking questions, and
answering my questions. Attendance is crucial, and unexcused absences will result in poor
grades for participation. Absences will be unexcused except in cases of documented
emergency (normally medical or family); late arrivals (30 minutes after begin of class) will


count as absences. Absences incurred because of personal travel will be unexcused. Please
check with me if you have any questions.
2
Participation Grade Profiles
A volunteers frequently and is well-prepared
B volunteers sometimes and is well-prepared
C does not usually volunteer but is usually prepared
D does not volunteer and is generally poorly prepared
F is consistently unprepared
Late Work
Late work will normally not be accepted, with the following exceptions: students can make up
work missed because of a religious holiday as long as they notify the instructor in writing at
least one week before the holiday occurs; in case of illness, documentation from a physician is
required and arrangements to make up missed work must be made promptly with the
instructor. Other cases will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
Essays
You will have to write two essays. One in the middle and one in the end of our period of eight
weeks. The essays are based on assignments related to the lectures and/or handouts in class.
These essays should be up to two pages in length and be written in your best English. They
can be typed (12 point font, Times New Roman, 1,5-spaced), should be stapled (if in paper
form), and have a title (but not a title page). These essays will be due at the end of class in the
week following the assignment or, if submitted electronically, by midnight of that day.
Journal / Presentations and Discussions / Quizzes
None
Grading
Participation: 33%
Essays: 67%
Journal: –
Presentations: –
Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability who
requires academic accommodations should present the instructor with their official letter
outlining authorized accommodations as soon as possible.
Academic Dishonesty
The instructor takes academic honesty very seriously. All work submitted for this course must
be your own. Any act of academic dishonesty will be dealt with according to the guidelines
set forth by the Dean of Students Office. If you have questions about academic dishonesty,
please see <http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php>.
Classroom Etiquette
Cell phones must be turned off in class; laptops should only be used for class-related
activities.
No food—only water. Civil respect for all viewpoints expressed, and for all of your
classmates, is expected, though agreement with any particular position is not.
Questions?
Please come talk to me if you have questions about any of these items, concerns about the
course, or need any assistance or academic advice.
Required Texts and Technologies
None
Text Excerpts (PDFs) in Canvas


None
3
Syllabus
Week I (5/27):
Basics, State theories
Week II (6/03):
Forms of government, Origin/End of states, Union of states, Separation of powers,
Development of the structure of German constitutional law,
Week III (6/10):
Whitsun Monday: no class
Week IV (6/17):
Historical development of the German state I (Beginnings till 1815)
Historical development of the German state II (1815 till 1919)
Week V (6/24):
Historical development of the German state III (1919 till 1949
Week VI (7/01):
Historical development of the German state IV (1949 till reunification)
Week VII (7/08):
Basic Law I (Principles of the German constitution: structure, state law, territory, people)
Week VIII (7/15):
Basic Law II (political parties, basic rights, rights of civil liberty, rights of inviolability, statal
guaranteed institutions, protection of the basic rights, the German „Länder“, responsibility of
legislation, responsibility of administration, responsibility of jurisdiction, the German
„Bundestag“)
Week IX (7/22):
Basic Law III (the German „Bundesrat“, the German „Bundespräsident“, the German
government: „Bundeskanzler“ and ministers, functions of federal power: legislation,
jurisdiction, the supreme constitutional court „Bundesverfassungsgericht“)


Julius-Maximilians-Universität Würzburg
Sabrina Hüttner, M.A. Philosophische Fakultät
s.huettner@uni-wuerzburg.de
 Würzburg English Language Program
Office Hours: after class
Summer School Summer Term 2019
        From Rome to Maastricht and Beyond: The History of the European Union
0. Course Description
Currently consisting of twenty-eight member states (pre-BREXIT that is) with supranational
and intergovernmental features, the European Union has not only created a political and
economic community, but also a single market by a system of laws which apply to all member
states, guaranteeing the freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capital. In this
course, we will look at the development of the European Union from the European Economic
Community (EEC), established in 1957 as a customs union, the introduction of the Euro as a
common currency adopted by fifteen member states in 1999, to the ratification of the Lisbon
Treaty in 2009. Topics presented include the idea of Europe, the foundational documents and
"founding fathers" of the EU, the economic and monetary union, how the EU is governed, the
movement of labor, immigration, and asylum, etc. Additionally, we will study and discuss
national particularities such as the German social security system, the German labor market,
etc. Differences and similarities to the U.S. will be pointed out and discussed. This course is
open to all students interested in the subject, including the US students participating in the
program of the American Studies department's summer school.
1. Calendar May 29, 2019 Introduction
June 26, 2019 How the EU is Governed (Part I) Key Terms: 2 • the Council of Ministers • the
European Council
July 3, 2019 How the EU is Governed (Part II) Key Terms: • the European Commission • the
European Parliament • the European Central Bank
July 10, 2019 The EU and / after BREXIT Key Terms: • Euroscepticism • Brexit
July 17, 2019 Movement of Labor, Immigration, and Asylum Key terms: • the Schengen
Agreement • Dublin III • the EU-Turkey Refugee Deal (2016)
July 24, 2019 Final Exam
2. Course Requirements: Regular attendance, active in-class participation. Every participant in
the seminar will be asked to do a short (5-10 minutes) presentation of one key term for this
class. For this presentation, you will have to become an expert on your topic and be able to
answer questions, so you should be well-prepared by solid research (Wikipedia.com does
NOT suffice!!). You should also prepare a handout (and/ or a PowerPoint presentation)
containing the relevant information and, of course, the works cited/ sources used. As this class
provides a survey of the history of the European Union and its economic institutions, the final
exam will be a revision of facts, dates, key terms, and the texts we have read.
Please note: You can get up to 5 ECTS credits in this class (only applies to international
students!) Here's how: 3 ECTS credits: you have to give a presentation in class (incl. a
handout or ppt) plus you have to pass the final exam 3 5 ECTS credits: you have to give a
presentation in class (incl. a handout or ppt), you have to pass the final exam, AND you have
to submit an essay (ca. 1,500 words) based on the topic of your presentation Those who are
interested in getting 5 ECTS should contact me so that I can come up with more specific
topics / questions for your paper.


3. Selected Bibliography
Bainbridge, Timothy and Anthony Teasdale (eds.) The Penguin Companion to European
Union. London: Penguin Books, 2000.
Baun, Michael J. A Wider Europe – the Process and Politics of European Enlargement.
Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2000.
Blair, Alasdair. The Longman Companion to the European Union since 1945. London:
Longman, 1999. Burgess, Michael. Federalism and European Union. The Building of Europe
1950- 2000. London: Routledge, 2000.
Jones, R.A. The Politics and Economics of the European Union. An Introductory Text.
Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2001.
 McCormick, J. Understanding the European Union. Basingstoke: Palgrave MacMillan, 2002.
Nello, Susan Senior. The European Union. Economics, Policies, and History. Maidenhead:
McGraw Hill, 2005.
Selected Websites
Website of the European Union: www.europa.eu
The OECD (Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Development): www.oecd.org
The OSCE (Organization for Co-operation and Security in Europe): www.osce.org
The European Commission: www.europa.eu/comm
The European Council: http://ue.eu/council
The European Parliament: www.eurparl.eu
 The European Central Bank www.ecd.int
