                               Introduction to the Study of Africa
                                             AFR 317C
                                    University of Texas at Austin
                                              Fall 2018
Professor: Tshepo Masango Chéry, Ph.D
Course Overview:
This introductory course on African Studies examines the social, cultural, political and
economic diversity of the African continent. It introduces students to major currents in
African Studies through an interdisciplinary lens. By engaging disciplines such as history,
politics, and economies alongside studies on culture, gender, and religion students gain a
wider perspective on Africa and its people. This study will equip students with foundational
tools to navigate more complex issues in an increasingly global world that range from
international politics to artistic production. Additionally, it exposes students to the history of
the field formation in an effort to contextualize dominant western narratives about the
African continent. It’s aim is to prepare students to critically engage Africa and some of the
most pressing concerns facing Africa(ns) at home or abroad.
Course Objectives: 1) To think critically about the distinct historical, political, and cultural
dimensions of the African continent to provide understanding for the contemporary
moment; 2) To engage African history within a global framework; 3) To consider the
development of the field of African studies in the West and its impact on higher education.
                                 GRADING & ASSIGNMENTS
Grading Policy:
Class assignments are based on a point system with an overall course total of 100 points.
Class attendance is mandatory and late assignments are not accepted. The professor will
consider medical or other emergencies with written documentation and/or prior notification
on a case-by-case basis.
                             Assignments       Points
                            Course             15 points
                            Engagement
                            Quizzes            15 points
                            Museum             25 points
                            Reflection
                            Paper
                            Presentation       20 points
                            Midterm            25 points
                            Examination
                            Total              100 points
                                                                                                 1


                             FINAL GRADE DISTRIBUTION:
  A        94-100     B+      87-89        C+     77-79       D+      67-69      F Below 60 pts
  A-       90-93      B       83-86        C      73-76       D       63-66
                      B-      80-82        C-     70-72       D-      60-62
                                    Assignment Descriptions
Course Engagement (Total: 15 points)
         African Studies in a broad sense is very likely unfamiliar and even foreign to you. This
means attendance at every class is among the minimum requirements for success. It will be
incredibly difficult for you to do well in this class if you do not attend the lectures regularly.
Successful students rely on lecture notes alongside the text. These students also come to class
prepared and ready to actively engage all assigned texts. This requires reading and reflecting
on the text as well as being prepared to pose relevant questions, provide comments, and
feedback on the reading for each class period. In other words, you must have an active voice
in the class. We will employ various strategies to encourage your participation beyond simply
speaking-up in class. You can always actively ignite and join discussions via the discussion
forum on Canvas. Plan on posing (via email or in class itself) at least one thoughtful question
or comment at least every two weeks to ensure your participation. You are also welcomed and
encouraged to use social media to discuss various components of the course (be prepared to
share your posts and tweets with your classmates as well as with me). Nevertheless, each
student is allowed three unexcused absences during the course of the semester. Each
additional (unexcused) absence will result in a 5-point deduction from your final grade.
*Absences Due to Athletics or University Activities
Any athlete competing for UT on an NCAA or club level team needs to notify me as soon as
possible about any absences. Written documentation from the Athletic department will be
required for accommodations to be given.
Your success in this course depends on close reading and engagement with the texts (readings,
films, video clips, web links and information posted to Canvas), as well as active and informed
participation in class discussions. You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site
and your email regularly for additional texts and announcements.
Your class participation grade will be based on attendance and meaningful participation in class
discussions. Meaningful participation is taken to be analytic engagement with the texts and
course themes in class discussions (both in the classroom and in virtual classroom space i.e.
Facebook), not vague commentary or generalizations. Each student is expected to come to
class prepared to participate actively in class discussions each week. This includes but is not
limited to doing the assigned reading and preparing thoughtful questions to share with the
class. You are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the readings.
Those students who take the initiative to engage critically with the readings and themes of the
class and actively participate in class discussions by sharing their ideas and thoughts openly
and respectfully on a regular basis will graded highly. Those who do not participate in class
discussions unless called upon will be graded down. Always be prepared to speak when you are
called upon.
                                                                                                2


In-Class Assignments: Students will also be graded on their thoughtful completion of in-class
assignments. In-class assignments will be assigned throughout the semester at the discretion
of the instructor.
Quizzes (Total: 15 points)
There will be several quizzes that cover major concepts, definitions, and ideas at various
moments in the semester (most will be unannounced with the exception of the map quiz).
For the map quiz, all students will be expected to be familiar with the cities, towns and
regions, that we will study this semester. The list of all of these categories will be provided in
the second week of the semester to get students acclimated to the geography of Africa.
Other quizzes will reflect concepts and ideas that were presented in previous lectures,
reading that is due for the class period, and or information posted on Canvas. The purpose
of these quizzes is to hold you accountable for these ideas and to highlight important aspects
of the course that will be reflected in both the midterm examination.
Midterm Examination (Total: 25 points)
There will be an in-class midterm exam part way through the semester. We will discuss the
format as well as sample questions in class together. All your answers to this exam must be entirely
of your own making. Working with someone else on the exam in any way will be interpreted as academic
dishonesty and will be reported.
Museum Reflection Paper (Total: 25 Points)
This project requires you to choose one image from the exhibits we review on the African
continent. Your task is to analyze this image in an effort to provide some critical insight for
an outside reader. You will be given the opportunity to think through some of the ideas you
will use to produce the final entry. Your final analysis, in the form of a single-spaced two-
page paper, of the source will be published online depending on the quality of your work.
Each entry will include the image and your analysis in an effort to provide critical historical
information and contextual analysis for outside readers.
The entry MUST:
(1.) Provide a BRIEF description of the image to provide visual context. The description of
the image should provide an introduction to the historical period, the key figures, and the
issues at stake but in a way that asserts your main reading of the image.
(2.) Clearly identify and articulate the major argument(s) or narrative you make in the digital
entry upfront. In short, you must define the focus of your paper by making a clear and
concise thesis statement that demonstrates your thinking/intellectual vantage point about
the primary source.
(3.) Explain how the image might inform, challenge, and/or expand your understanding of
Africa, Africans, and African related subjects by using specific examples and details. This
may require limited outside research and or discussions with your professor during office
hours. You must consider specific portions of your primary source (and not generalizations)
in your entry, which might require citation.
(4.) Use the conclusion to describe some of the larger implications for the arguments you are
                                                                                                  3


making about your image.
Essays must be a MINIMUM of 2 pages (and no more than 3.5 pages) in length, typed (in 12-
point font), single-spaced with standard 1” margins. It must also be free of grammatical
errors/typos and use proper citation techniques specific to the discipline of history (Chicago
Manual Style). Please do not use any other form of citation.
Museum Entry Presentation: (Total 20 points)
Students are required to present their analysis of the image in a 15-min presentation during
class. Details of this assignment will be provided in class.
                                            Class Schedule
*As the professor of this course, I reserve the right to deviate or modify parts of this
schedule. All changes will include advanced written notice on Canvas.
 DATE/TOPIC                                   READINGS                              ASSIGNMENT
 Week 1                Required Reading:
 9/3-9/5               Karen Attiah, “Louis Linton Just Wrote The
                       Perfect White Savior Narrative: Finally, one
                       narrative that nails every cliché of the genre,” July
                       6, 2016, The Washington Post
                       https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2016
                       /07/06/louise-linton-just-wrote-the-perfect-white-savior-in-
                       africa-story/?noredirect=on&utm_term=.6b3141f48671
                        “Zambian Embassy Slams Louise Linton
                       Memoir,” July 11, 2016, The Scotsman: Scotland’s
                       National Newspaper
                       https://www.scotsman.com/news/zambian-
                       embassy-slams-louise-linton-memoirs-1-4174540
 Week 2                No Class 9/3 Labor Day
 9/10 - 9/12
                       Required Reading:
                       Wainaina, Binyavanga, “How Not to Write
                       About Africa”, Granta 92.
                       http://www.granta.com/Archive/92/How-to-
                       Write-about-Africa/Page-1
                       Wainaina, Binyavanga, “How to Write About
                       Africa II: The Revenge”
                       http://www.bidoun.org/magazine/21-bazaar-
                       ii/how-to-write-about-africa-ii-the-revenge-by-
                       binyavanga-wainaina/
                       Watch YouTube Film: Chimamanda Ngozi
                       Adichie, “The Danger of a Single Story”
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=D9Ihs241zeg
                                                                                              4


Week 3        Required Reading:
9/17 - 9/19   M. McNulty, “The Contemporary map of Africa,”
              ed. Phyllis Martin and Patrick O‘Meara, Africa, 9-
              22.
Week 4        Watch the Film: African Americans Many Rivers       Map Quiz
9/24 – 9/26   to Cross with Henry Louis Gates. Episode 1:         9/24
              Earliest Africans
Week 5        Required Reading: R.O. Collins and J.M. Burns,
10/1 – 10/3   Chapter 18: “The European Conquest of Africa,”
              A history of Saharan Africa (Cambridge University
              Press, 2007), 265-279.
              A.A. Boahen, “Chapter 2: The Imposition of the
              Colonial System: Initiatives and Response,” African
              Perspectives on Colonialism
Week 6        Required Reading:
10/8– 10/10   W. Rodney, Chapter 6.1: “Colonialism as a System
              for Underdeveloping Africa,” How Europe
              Undeveloped Africa (New York: Black Classic Press,
              2012), 320-351.
              http://abahlali.org/files/3295358-walter-
              rodney.pdf
Week 7        Watch YouTube Film: Africa A Voyage of              Midterm
10/15 – 10/17 Discovery Episode 7: the Rise of Nationalism        Examination
                                                                  10/17
Week 8        Required Reading:
10/22 – 10/24 Arit John, "Why the All-Ivy League Story Stirs Up
              Tensions Between African Immigrants and Black
              Americans, April 1, 2014, The Wire: News From
              the Atlantic
              V. Harding, The Vocation of a Black Scholar
Week 9        Required Reading:
10/29 – 10/31 Ronald H Chilcote and Martin Legassick, “The
              African Challenge to American Scholarship in
              Africa,” Africa Today, 18,1 (Jan 1971), 4-11.
Week 10       P. T. Zeleza, The Perpetual Solitudes & Crisis of
11/5 – 11/7   African Studies in the United States,” 44,5, Africa
              Today (Apr-June 1997), 193-210.
              Watch YouTube Film: “Shutting Down the
              Rainbow Nation: #FeesMustFall
                                                                              5


              https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ksgrJyOr
              d7A
Week 11       D. Moyo, Dead Aid: Why Aid is Not Working and
11/12 – 11/14 How There is A Better Way for Africa (New York:
              New York, Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2009), 3-9;
              D. Moyo, Dead Aid: Why Aid is Not Working and
              How There is A Better Way for Africa (New York:
              New York, Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 2009), 28-35.
              “Finding Simple and Creative Solutions,” The
              Leonard Lepoate Show
              https://www.wnyc.org/radio/#/ondemand/3541
              74
Week 12       M. Hunter, Love in the Time of Aids: Inequality,
11/19 – 11/21 Gender, and Rights in South Africa (Bloomington:
              University of Indiana Press, 2010) 205-215; 215-
              226.
Week 13       No class 11/23 – Thanksgiving holiday
11/26 – 11/28
              Required Reading:
              A. Cornwall, “Introduction: Perspectives on
              Gender in Africa,” in Readings in Gender in Africa,
              ed. Andrea Cornwall (Indiana University Press,
              2005), pp. 1-19.
              M. Bloom & H. Matfess, “Women as Symbols and
              Swords in Boko Haram’s Terror, PRISM,
              6,1(March 2016).
Week 14       Presentations                                       Presentations
12/3 – 12/5                                                       all Week
Week 15       Last Class                                          Museum
12/10                                                             Reflection
                                                                  Paper Due
                                                                                6
