RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                       Fall 2019
   WRITING FOR GAMES
                               RTF 344M/AET 337
                         CMA 6.174 | Tuesdays & Thursdays 5 - 6:15pm
           Professor: Susan O’Connor | email: susanoconnor@utexas.edu | text: (512) 565-6124
           Oﬃce Location and Hours: 6.166 (or online via video) T & Th 6:15 - 7:45
Welcome to this course on writing for video games! I’m glad you’re here.
Why study writing for games?
Because it gives us a chance to take a close look at how two of the most powerful forces in our
lives come together: namely, the stories we tell, and the technology we use.
Stories and technology connect us with the world around us — and with each other. One is peanut
butter, the other is chocolate. We are still learning how to get those great tastes to taste great
together.
At its core, interactive storytelling is a form of dramatic writing, just like theater or television. But
what makes it exciting and weird is that the writer does not control the story; the audience does.
Creatives (like you) have only just begun to explore the storytelling possibilities in this field.
All semester long, we will be exploring:
                                         How games work, how stories work,
                                                       and how they work together
Why is this course important?
Because we are are a turning point. Games aren’t new, but they aren’t old yet, either. Game makers
aren’t done experimenting. They’re still exploring new and diﬀerent ways to tell interactive stories.
We’ve seen some success and some failures - but nothing’s written in stone.
This period of exploration and discovery has happened before. In the 1920s and ‘30s, writers
invented new ways to tell stories, using that exotic technology called film. Writers today are playing
University of Texas at Austin                                                                                  1


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                  Fall 2019
around with games, digital media, VR, and augmented reality. They have questions, lots of
questions. What does it mean, to share the story with the audience? What new possibilities does
that open up for us? What can we do now, that we could never do before?
The discoveries we make in the next few years could shape games (and stories) for decades to
come - and this class can be the beginning of that adventure for you.
What will I know, understand, and be able to do by the end of this
course?
By the end of this course, you will be able to:
        • Understand and recognize the building blocks of games
        • Describe the ways in which a game is designed for a player, and his/her motivation
        • Recognize the fundamentals of story - the ways in which every story is the same, regardless
          of the medium
        • Identify the the seven steps of story structure at work inside game narratives, and how they
          work together to create the spine of the story
        • Compare and contrast how story is structured in both traditional and interactive stories, to
          see how games change that structure
        • Understand the tools writers use to create characters
        • Explain the unique role characters play in a game narrative
        • Describe how worlds shape stories
        • Critically evaluate a game narrative, with evidence to support that critique
Students may vary in their competency levels on these abilities. You can expect to acquire these
abilities only if you honor all course policies, attend class regularly, complete all assigned work in
good faith and on time, and meet all other course expectations of you as a student.
What skills will I develop?
Over the course of the semester, you will develop strengths in the following areas:
        • Communication skills, both written and verbal
        • Critical thinking skills
        • Design-thinking skills, including emotional intelligence and empathy
        • Creative flexibility - the ability to generate and revise content under tight deadlines
University of Texas at Austin                                                                             2


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                Fall 2019
What materials will I need?
1. The Art of Game Design: A Book Of Lenses, Third Edition by Jesse Schell ($25.50 to rent
     through Amazon)
2. The Anatomy of Story, by John Truby ($11.69 on Amazon)
3. A subscription to SquareCap: https://info.squarecap.com ($12)
On Canvas you’ll find class slides and other materials.
You will also need access to a few movies and games, including (but not limited to) Florence,
Journey, Brothers, & Control. We will discuss specifics in class.
How will you teach this class?
This class relies heavily discussions and small-group work, both inside and outside of class.
Lectures will be kept as short as possible. The best way to learn is to learn by doing, so come to
class ready to Do. Class participation is an important part of your grade.
Can I use my laptop in class?
If we are not actively working on a project in class, laptops are closed and put away. When students
are surfing the web, responding to e-mail, instant messaging each other, and otherwise not devoting
their full attention to the topic at hand they are doing themselves and their peers a major disservice.
Those around them face additional distraction. Fellow students cannot benefit from the insights of
the students who are not engaged. Faculty oﬃce hours are spent going over class material with
students who chose not to pay attention, rather than truly adding value by helping students who
want a better understanding of the material or want to explore the issues in more depth. Students
with real needs may not be able to obtain adequate help if faculty time is spent repeating what was
said in class. There are often cases where learning is enhanced by the use of laptops in class.
Faculty will let you know when it is appropriate to use them.
What about my phone?
No phones. Period. Phones and wireless devices are turned oﬀ (not just on ‘silent’). They prevent
you and those around you from learning. Learning requires mentally manipulating concepts; multi-
tasking keeps that from happening. You (or your parents) have paid good money for you to be in this
class. For the short time we are together, let’s give each other our full attention.
University of Texas at Austin                                                                           3


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                Fall 2019
How do I succeed in this class?
• Be prepared. Do the readings, play the games, come ready to work. We will be doing a lot of
   work in-class, and you want to be able to participate fully. (There will be quizzes.)
• Help others when you can. Your attendance and your level of participation - in conversations, in
   workshops and in online discussions - will be part of your overall grade. Bring your whole self to
   class. You will be learning from each other as much as you will be learning from me.
• Ask for help when you need it. This class is a combination of left-brain and right-brain work, and
   it can be challenging in ways you may not expect. Ask for help when you need it.
• Go pro. Professionals deliver work that is clean and well-written. Set this as a standard for
   yourself, too. Before turning in writing assignments, use spellcheck.
This class is designed with your success in mind. I’m here to help.
This class carries a Writing Flag. What does that mean?
In this class - as in any Writing Flag course - you will:
• Write regularly, several times during the
   semester, and complete writing projects that                  What if I need extra help
   are substantial, such as critical essays and                       with my writing?
   creative work;
                                                          Visit the Moody Writing Support program.
• Rewrite your work, incorporating feedback
   from the instructor, TA, and fellow students;                   They offer peer coaching,
                                                                 writing study halls, and more.
   and
                                                            http://sites.utexas.edu/moodywriting/
• Earn at least one-third of your grade - if not
   more - through your writing assignments.
This class also carries an Independent Inquiry Flag.
What does that mean?
Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course
of a semester, providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question,
problem, or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
University of Texas at Austin                                                                           4


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                        Fall 2019
What does our class schedule look like?
It looks awesome.
Week One
The Designer Creates An Experience
Week Two
The Experience Rises Out Of A Game
The Game Consists of Elements
Week Three
The Game Is Made For A Player
The Experience Is In the Player’s Mind
Week Four
The Player’s Mind Is Driven By The Player’s Motivation
Experiences Can Be Judged By Their Interest Curves
Week Five
One Kind Of Experience Is The Story
Week Six
Story And Game Structures Can Be Artfully Merged With Indirect Control
Weeks Seven and Eight
The Seven Key Steps of Story Structure
Weeks Nine And Ten
Worlds Contain Characters (Schell); Character (Truby)
Weeks Eleven and Twelve
Stories and Games Take Place in Worlds (Schell) and Story World (Truby)
Weeks Twelve and Thirteen
Final deliverable: Game Narrative Review
University of Texas at Austin                                                   5


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                 Fall 2019
How will I be graded?
Your final grade will be based on the following:
     Attendance & Participation: 20%
     Quizzes & Formative Assessments: 20%
     Three Essays: 10% each, for a total of 30%
     Game Narrative Review: 30%
                  Game Narrative Review    Attendance +    Formative Assessments
                  Essays
                                30%                       30%
                                    20%                 20%
University of Texas at Austin                                                            6


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                 Fall 2019
Got it. So how did you become a game writer?
After graduating from UT Austin (B.A. Art History), I started my career as a writer at a small game
studio down on Congress Avenue. Since then, I’ve worked on over 25 game titles. Some were great,
some were terrible. The great ones include BioShock, Tomb Raider, and Far Cry 2. Past clients
include Telltale Games, Lucas Arts, Ubisoft, and Electronic Arts. You can find my portfolio at
susanoconnorwriter.com
If you are interested in learning more about careers in the game industry, I’m here to help you
navigate that world.
I’m looking forward to working with you and exploring this material together.
- Professor O’Connor
University of Texas at Austin                                                                            7


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                               Fall 2019
Policies and Resources
Classroom Policies
Grading policies
The course grade will be computed as follows. Grading is based on mastery of course material,
attendance, and completion of assignments. I DO NOT ACCEPT LATE ASSIGNMENTS. Class
grade curves are generally avoided, I do not round grades up or down.
           A 94.0 and above A. 90.0-93.9
           B+ 87.0-89.9
           B 84.0-86.9
           B- 80.0-83.9
           C+ 77.0-79.9
           C 74.0-76.9
           C- 70.0-73.9
           D+ 67.0-69.9
           D 64.0-67.9
           D- 60.0-63.9
           F 62.9 and below
Assignment grades will be posted on Canvas and you are welcome to raise questions about
potential data entry or calculation errors with me as they are entered (7 calendar days from date
entered). Important Note: no credit is given for late assignments. However, the final grade
assigned in the course is an informed and final evaluation and not open for discussion or
negotiation. Any lobbying eﬀorts (i.e. asking for a higher grade because you want one, need one,
etc.) will not be tolerated.
To respect each student’s privacy, individual grades are never discussed over email or phone. You
may email me with concerns about missing grades, but if you wish to verify a specific grade, you
must meet me in person.
Policy on late work
As you know by now, no credit is given for late assignments. Please communicate with me if you
hare having problems keeping to the schedule. It is better to talk through problems than ignore
them.
University of Texas at Austin                                                                          8


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                 Fall 2019
Policy on absences
This is a discussion-based course and students learn as much or more from interacting with each
other than from the formal presentations by the instructor. When all students attend every class it is
easier to develop a culture and atmosphere conducive to sharing experiences and discussing
opinions. Formal attendance will be taken each class, and you are expected to participate actively
in discussions and class exercises. You will be expected to be able to answer questions and ask
relevant and thoughtful questions. When evaluating any individual’s contribution, quantity and
volume are much less important than quality and perceptiveness.
Attendance will be recorded through SquareCap (www.squarecap.com). It is an EXPRESS violation
of the academic integrity policy to let anyone log-in for you using SquareCap. There are no warnings
and no leniency regarding this policy.
You should view class attendance as you would work attendance and communicate to me (by e-
mail) when you must miss a class. You are given two (2) allowed absences for the semester. You
are expected to manage these two absences to cover all expected and unexpected class absences.
If your absences exceed two days, your grade will be reduced accordingly. Although you get two
free absences, you WILL NOT be allowed to make-up missed in-class assignments or quizzes.
In-class assignments and quizzes are given randomly throughout the semester and you MUST be
present in class to participate and get credit.
Genuine emergencies and serious illness will be handled on a case-by-case basis as will
accommodations for student athletes. My flexibility will be determined, in part, by your standing in
the class in terms of participation and attendance record.
The ONLY time an absence can be exempt from this policy is for observance of a religious holy day
(see University policies below) or in the case of exigent circumstances.
Does this sound severe? It is! But that is because I want you to have a great experience. We only
have fourteen weeks together; let’s make the most of it.
Important Note. The course syllabus is subject to change at the sole discretion of the instructor.
Students will be given reasonable notice of any changes and all changes will be posted on Canvas.
As a final note, by continuing in this class, you acknowledge that you understand everything in this
syllabus, will take responsibility for clarifying any questions you have with me directly and agree to
the standards and expectations outlined here.
University of Texas at Austin                                                                            9


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                 Fall 2019
University Policies
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://ugs.utexas.edu/vick/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/about/
• Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
• Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
• Please notify me if any of the physical space is diﬃcult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it
is assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether
collaboration is encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy, which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
University of Texas at Austin                                                                           10


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                  Fall 2019
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help
you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and
you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
The Writing Flag faculty committee also provides statements on Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
and Plagiarism Detection Software
Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is considered
plagiarism, a serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe penalties. Copying
someone else’s work, buying a paper and submitting it as your own, copying and pasting text (even
with changes), or borrowing images from an online source, are some examples of plagiarism. Even if
you plagiarize accidentally, you can be held responsible and penalized.
Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional. When you
are unsure about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor (who is already an expert in the
discipline) what is appropriate in the context of your assignment. Consultants at The University
Writing Center can also help you determine whether you are citing sources correctly—and they have
helpful guides online for using direct quotations and paraphrasing. Reviewing those skills will help
you feel confident that you are handling sources professionally in your writing.
You can read the University’s definition of plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty in
Sec. 11–402 of the Student Conduct Code. For more information, visit the Dean of Students’ site.
Plagiarism Detection Software
If plagiarism detection software such as if TurnItIn will be used in a class, please include a statement
such as the following in your syllabus:
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted
material to an archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other
methods may also be used to determine if a paper is the student’s original work. Regardless of the
results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member will make the final determination as to
whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
University of Texas at Austin                                                                            11


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                 Fall 2019
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your class. In addition to the Moody Writing Center,
mentioned earlier in the document, you have access to:
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 diﬀerent subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Moody Writing Support Program
The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3.322, oﬀers one-on-one assistance
without charge to undergraduates seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of
communication. We have student specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, Communication &
Leadership and PR & Advertising. In addition, we oﬀer workshops to strengthen core writing skills in
each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may guarantee their time by
booking half-hour appointments on our website for assistance during all stages of
the writing process. Writing coaches also will take drop-ins if they are not working with
appointments. http://sites.utexas.edu/moodywriting/
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are
options available for support.
For immediate support:
• Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor             |
   512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
• CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
-    |CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
• Brief assessments and referral services
University of Texas at Austin                                                                           12


RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                  Fall 2019
• Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
• MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
• Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Oﬃce of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an oﬃcial representative.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services oﬃce. www.utexas.edu/emergency
University of Texas at Austin                                                                            13
