                                                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                                                        Department of Slavic and Eurasian Studies
                                                            http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/slavic
                                                                                     Summer I 2020
                                                                             June 4 – July 9, 2020
First-Year Russian Online 1
RUS 406
Course Syllabus
Course Canvas Site: First-Year Russian Online 1
Language Lab: MWF 10:00 – 11:00 AM (CST)
Instructor: Heather Rice, Ph.D.
Office Hours: Thursdays 12:00 PM (noon) and by appointment in Zoom.
E-mail: hrrice@utexas.edu
General Information:
Course Content and Overview:
Welcome to Russian online! This class is designed to introduce you to Russian language and
culture. Before you go any further, you need to know that this is an INTENSIVE SUMMER
RUSSIAN LANGUAGE COURSE. We will cover the equivalent of a semester’s worth of material
in 5 weeks.
The aim of the course is to help you develop functional proficiency in four skills: reading, writing,
listening and speaking in Russian within authentic cultural contexts. In order to develop these
skills, you will be introduced to new material on a daily basis. We will cover 7 units, each of
which gradually builds on the other.
Each unit will consist of 4 content modules, with the exception of unit 1, which will consist of 8.
You will be given an assessment upon the completion of each unit in the form of an online exam
module. Content modules comprises the bulk of the instructional material for this course.
Because language study is cumulative, you are encouraged to practice the language we are
learning every day, engage with your fellow classmates, and take part in various activities
outside of the class assignments. You are expected to complete all daily assignments and
activities and to learn the accompanying vocabulary.


Textbook and Course:
The textbook for this course «Будем на связи» is built directly into the course’s Canvas site.
You will NOT need to purchase additional textbooks.
The course will cover the following material:
    •   Unit 1: Welcome!
        This first unit will introduce you to the Russian alphabet and the sounds of Russian. You
        will learn to introduce yourself and others, as well as ask and answer simple questions.
    •   Unit 2: Life, Work, and Study
        You will learn to talk about where you and your family and friends live, work, and study,
        as well as describe your hometown and other places in the world.
    •   Unit 3: What a world!
        You will learn to describe items around you, to talk about the weather, your hobbies, and
        your favorite places. You will also learn to talk about your major and what you study.
    •   Unit 4: Make yourself at home!
        You will learn to talk about the rooms in your home and the items you do and do not
        have. You will learn to talk about your daily routines, as well as talk about what you were
        doing earlier.
    •   Unit 5: My favorite lesson…
        You will learn to describe what and who you look like, to describe your friends and
        family, to talk about your favorite places and things, express an opinion, and to say
        something is the ‘best’ or ‘the worst’. You will also learn to say you can or cannot do
        something, to say you want or do want something, and to give today’s date.
    •   Unit 6: Do you like Russian?
        You will learn to talk about your hobbies and what you do and do not like. You will learn
        to compare people and things, as well as give your opinions and impressions. You will
        learn to say when you were born and give your age.
    •   Unit 7: Where do we go now?
        You will learn to talk about going places around town and around the world using various
        forms of transportation.
There are many recommended and useful outside sources that can be found both online and in
print. Some recommended print materials that may be useful during and after this course are:
    ●   Russian/English Dictionary, such as Katzner, or Oxford.
                                                    2


  ●   Beyer, Thomas R. 501 Russian Verbs. Hauppauge: Barron’s Educational Series, Inc.,
      2007.
  ●   Cruise, Edwina. English Grammar for Students of Russian. Ann Arbor: Olivia and Hill
      Press, 1993.
  ●   Garza, Thomas. Fundamentals of Russian Verbal Conjugation for Teachers and
      Students. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt and ACTR Publications, 1993.
  ●   Gerhart, Genevra. The Russian’s World, Orlando: Houghton Mifflin, 1994.
  ●   Wade, Terence. A Comprehensive Russian Grammar. Oxford: Blackwell, 1992.
Some recommended online sources to be used in the course are:
  ●   Multitran - An online Dictionary - An online dictionary
  ●   Phonetic Keyboard - You MUST be able to type in Russian for this class. A phonetic
      keyboard is recommended.
          ○ Phonetic Keyboard for Mac
          ○ Phonetic Keyboard for Windows
  ●   Викисловарь - A great reference site for grammatical and prosodic (sound) information
      about Russian words.
Course Requirements
  ●   Instructional Materials:
      As stated above there is no printed textbook for the course. All content is built directly
      into Canvas. Modules contain instructional (non-graded) material, practice exercises,
      and all graded assignments. You are responsible for everything! Go through EACH
      and EVERY item in your daily modules. Do not rely solely on the Canvas dashboard to
      navigate this course!
          ○   Modules in Canvas:
              The majority of this course will take place in Canvas. You are expected to do
              work on a daily basis, even though we will not be meeting every day.
              Daily practice is essential. You should expect to spend approximately 3-4 hours
              per module to be successful in this course. Because this is an intensive summer
              language course, you will be doing approximately 1 ½ modules each week day,
              which works out to between 4 and 6 hours a day of coursework. Coursework may
              take the form of instructional videos, grammar or culture-based texts, vocabulary
              drills, partner work and interviews, message board discussions, quizzes, and
              various other language-based tasks designed to build your knowledge of and skill
              with Russian.
                                                 3


          Each ‘module’ contains assignments and activities for which you are responsible.
          Any graded assignments or quizzes will usually be DUE by midnight on the
          date specified in the assignment. When in doubt, check an assignment’s due
          date. This is also visible from your dashboard. Canvas will alert you when an
          assignment is due.
● Graded Materials:
     ○    Assignments themselves can include downloading pdf forms to fill out and
          return, recording and uploading video or audio, and other work you cannot do
          directly on Canvas.
     ○    Quizzes in Canvas are equivalent to typical workbook exercises. You are
          typically given 2-3 chances to do them. They are also often automatically scored.
     ○    Discussions may be text only, audio, or video (instructions will be given on a
          case-by-case basis). You are expected to contribute to all graded discussions
          according.
  ●  Homework submission:
     Homework is anything in a non-test module that has a grade associated with it. It will
     be labeled in Canvas as belonging to the category ‘Homework’ and will come in the
     form of quizzes, assignments, and discussions.
     Homework will be due every weekday and a few times on weekend days.
     Homework will be graded and returned to you electronically. You should review any
     feedback and make any corrections. This can help you learn grammar and spelling
     rules faster than you might, otherwise.
  •  Late Policy:
     Late homework will be accepted in most but often for reduced credit. Homework may
     not be accepted after a unit exam. Plan accordingly. Do your best NOT to submit late
     work. You do NOT want to fall behind.
     If you ever realize you will not be able to make a deadline, contact me immediately.
     Test extensions will not be offered.
● Language Lab (Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays in Zoom):
  The purpose of the Language Lab is to practice what you have been learning in the
  Canvas modules. Attendance and participation in lab are required!
                                            4


      We will be using Zoom for our language labs and office hours. You will be able to
      access the Zoom room from the course homepage in Canvas.
      In Zoom you are expected to share your video and audio so we can communicate with
      each other most effectively. At times you will also be able to share your screen, upload
      files, and draw on a whiteboard. This is all to facilitate the learning of Russian.
      You will mostly be working in ‘breakout rooms’ - in small groups of 3-4 students to
      practice Russian, and we will also meet in larger groups at times.
Some lab tips:
      ●    Come to ‘lab’ dressed as you would for a traditional face-to-face class.
      ●    Dress appropriately.
      ●    Go to a quiet place! If your environment is noisy, mute yourself!
      ●    Do not eat while in lab.
      ●    Do not smoke – ever – but at least not while in lab.
      ●    Do not drink alcoholic beverages in front of your classmates in lab.
      ●    Use Gallery View (recommended) to see everyone in your group at once.
      ●    Use the Chat function as needed and always respectfully.
      ●    Ask for help when needed.
      ●    Help your classmates when you can!
      ●    Speak Russian as much as you possibly can! DON’T EVER WORRY ABOUT
           MAKING MISTAKES. IT’S THE ONLY WAY TO LEARN!
      NOTE: Our lab meetings will be recorded. This is to track attendance and it will help
      us understand how students are handling the material. We will review our videos as
      needed for these reasons only - to track your attendance and for instructional purposes.
      The videos will be used for and contained within our class only and will not be published
      or used outside of class.
      Conduct:
      Conduct yourself as you would if you were in a traditional face-to-face classroom. Be
      respectful to all, including yourself. Belligerent or disruptive behavior is never
      acceptable. If you are removed, you will not be able to rejoin lab for that day.
Attendance & Participation:
   •  Daily: The majority of the course will be conducted online in Canvas. Although you
      will be doing work every day, you will be able to work at hours that suit you and you do
      not need to work through the materials all in one sitting. You may break up the work as
      needed throughout your day. The only exception to this is Language Lab.
                                                  5


   •  Language Lab Wednesdays: We will meet 3 times a week (MWF) from 10-11:00 AM
      (CST).
          o   Attendance is MANDATORY for all Language Lab meetings held on
              Wednesdays.
          o   Please note that tardiness is discouraged as it is very disruptive to others in the
              class. Leaving early is likewise not appreciated. We know technical difficulties
              can arise from time to time, of course, but please plan accordingly. Do not show
              up late and do not plan to leave early. If you miss more than 10 minutes of lab,
              you will not receive attendance credit for that day.
          o   Participation IS required in Language Lab. You are expected to participate in
              lab for the duration of lab, practicing Russian language forms and engaging in
              assigned activities with your classmates as directed.
      Having read that, keep in mind you have signed up to learn Russian. This requires LOTS
      of practice. Language Lab is where we, as a whole class, will be able to do it. The key
      to success (in all of the skills) is PRACTICE. Do not be afraid to be a little silly, to
      make mistakes, and simply to be brave and TRY.
          ●   You are allowed 1 absence from Language Lab - no questions asked. ANY
              other absences (for whatever reason) will not be excused. In other words, do not
              use this absence unless you have to. Plan accordingly.
Technical Requirements:
    ○ Strong & reliable internet connection
      The course content relies heavily on video. Your connection should allow you to stream
      video easily and participate in online video calls and conferences, such as we’ll be doing
      in Language Lab and student meetings.
    ○ Reliable headphones
      Make sure you have a reliable, working set of headphones. You may not always need
      them for lab or student meetings, but have them on hand for when you do.
    ○ Working web-cam
      We will be using video during Language Lab, ’Discussions’, student Zoom meetings, and
      some ‘Quizzes’. Video is required.
      Major technical problems need be resolved within the first week of class, any
      issues relating to Zoom participation and your internet connection. Plan
      accordingly.
                                                  6


        Minor technical problems that might happen on a daily basis need to be resolved as
        quickly as possible. If you miss more than 10 minutes of any lab, you will be
        counted absent for the day. Your presence benefits not just you but your entire
        class.
Communication
Your instructor will respond to email communication as quickly as possible, although you should
allow at least 24 hours for a response.
It is CRUCIAL that you, as the student, ask questions about the material and bring up
ANYTHING that is unclear as you work through your assignments. As your instructor, I am here
to help you, and your questions will only make the class better for everyone. Never hesitate to
ask for help or additional information or materials.
Grade breakdown:
Testing - 35%
     ●  Unit tests (7 x 5%)
        A unit exam will be given every two weeks. Each unit exam is worth 5% of your final
        grade. The final exam will be given on the last day of classes and is also worth 5% of
        your final grade.
Homework - 30%
     ●  Canvas Quizzes – These are often auto-graded and will be used for practicing grammar
        and vocabulary.
     ●  Canvas Assignments – These will be used for writing assignments, student videos, and
        various other types of creative projects.
     ●  Canvas Discussions – These are Canvas’ equivalent of message boards – kind of like a
        micro-sized social media platform. You will often be asked to upload video and text
        responses to various prompts and to respond to your classmates.
Vocabulary – 5%
You need to learn your vocabulary. You will be given one vocabulary quiz per module.
You will have two chances to do it and it will be timed and randomized. That is, the
second time you take the quiz will NOT be like the first. You are given two chances in
case you have technical issues and just because sometimes you need a second
chance. You will not be given a third chance.
                                                  7


Participation / Attendance - 20%
As described above, attendance and participation are necessary for language learning.
Showing up is half the battle, but you must also participate.
Conversation - 5%
You will be tasked throughout the course with various conversation assignments, like interviews
and role-plays. Conversations will be recorded and will comprise 10% of your final grade.
Presentation / Research / Portfolio - 5%
On occasion, you will be given small research assignments and will be asked to present
either in Russian or in English to the rest of the class either in Lab or on video. These
projects will comprise 5% of your final grade.
94 – 100 = A
90 – 93 = A-
88 – 89 = B+
84 – 87 = B
80 – 83 = B-
78 – 79 = C+
74 – 77 = C
70 – 73 = C-
68 – 69 = D+
64 – 67 = D
60 – 63 = D-
59 and below = F
Test Dates:
Unit tests are scheduled to be published on and due by midnight on the following dates. If a
date change occurs, you will be notified in advance to be given sufficient time to prepare and
adjust your schedule:
    1.  Unit 1 Test – Thursday, June 11
    2.  Unit 2 Test – Wednesday, June 17
    3.  Unit 3 Test – Monday, June 22
    4.  Unit 4 Test – Friday, June 26
    5.  Unit 5 Test – Wednesday, July 1
    6.  Unit 6 Test – Monday, July 6
    7.  Unit 7 Test (Final Exam*) – Friday, July 10, 2020
*The unit 7 test will count as the class’ final exam. The content of the exam will focus on unit 7
content, but because each lesson builds off the previous, the final exam will presume
                                                   8


knowledge of all previously covered course material. The final exam will also be slightly longer
in length than other unit exams.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness. You
have a right to respect. You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly. You have a right to
freedom of opinion and expression. You have a right to privacy and confidentiality. You have a
right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
environment. You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No
student shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way. With these rights come
responsibilities: You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
communicating with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
overwhelming. You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always
respectful of others. •Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the
energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences. You
are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
excluded. You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding
each other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas
Honor Code
The University of Texas Honor Codes reads: “The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness and respect toward peers and community.” Students are expected to adhere to
these principles throughout the course, in dealing with the instructors, fellow students, and in
completing all assignments for the course. Your instructors will do the same.
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if
you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a previous class), you
must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web
address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Google Translate, Reverso Context (and other translators):
                                                   9


Online translators are a GREAT tool you should learn to use intelligently. I use them all the time
to check myself. They should NOT be used in place of your own work and skill. If you don’t
know how to say something, translators may or may not come up with what it is you want to say.
When you use a translator to do your work for you, you are not learning anything about Russian
language. It is also usually quite obvious when a translator has been used. You should NOT use
them to do your work for you. You may not use them on any part of an exam. If you are
suspected of having used a translator (machine or otherwise), you will be confronted with the
task of having to explain in detail the language you have submitted as your work and you may
receive a zero for the assignment or test in question. Don’t do use translators. Do your own
work.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster,
and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in
case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to
creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss
your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of
these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
                                                  10


achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle.
You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important
part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather
than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult
life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.
For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES
A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center:
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a
culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right–it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. The
following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/. Occupants of buildings on The
University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
                                                  11


Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Link to
information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in
our community, the university can: 1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or
escalating. 2.Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation. 3.Investigate and discipline violations
of the university’s relevant policies. Faculty members and certain staff members are considered
“Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to
report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must
report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be
sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for
support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                   12
