                  ALD 321: Play in Early Development Fall 2018
                       Tuesdays      11:00 am -12:30 pm in UTC 3.134
                       Thursdays     08975 (11:00 am -12:30 pm, SZB 411) David Barry
                                     08980 (11:00 am -12:30 pm, SZB 518C) Natacha Jones
                                     08985 (12:30 pm- 02:00 pm, SZB 411) Shubhi Sachdeva
                                     08990 (11:00 am -12:30 pm, SZB 426) Da Hei Ku
                                     08995 (11:00 am -12:30 pm, SZB 344) Maureen Nicol
                     Welcome to ALD 321: Play in Early Development
This course is designed to examine play from a variety of political, anthropological,
sociological, educational and social justice perspectives. In an era where play is increasingly
disappearing in schools and neighborhoods, it is essential that anyone who cares about or
for children have a deep understanding of the connections between play, learning, healthy
living and capability expansion. In this course, we critically evaluate research on play and try
to better understand the role of play in our lives and in the lives of children. We investigate
how society and culture shape the ways we think about play and how much access to play
we have in our daily lives. We talk about play experiences for children on the Autism
spectrum as well as for children who have experienced trauma. We address whether video
games count as play and how to support principles of play in an increasingly digital world.
There are two goals for this course. The first goal is to help each student value play for
children and for themselves and to have a range of theory and evidence to advocate for play.
The second goal is for students to expand their capabilities to support children’s play in ways
that increase their agency rather than try simply to control them.
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed
to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your
major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the
independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
Shubhi Sachdeva, Instructor
SZB 528D Email shubhi.sachdeva@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Thursday 11:30 am – 12:30 pm
 Teaching              Email                            Office Hours
 Assistants
  David Barry           davepbarry@utexas.edu           (SZB 528D) Thursday 12:30 – 1:30 pm
  08975
  Natacha Jones         njones@utexas.edu               (SZB 528D) Thursday 10:00 -11:00 am
  08980
                                                                                               1


  Shubhi Sachdeva        shubhi.sachdeva@utexas.edu (SZB 528D) Thursday 11:30 am – 12:30
  08985                                                 pm
  Da Hei Ku              dahei@utexas.edu               (SZB 528D) Thursday 10:00 -11:00 am
  08990
  Maureen Nicol          mnicol@utexas.edu              (SZB 528D) Thursday 10:00 -11:00 am
  08995
Required Text
Course Reading Packet - ALD 321 can be purchased on first day of classes (Tuesday) or at
Asel Art Supply 510 W. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd.
Technology Etiquette
I expect that you will use your laptop/tablet/phone in appropriate ways and at appropriate
times. There are so many ways you *could* distract yourself in class – please don’t. Stay with
us. Posting on social media any pictures or quotes from students or teachers is prohibited.
Class should be a safe place for sharing ideas without worrying about people posting it. If
you are on social media or email instead of engaging in class, you will lose participation
points.
Course Assignments
I. Participation (60 points)
Participation includes coming prepared to class, reading the assignments, appropriately
participating in class discussions and periodic attendance assignments. Regular attendance
at all class meetings is a requirement of this course: you cannot learn if you are not here. For
each class session you miss, 3-5 points will be deducted from your final grade for the course.
Each of you will be granted two Emergency Release (ER) days. Your ER excuses you from
two class sessions with no penalty. To use your ER you must notify me and your TA by email
BEFORE class. (If you fail to contact me before class, you ER will not count, and you will lose
points.) Save your two ER’s for medical issues, family demands, car trouble, etc. All other
absences are unexcused and will affect your grade. *Students will not be penalized for
absences due to the observance of religious holidays that fall on our scheduled class day. You
must give me an advance notice of these absences, so I can make the necessary
accommodations. All other absences are unexcused and will affect your grade.
For both Tuesday’s lectures and the small sections, sign-in sheets would be made available
for the first 10 minutes of class for you to mark attendance. If you are late and unable to sign,
then please check in with your TA after the class for attendance.
II. Daily Reflection (65 points total)
                                                                                               2


Before each Tuesday class you will post a reflection of the reading by 11 am on Canvas under
the Discussion tab (except for Week 1 and 15). To post, students will reply to the discussion
board created each week. Once your response is posted you will be able to see your other
classmates’ responses as well. You are free to discuss and respond to one another, but that
is not a requirement. However, glancing over each other’s work may enhance the
conversation within class. Please see below for a few reflection guidelines:
1. Your post should be approximately 250 words (excluding your 2-3 questions- see below).
2. Your writing should synthesize all the readings, not summarize.
3. Your reflection may include a few, some, or all of the following:
     • What was most compelling and striking to you in the readings? What makes you think
         more deeply in the reading in helpful and provocative ways?
     • What are the major arguments/thesis of each reading (what supporting evidence,
         facts, experiences, or data do the authors provide to support their arguments)? And,
         what are your reactions to the arguments? Are you convinced, why or why not?
     • What are specific strengths and weaknesses of the promulgated ideas? How did the
         authors support or not support their argument? Were there any perspectives missing
         in the reading?
     • How do the authors' perspectives compare and contrast across readings?
     • How does the reading content relate to your own life experience and your research
         in education? Critically reflect on this question.
Finally, ALWAYS create 2-3 robust questions from the readings that may be used for
discussion. Have a mix of larger questions that relate to the theme of the course, but also
specific questions that relate directly to what you read for that week. Include page numbers
and direct quotes where appropriate. These questions will guide discussions during small
group meetings on Thursdays.
III. Opening Activity
For each small section meeting on Thursday, students will prepare one 10-minute opening
activity that relates to the topic we will be discussing. The activity can be and is not limited
to a game, video clip, discussion questions, etc. Be creative! Students will sign-up for a
session on the first day of class.
III. Play Series
     1. Generation Play (Data due 09/13/18 and Reflection due 09/20/18 ) (25 points)
For this project, you will be asked to complete an interview with one adult about his/ her
play memories (using guiding questions that we come up with in class) and one interview
with a child (ages 3-12) about his/her experiences and ideas about play. Students will bring
                                                                                               3


data to class and the following week turn in a 1-2 page (typed, double spaced) reflection that
draws upon readings and interview data.
2. Observation of Play (Paper due 10/11/18) (25 points)
Students will observe children (0-12 year-old) playing in a public space such as a park,
museum or school for one hour and then analyze their observations using at least one
theorist and/or reading from class in a 3-4 page (typed, double spaced) paper. You are also
encouraged to use your experiences from the interviews and connect it to your observations
in the paper. Possible areas of focus include the ways children engage in play, welcome or
don’t welcome others into their play, how physical materials and nature play a role in the
play, how adults interact with children during play, ways that certain things encourage and
discourage play and how regulations impact play.
*Be sure to be respectful of children. You do NOT have permission to film or take
photographs – only observations from a distance.
3. Environment Design for Play (Due 11/01/18) (25 points)
Due: Environment redesign map
Students will take a picture of an inside space (classroom, family room, hospital, library,
outdoor space, supermarket, museum, hallway) and change the design to allow for play –
this includes attention to time and space as well as what people do, what is around for them
and how it is regulated. Students can map, draw arrows, stick pictures, create models or
narratively explain the readings/ concepts/ theorists/ researchers that inspire each change.
4. Equity and Development (Due 11/20/18) (25 points)
Write a paper or create some type of a visual demonstration (e.g., poster, ppt presentation,
or video of yourself) to explain how play and development is impacted by equity issues. The
equity issues include, but are not limited to, race, class, ability, gender, sexuality, language or
immigration status. Select one of these equity issues and provide three related examples to
articulate how play is affected by that particular equity issue. You can draw examples from
legitimate news sources, articles, reports, or books (NOT from the reading packet). You may
use the readings to support the examples you have found from the other sources. One
example can be your own experience You can also write about your own experience(s) as a
child, aunt/uncle, or parent and reflect on how (in)equity issues played a part in your or the
child’s/children’s play and development Please cite your sources according to APA style.
IV. Play Advocacy Project (Final) (Presentation due 12/6/18, Paper due 12/10/18) (70
points)
Due: Play advocacy artifact Cover sheet (found on Canvas)
      Reflection paper (2-3 pages, double-spaced)
      Proof of Project’s execution (i.e. screenshot, forwarded email, etc)
                                                                                                  4


This project is meant to demonstrate knowledge of the importance of play and a committed
effort to advocating on behalf of young children. Using discussions and readings from the
class as a guide, students will create an advocacy piece that is meant to publicly explain the
importance of play. This is meant to be a flexible but high quality creative project. For
example, students could write a general op-ed for the Texas Tribune on the importance of
play. Students could choose to advocate for play in certain specific environments such a
schools, doctors’ offices or other locations. Students could choose a particular group of
people/organization to focus on with their project. Other possible project options include
policy brief, podcast, graphics poster, graphic novel, social media campaign. Students will be
graded according to the play advocacy project guidelines/ cover sheet found on canvas.
 Attendance and Weekly Engaged                      60 points
 Participation                                      (15 weeks x 4 pts each week)
 Reflections                                        65 points (13 weeks x 5 points each week)
 Opening Activity                                   5 points
 Play Series                                        100 points
                                                    (4 projects x 25 pts each)
 Play Advocacy Project                              70 points
 Total                                              300 Points
Class Policies and Grading Criteria
    •   All papers, assignments, and projects must be completed and submitted through
        canvas by the start of the class session on which they are due. The grade on any late
        work will be decreased by 5 points for each day beyond the due date unless
        arrangements have been made with your TA in advance.
    •   Any students with travelling schedules need to submit their schedules to their
        respective TAs in the first week of class.
    •   If you leave from class early, then it would be counted as an absence and attendance
        points would be deducted.
    •   Meeting the basic requirements of an assignment neither constitutes nor guarantees
        an A. Please refer to the University of Texas at Austin's grading system that defines
        the following letter grades: A (excellent); B (above average); C (average); D (pass); F
        (failure). In this class A= 93-100; A- =90-92; B+=87-89; B=83-86; B- =80-82; C+=77-
        79; C=73-76; C- =70-72: D=60-69; F= 59 or below
    •   Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
        disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
        dismissal from the University. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services web
        site at <http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/> for more information about
        scholastic dishonesty.
    •   Students with specific learning needs should meet with me within the first week of
        classes so that all necessary accommodations can be made. Students with disabilities
                                                                                              5


may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
                                                                             6


                          Course Content and Organization
Week 1: Introduction to the Course – What is Play?
8-30-18 - Small Sections
   • Introduction to the Course Community
   • Housekeeping - Remind: Texas email and Canvas, Weekly activity signups
   • Overview of the course
   • Play Genealogy Maps
   • Defining Play
   • Reasons why children play
   • Discuss Reading
      READING                            Ambiguity of Play (Sutton Smith)
                                                   ** On Canvas
Week 2: How do we listen carefully to young children?
9-4-18 - Large Class
   • Principles for taking children seriously
   • Importance of listening and observation when working with children
   • Technology and listening to children
9-6-18 - Small Sections
   • Discuss Readings
   • Examples of Adult/Child Discussions
     READINGS        “We’re Many Members, but One Body”: Fostering a Healthy Self-
                     Identity and Agency in African American Boys (Wright, Counsell &
                     Tate)
                     On Listening to What the Children Say (Paley)
Week 3: What does play have to do with development? Part One
9-11-18 - Large Class
   • Domains of development
   • Impact of Piaget and Montessori
   • Theory of Minds
9-13-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Generation Play Project Data – Sharing
                                                                                      7


  DUE THIS WEEK                        Data from Interviews (Bring to class)
 READINGS            Theories of Childhood – Piaget (Harhart)
                     Playful Learning and Montessori Education (Lillard)
                     Scientist in the crib (Gopnik, Meltzoff & Kuhl)
Week 4: What does play have to do with development? Part Two
9-18-18 - Large Class
   • Expanding domains
   • Impact of Vygotsky and Erickson
9-20-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Theorist Activity – Ages & Stages/Context & Environment
  DUE THIS WEEK                                   Reflection paper
 READINGS           Vygotskian and Post-Vygotskian Views on Children’s Play
                    (Bodrova & Leong)
                    Play as the Precursor to Literacy Development (Genishi & Dyson)
Week 5: What does play have to do with development? Part Three
09-25-18 - Large Class
   • Culture(s) and Development
   • Impact of cultures, nationalities, and experience on play
READINGS           Using Postcolonial Theory to Critically Reframe the Child Development
                   Narrative (Gupta)
                   Children’s Play as a Cultural Activity (Gaskins)
09-27-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Interpretation Activity
Skim               Preschool in Three Cultures Revisited (Tobin)
Week 6: How does agency and control impact play?
10-02-18 - Large Class
                                                                                       8


   •  How agency works
   •  International development and children’s development
   •  Unequal access to play
10-04-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Open-up activity with roadblocks
   • Tech Challenge
 READINGS       Children’s Need to Know: Curiosity in Schools (Engel)
                Making a Stink About the “Ideal” Classroom (Souto-Manning)
Week 7: How does policy and equity impact children’s play and development?
10-09-18– Large Class
   • Disappearance of play
   • Advocacy for play and early childhood
10-11-18 – Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • DAP changes over time – where did play go?
   • Equity issues and Play
  DUE THIS WEEK                                Observation of play paper
     READINGS          Is Kindergarten the New First Grade? ** On Canvas
                       NAEYC Policy Statements ** On Canvas
                       Inserting Child-Initiated Play into an American Urban School District
                       after a Decade of Scripted Curricula Complexities and Progress
                       (Nicholson, Bauer & Woolley)
Week 8: How can technology limit or extend play?
10-16-18 - Large Class
   • Play vs. Entertainment
   • Tech for young children
 READINGS “I’m Just Playing Ipad” (Moore & Adair)
             Young people, online gaming culture, and education (Beavis)
 SKIM        http://www.naeyc.org/files/naeyc/file/positions/PS_technology_WEB2.pdf (Links to an
             external site.)
                                                                                                 9


10-18-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Play Tech Challenge
 READING       https://masalachaimusings.com/2017/07/28/phones-r-us-parental-
               controls-in-a-digital-world/
Week 9: What is different about playing outdoors?
10-23-18 - Large Class
   • Explorer of the World
   • Loose Parts Theory
   • Privilege
10-25-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Outside Time vs. Playing Outside
 READINGS    The Genius of Childhood: How nature nurtures creativity (Louv)
             Bear-Child Stories in Late Liberal Colonialist Spaces of Childhood
             (Pacini-Ketchabaw, Tomasso, and & Nxumalo)
 SKIM        Quality Outdoor Spaces for Young Children (Spencer & Wright)
Week 10: Does gender affect how we play?
10-30-18 – Large Class
   • Internalized Gender Roles
   • Sexism at Play
   • Queer Theory and Play
11-01-18 – Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Lego Challenge
 DUE THIS WEEK                          Environment Design for Play
 READINGS          How to play like a girl (LaFrance)
                                                                                10


                   Using Queer theory to rethink gender equity in early childhood
                   education (Blaise & Taylor)
Week 11: What kinds of racial conversations happen during play?
11-06-18 - Large Class
   • Kids act out real life
   • Examples of racial conversations that happen during play
   • Normalizing diversity
11-08-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Inclusive communities
 READINGS         The impact of race and culture on play in early
                   childhood (Adair & Doucet)
                  How children learn about racism and enact anti-racism (Derman-
                  Sparks)
                  Fostering children’s caring and activism (Derman-Sparks)
Week 12: How does play make sense for children with special needs/abilities?
11-13-18 - Large Class
   • Play and Autism
   • Play for children with different abilities
11-15-18 – Small Sections
   • Presentation
   • Blog of the week
   • Discuss Readings
 READING           Emancipating play: Dis/abled children, development and
                   deconstruction (Goodley & Runswick-Cole)
                   Preferred Play Activities of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder in
                   Naturalistic Settings (Doody & Mertz)
 SKIM              Therapeutic Advantages of play (Goncu & Gaskins)
Week 13: Identity, Parents, and Community
11-20-18 - Large Class
                                                                                       11


   •  Parent panel
   •  Identity development in young children
   •  Intersectionalities and identity(ies)
 DUE THIS                                        Equity and play
 WEEK
                    Preschoolers’ funds of knowledge displayed through sociodramatic
                    play episodes in a bilingual classroom (Riojas Cortes)
 READINGS
                    Learning to be a child (Brooker)
11-22-18 – NO CLASS (Thanksgiving Holiday)
                ******** Thanksgiving Break – 11.21.18 to 11.24.18 *********
Week 14: How can play and positive schooling help children going through trauma?
11-27-18 - Large Class
   • Play and Trauma
                   Learning to laugh (Wright)
 READINGS          Loss, Trauma, and Human Resilience: Have We Underestimated the
                   Human Capacity to Thrive After Extremely Aversive Events? (Bonanno)
11-29-18 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
Week 15: Considering children in our work
12-4-18 - Large Class
   • Discipline and Young Children
   • Future directions
12-6-18 – Small Sections
   • Advocacy Project Presentations
                                                                                     12
