                          Department of Accounting
              ACC 311 – Fundamentals of Financial Accounting
                                    Spring 2020 Syllabus
Instructor:       Stephen T Smith
E-mail:           Stephen.smith@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office:           GSB 4.112C (MPA Program Office)
Office Hours:     Monday 2 – 4 pm & Wednesday 2 – 3pm
Teaching Assistant:      Sarah Childers
E-mail:                  childers.sarah@utexas.edu
Office:                  CBA 4.304A – TA Space
Office Hours:            T Th 10 am - Noon
Class times and locations: Unique #02180 MW 9:30 am - 11:00 am UTC 4.102
                                Unique #02195 MW 11:00 am - 12:30 pm UTC 4.102
Required Materials and Equipment
Textbook: Financial Accounting, 10th Edition, by Libby, Libby, and Hodge, (ISBN:
9781260936087, McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2020). This is a customized version packaged with
McGraw Hill’s on-line homework manager, McGraw-Hill Connect. Follow this link once you
have purchased the textbook: https://connect.mheducation.com/class/s-smith-acc-311-spring-2020
Accounting Cycle Supplement: Solid Footing: Building an Accounting Foundation, 12th
edition, by Dan Wiegand, (ISBN: 978-0-9973812-8-3, Micro Solve Inc.). This is a textbook
with accompanying software and files.
Calculator: A financial calculator (without text memory) is required. These calculators have
dedicated keys for convenience in working problems involving the time-value of money. The
keys typically are labeled N (number of periods), I/Yr (required interest rate per period), PV
(present value), PMT (payment per period), and FV (single future payment amount). If you
already have such a calculator, you do not need to buy a new one. If you do not already have
such a calculator, you should buy an HP 10bII+. This calculator is recommended by both the
accounting and finance faculty of the McCombs School of Business. You may not use a
calculator that has text memory or cell-phone calculators on quizzes or examinations. Examples
of prohibited calculators are the TI-83, 84, 86 and 89. You may use a simple 4-function
calculator if an exam or quiz does not require time-value of money calculations.


What is this class about?
We will cover accounting from the basic record-keeping through the creation and use of financial
statements. Our primary goal is to understand how accounting communicates the underlaying
economic effects of certain business transactions. We will accomplish this goal if we develop an
understanding of
o The nature and purpose of accounting for businesses, with emphasis on corporate business
   entities,
o Accounting methods and their use as an orderly means of recording, classifying, and
   presenting useful information from a mass of data derived from transactions and events
   affecting businesses,
o The basic language of business as represented by business and accounting terminology,
o The concepts and standards underlying the measurements used in accounting to prepare
   financial statements, and
o The use and interpretation of financial reports (i.e., income statements, balance sheets,
   statements of retained earnings, statements of cash flows) prepared for users external to
   businesses (e.g., owners, creditors, government agencies, and investors).
Why take this class?
A solid knowledge of accounting will enhance your understanding of how businesses operate,
why they engage in certain transactions and contracts, the implications of these transactions for
various interested parties (especially, employees, owners, creditors, and taxing authorities). This
class is a prerequisite for ACC 312 (Fundamentals of Managerial Accounting), which examines
the use of accounting to solve various problems that managers face. Both of these courses are
prerequisites to upper division courses in business.
What is the game plan to do well in this class?
o Attend class and be an active participant.
o Read the text before the class sessions on each topic. By reading the text in advance of class
   discussion, you will be prepared to ask questions.
o Do all the homework, whether or not it is “required.”
o If you are struggling with a topic, review the class material in the 24 hours that follow those
   class sessions. Do this in a small group or on your own, then visit me or our TA during office
   hours.
Supplemental Materials on Canvas
Solutions for Non-Graded Recommended Exercises and Problems in the LLH Textbook
Instructor PowerPoint Slides and Class Notes
Sample Midterm Exams and Additional Exam Review Problems
                                                 2


Prerequisite
The prerequisite for this course is twenty-four semester hours of (prior) college credit. If you do
not satisfy this prerequisite, you should drop ACC 311, or the Office of the Dean of
Undergraduate Programs will drop you from the course. Instructors may not waive prerequisites
to their courses.
Quantitative Reasoning Flag
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are
designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative
arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze
real-world problems.
Course Routine
I will conduct the course by giving lectures, facilitating solutions to in-class exercises and
conducting discussions in a manner that encourages class participation by students, consistent
with the objectives of the course and the time available. Students are expected to study the
chapter readings before topics are introduced in class and do assigned homework
questions, exercises and problems to reinforce what they learn. You cannot effectively
learn accounting without doing exercises and problems. Students are encouraged to ask
questions and to request that particular points be explained in more detail if they remain
confused or uncertain about items discussed or if concepts remain unclear.
Homework
There are two types of homework in the course, Solid Footing HW and textbook HW.
HW Grade = (Solid Footing plus textbook HW points earned)/(total possible HW points).
No homework assignments can be dropped in computing the final homework grade.
Solid Footing Homework
During the first four weeks of the course, you will be learning about the accounting cycle – the
process with which companies capture transaction data, then record, summarize, and transform
data into financial statements that conform to Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
(GAAP). It is essential that every student develop a solid understanding and ability to do
accounting cycle tasks because these accomplishments are the foundation for learning the
remaining content of the course. Accordingly, the faculty adopted Solid Footing, a semi-
interactive tool for learning the accounting cycle and statement of cash flows. It is meant to
present, reinforce and test progress in the accounting cycle in a way that leads to more consistent
and deeper understanding among our students, leading to less attrition and disappointing grades
in ACC 311. To be sure that all students keep up with the lessons during this phase of the
course, we require three Solid Footing homework assignments be completed and uploaded
through Canvas to be graded. All assignments are must be uploaded by 10:00 pm on the
due date. See the homework column of the course schedule for the assignments and due dates.
All Solid Footing Homework is due in the first five weeks of the course (prior to Exam 1).
                                                  3


Textbook Homework
Textbook homework is assigned from the chapters we cover. As the name implies, homework is
meant to be completed outside of class. Textbook homework is further divided into problems to
be submitted for grading and problems that are neither submitted nor graded. Textbook
exercises and problems to be graded are listed in bold-faced text on the Course Schedule
and are managed through the Connect system. Graded homework must be completed
individually, however you are permitted to collaborate with classmates on figuring out how to
structure the solution to assigned questions. Textbook homework is due by 8:00 am on the
day of class. Partial credit can be earned for late homework. Details on partial credit
deadlines will be available on Connect and cannot be changed by faculty. Connect changes
the numbers in the problem for each student, so the data will differ from the textbook and your
solution will not be the same as your classmates’ solutions. Connect will grade these problems,
provide solutions (after all sections of ACC 311 have submitted their homework), and indicate
areas where you need to do additional study. If you have difficulty using Connect or encounter a
problem with it please first try to resolve the problem with Connect Customer Support: 800-331-
5094. If you have questions about how to solve the exercises or problems, please see me or our
TA.
The problems that are not required to be submitted or graded (not bold-faced) are as critical to
your success as those that are graded. Solutions to non-graded problems will be posted on
Canvas.
Instructor Discretion
Instructor discretion may include (but is not limited to) announced or unannounced quizzes (in or
out of class), quizzes on Canvas, participation, extra homework, or group projects. If I choose to
make such assignments their scores will be treated as part of the instructor discretion. I plan to
use quizzes and Earnings Release Assignments (information below) for the instructor discretion
weighting.
        Quizzes
        There will be approximately 5-8 quizzes during the semester. You will be able to drop
        your lowest quiz grade. If you miss a quiz you will receive a zero for that quiz. There
        are no make-up quizzes. Quizzes may not have the same point value. Graded quizzes
        will not be returned, but they will be available in my office. Complete solutions for each
        quiz will posted on Canvas. Quizzes will make up one-half of the instruction discretion
        weighting.
                                                   4


         Earnings Release Assignment
         You will be required to listen to two earnings releases (January 28, 2020 and end of April
         2020) during the semester and complete an assignment tied to the each of the earnings
         releases. Apple will be our company of focus during the semester and details will be
         provided later in the semester. The earning release assignment will make up one-half of
         the instructor discretion weighting. Apple’s most recent 10-K filing can be found here
         https://d18rn0p25nwr6d.cloudfront.net/CIK-0000320193/1a919118-a594-44f3-92f0-
         4ecca47b1a7d.pdf
Class Protocol
If for some reason you are running late, do not feel you should skip class. Please come in quietly
and take a seat at the side or in the rear of the classroom. If you must leave class early, please
tell me before class starts. Such comings and goings during class should be rare – do not let
them become a habit.
If you need to miss a class or other required activity, including an examination, for any reason,
please inform me as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that I can approve the absence
as excused and arrangements can be made to complete any missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence. If you miss a class or other required activity, including an examination, for
reasons beyond your control, precluding prior notice, inform me of the circumstances as soon as
you are able.
         Personal Electronic Equipment Policy
A 2017 study by McCombs marketing professor Adrian Ward shows that having your phone
present (even when it’s turned off) takes up some of your brain power. Other recent studies have
shown that using laptops in class leads to worse performance. For example, see
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/22/business/laptops-not-during-lecture-or-meeting.html?_r=0.
On average, students who use such equipment in class do not perform as well (e.g., have lower
retention rates and lower grades) than students who do not use such equipment. In addition, the
equipment distracts students sitting near the user. Although you will use your computer
extensively for class-related work (e.g., Canvas and Connect), there will be no computer, e-
tablet, cell phone, PDA, DVD player, MP3 (iPod) or other such equipment used during
class time. Your phone should be silenced and in your bag. A two-point penalty will be
deducted from your final exam score for unauthorized technology use during class.
Other Class Policies
o Be prepared to use your financial calculator in class. Your phone calculator will not be
    allowed on exams so practice with your financial calculator when working class exercises,
    quizzes, and homework. The ACC 311 and 312 faculty recommend the HP 10bII+ financial
    calculator because it is relatively inexpensive (usually under $30) and non-programmable (and
    therefore acceptable for exam use).
o You must come to the class section in which you are officially registered. Class limits are set
    to ensure a quality experience for everyone. Also, during the semester we might do some
    activities in class, perhaps in teams, and the activities could be required for course credit as
    described below.
                                                    5


E-mail and Canvas
The use of email and Canvas are required for this course. I will frequently communicate with the
class with announcements and guidance. The TA and I will answer questions via email. We will
check e-mail each weekday and somewhat less regularly over weekends. We will use the email
addresses on Canvas. They are the email addresses that you have given the University for
directory purposes. If you need to update your email address with the University go to your UT
Direct page and, under personal info/all my addresses, change your email address. Before each
class, I will post on Canvas any PowerPoint slides I intend to use. You can print them in
handout style to save paper – either six slides to a page or three slides accompanied by note-
taking space. It is your responsibility to regularly check both your e-mail and the class website
on Canvas.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must inform
students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster: web-based,
password-protected class sites are available for all accredited courses taught at The University.
Class email rosters are a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the
Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information see
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/educational-records/.
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. I will use a merged Canvas site for
both sections of our course. This allows students in my sections to see your name (but not your
email address) and send you email from within Canvas. If you have any concerns, please contact
the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from view of other students.
Academic Standards
All ACC 311 instructors are expected to maintain high academic standards with respect to the
course quality and grading. Semester grades will be determined using the following factors and
relative weights:
                   Graded homework (Connect & Solid Footing)                                        15%
                   Lower Midterm                                                                    15%
                   Higher Midterm                                                                   25%
                   Final Exam (comprehensive)                                                       35%
                   Quizzes & Earnings Release Assignment (Instructor discretion)                    10%
                                                                                                    100%
The ACC 311 faculty has adopted the University’s plus/minus grading as the standard for all
sections of the course.1 The faculty believes that plus/minus grading permits us to better
distinguish gradations in performance and provides better feedback to students on their
performance.
1
  Under the traditional grading system an undergraduate student needs a D or better to receive credit for a course;
under the plus/minus system an undergraduate student needs a D- or better to receive credit.
                                                         6


Course grades will be such that the class average will be in the range of 3.0 – 3.2. Grades will
be based on the total points earned in the course (as shown above). It is possible, but not
guaranteed, that we will curve grades at the end of the course. No letter grades will be associated
with scores on exams or quizzes during the semester. In addition, no individual exam grades will
be curved during the semester.
Incompletes will be given only in the RAREST of circumstances and only in accordance with
university policy. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing “extra
credit” work during or after the end of the semester—that would violate University policy.
Examinations
There will be two midterm examinations and a comprehensive final examination.
  Exams 1 & 2 will be uniform (all sections at the same time).
  Exam 1: Wednesday February 26                         7:00-9:00 PM Room TBD
  Exam 2: Wednesday April 8                             7:00-9:00 PM Room TBD
  Make-ups will be the following day or evening.
 The Final Exam will be uniform (all sections at the same time) and comprehensive (covering
 the entire course). It will NOT be given on the dates and times listed in the UT course schedule.
 The actual dates and times will be announced later in the semester. NO EXAMS WILL BE
 GIVEN EARLY. IF YOU MUST SCHEDULE AIRFARE BEFORE THE EXACT DATE OF
 THE FINAL IS KNOWN, DO NOT SCHEDULE TRAVEL UNTIL AFTER THE LAST DAY
 OF FINALS.
Examinations are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. All exams are also
closed book/notes. Calculators that can store text are not allowed.
Only students with conflicts with other UT classes or UT exams, medical or other documented
emergencies and special needs will be given exams at times other than the uniform exams. If
you have a job or extra-curricular activities at the times of the exams, this is notice that you are
responsible to be excused, to miss or to work around those other activities. Individual makeup
exams must be taken within 72 hours of the original exam.
Unexcused absence from any examination will result in a score of zero. If you miss an exam due
to an illness or other emergency reason, you should notify me as soon as possible and provide me
with written documentation (e.g., a note from the attending physician) after you return. I have
final authority to determine if your absence should be excused and if I can give you a make-up
exam. If you have an excused absence from a mid-term exam and I cannot give you a make-up
exam, you will receive extra weight on your final to compensate for the missed examination.
If you need to make early travel reservations for the end of the semester, you should make them
for travel on May 20 or later—because we will not know until well into the semester exactly
when our examination will be scheduled by the University. If you make non-refundable (or non-
cancelable) arrangements for travel before May 20, that will not be an acceptable reason for
taking the final exam early. No final exams will be given early.
                                                   7


Grading Questions or Appeals
Do not wait until the end of the semester to question or appeal grade components other than the
final examination. If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the grade components, or if
you feel you need to bring to the attention of our Teaching Assistant or me other facts or
circumstances that might affect the grade for that item, you will have ONE WEEK from the date
the grade is posted on Canvas to take such action and have the matter resolved.
Dropping the Course
Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who stops
attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a grade of F. Consult the Academic
Calendar on the Registrar’s website (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for specific deadlines.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to
observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed
to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, https://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
o Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
   evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
   requires exiting and assembling outside.
                                                   8


o Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
   Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
   building.
o Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the
   first week of class.
o In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
o Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
   Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
   Services office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                 9


                   Textbook Material Excluded from the Course
                        Excluded Material from chapters assigned prior to EXAM 1
Chapter 1
Chapter Supplement B: Employment in the Accounting Profession (p 23-24)
                        Excluded Material from chapters assigned prior to EXAM 2
Chapter 6
To Take or Not to Take the Discount (bottom of page 292)
Report, control and safeguard cash (p 306-311)
Chapter Supplement: Recording Discounts and Returns (p 313-314)
Chapter 7
Cost Flow Assumption Average Cost Method (bottom of page 351)
Inventory Methods and Financial Statement Analysis (p 359-361)
Chapter Supplement A: LIFO Liquidations (p 367-368)
Chapter Supplement B: FIFO and LIFO Cost of Goods (p 368-369)
Chapter Supplement C: Additional Issues in Measuring Purchases (p 369-370)
Chapter 8
Depreciation Method Units-Of-Production (p 411-412)
Depreciation Method Declining-Balance (p 412-413)
Chapter 9
Chapter Supplement A: Present Value Computations Using Excel (p 496-497)
Chapter Supplement B: Deferred Taxes (p 497-498)
          Excluded Material from chapters assigned prior to the comprehensive FINAL EXAM
Chapter 10
    1. READ pages 518 through the middle of page 528.
    2. SKIP the pages discussing “Times Interest Earned” and journal entries with “Separate Accounts for
        Discounts and Premiums” (bottom of page 528 through page 535).
    3. READ the Chapter Supplement: Accounting for Bonds without a Discount Account of Premium
        Account (pages 541-547).
    4. READ pages 536-541.
Chapter 11
Key Ratio Analysis: Dividend Yield (p 577)
Stock Dividends and Stock Splits: (p 580-582)
Preferred Stock: (p. 585-586)
Chapter Supplement: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for Sole Proprietorships and Partnerships (p 589-592)
Chapter 12
Key Ratio Analysis: Quality of Income Ratio (p 629)
Key Ratio Analysis: Capital Acquisitions Ratio and Free Cash Flow (p 632-633)
Chapter Supplement A: Reporting Cash Flows from Operating Activities – Direct Method (p 639-642)
APPENDIX A
Investments for Significant Influence (p A16-A20)
Controlling Interests (p A20-A26)
Appendix Supplement: Held-to-Maturity Bonds Purchased at Other Than Par Value (p A26-A27)
               Anticipate slight differences in page numbers for the online textbook (E-book).
                                                      10
