Course:        ADV373/PR377K                      Integrated Communications Campaigns/NSAC 2020
Semester:      Spring 2019
Meeting:       T/Th 11AM to 12:15PM
Classroom:     BMC 3.206
Book:          None required
Professor:     Dr. Liza Stavchansky Lewis (Dr. Lewis/she/her/hers), BMC 4.366 , 471-1101,
               lizalewis@mail.utexas.edu;
               Office Hours: T/Th 10AM to 10:50AM
T/A:           Brooke Borglum, BMC 4th Floor Station #15, kbrookeborglum@gmail.com
               Office Hours: M/W 1PM to 2PM
Commencement
               “The University of Texas at Austin is an inspiring place that cultivates exceptional people. Our
               graduates have upheld the highest standards of academic achievement. With their new degrees in
               hand, they are better equipped to make valuable contributions to their families and society, and to
               pursue their own personal ambitions. They are ready to make their mark on the world.”
               Larry R. Faulkner, President (former), The University of Texas at Austin
Course Description
Philosophy:    This is it! You’ve made it to the capstone course in your academic career. Congratulations – now, be
               prepared to work. This course requires you to bring every single piece of your education together
               (academic and industry) to create an award winning communications campaign. It is important to
               know that this course is less about you learning new material and more about you practicing and
               experiencing the culmination of all you have learned.
Objectives:    The course has several objectives.
               1. To provide students with an in-depth understanding of the process of planning; presenting; and,
               implementing a complete campaign. In order for this to happen, the emphasis in the course is on
               each individual learning-by-doing. That is, by developing and presenting a complete campaign for a real
               client.
               2.   Increase student’s level of competence and professionalism.
               3.   Specifically: course is designed to help students sharpen the following skills: strategic and
                    critical thinking; planning; organizational; written and verbal communication; time
                    management; interpersonal; and , task group (bringing out the best in others).
               4.   Students should really have fun, after all, this is what you’ve decided to do for your professional
                    life!
               5.   To WIN the District 10 competition and the national NSAC competition!
Assumptions:   You have successfully completed all those prerequisites! There are good reasons for having taken
               them (trust me – in 5 years or less you will thank the Department). These include introduction to
               advertising and marketing, research, media, and communication management. IMPORTANT: If
               you have not successfully completed IC Management (ADV 370J/PR 367), then you should not be in
               this class.
Team Work:     As you will encounter in industry, this course is largely one of teamwork. You will create teams for
               most assignments. Marketing communications, to be effective, requires groups of people to work
               together toward a unified goal. Within departments or agencies people with varied areas of


            expertise (e.g., media, creative, pr, account planning) must cooperate and act together to solve
            problems. And, on the broader scale, the whole concept of “integrated” marketing communication
            is about everyone – even those in other disciplines (e.g. sales promotion, direct marketing) – working
            in a coherent manner, so that they are not creating incompatible solutions to a single problem.
            In other words, like it or not, you will work in teams.
            Our agency will have the following departments: Account Services, Account Planning (Research),
            Media, Public Relations, and Creative.
            A department director for each will be selected by me based on the interviews last semester and each
            student’s desire for the position.
            There will also be a Vice President (leader) for the entire agency. Directors will report to the VP.
            Peer Evaluations will be worth 20% of your course grade. You will only evaluate your immediate
            department team. Directors will be evaluated by their own team AND the agency VP.
Standards:  Because you will be working for a real client you must:
            1.   Turn in all work on-time: no exceptions. Our team/school is disqualified if you all are late
                 submitting the campaign book, per NSAC rules.
            2.   All work must be professional in appearance.
            3.   Any questions regarding grades are to be asked within 7 days of learning your grade –
                 including attendance (attendance is part of participation).
            4.   Attendance will be taken each time we meet in the classroom as an entire agency. The agency VP
                 and Directors will decide how to take attendance during meetings outside of our normal agency
                 time.
            5.   Participation: 10% of your course grade goes to attendance. The other 10% goes to
                 participating/discussing what we are learning/discussing in class.
            6.   On that note, I want to say the following concerning grades. I hope that you have now realized,
                 in your senior wisdom, that it’s what you learn, not what you earn, that really matters. I
                 encourage you to “worry” about the quality of your work and how much you are learning, rather
                 than to focus on grades. In the long run, grades are the least important of those issues. However,
                 I must evaluate each student, for a grade, and this is how it will go:
Evaluation: NSAC campaign project (book)                                =       30%
            NSAC presentation                                           =       20%
            Peer Evaluation Grade                                       =       30%
            Individual Assignments                                      =       10%
            Attendance                                                  =       10%
                              Total                                     =       100%
+/- System  Beginning Fall 2010, for the first time, UT at Austin implemented a +/- grading system for
            undergraduate students.
            The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
            A=       93.5 to 100
            A- =     89.5 to 93.4
            B+ =     86.5 to 89.4
            B=       83.5 to 86.4


            B- =      79.5 to 83.4
            C+ =      76.5 to 79.4
            C=        73.5 to 76.4
            C- =      69.5 to 73.4
            D+ =      66.5 to 69.4
            D=        63.5 to 66.4
            D- =      59.5 to 63.4
            F=        59.4 or below
            Please ask your questions early in the semester regarding the +/- grading system.
Deadlines &
Standards:  1. All reading assignments are to be completed prior to class discussion.
            2. Materials are often distributed in class.
            3. Attendance is required at all class, presentation, and department meetings. When we meet as a full
            agency (which will be often) attendance will be taken – this is how your attendance score will be
            earned for the course. However, at times you will meet only with your department and/or directors,
            etc. I will not require that directors take attendance but your grade will be reflected in your peer
            evaluation – it’s all about professionalism and letting your department know what is going on if you
            cannot communicate well/meet/etc.
            4. Everything produced for this class is to be your original work. Enlisting aid from anyone outside
            the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and will be dealt with accordingly.
            5. Late assignments are scored 0. Turn in work early if you have a conflict with the deadline.
            6. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors can reduce your score by one to two letter grades. If
            you need help with writing please use the undergraduate writing center.
            7. Team presentations are to be presented using Microsoft Office’s Power Point or another
            professional presentation software program/package. We must also follow all NSAC rules.
            8. E-mail Policy/Canvas Messaging: As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate in
            academia and industry, you must learn to use it appropriately. People have been fired from their
            jobs for misuse of this communication tool. Thus, when e-mailing me, you will address it formally.
            Communication between professors and students is professional in nature, not informal. Begin your
            e-mail with, “Dear Dr. Lewis:” and use block business format. Write professionally, as if you are
            writing to your boss at work, not to your friend.
            I will return your e-mail within 24 hours of receiving it on weekdays or by Monday evening if
            I receive it on the weekend. Many times I will e-mail you back much faster. E-mail is an excellent
            way to communicate with me if done appropriately.
            The same policy applies to messaging me via Canvas.
            9. A schedule has not been created for this course – I am the academic advisor and your agency will
            create the schedule with my guidance. A few assignments will be from me but the rest will be set up
            by the student agency.
            10. All students agree to read and abide by The University of Texas at Austin Policy on Academic
            Integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php**
            If you have any questions about what constitutes plagiarism, or any other form of Scholastic
            Dishonesty, ask me or any other member of the faculty. Students are responsible for their own
            conduct and for reporting any violations to their instructor or other member of the Department of
            Advertising faculty.


11. University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
12. Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact Services for Student with Disabilities at 512.471.6259 (voice) or 512.232.2937
(video phone). http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
13. This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor
to help you improve your writing. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from your written work.
14. Religious Holy Days Observance Policy/Military Duty/Excused Absences: The Texas
Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day,
including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not
be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment
from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so
that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
If you are in the military and are called to duty for a short time I will also work with you.
Please read UT’s policy below:
Visit: https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-
procedures/attendance/
The only other excused absence from class is for an official UT event that requires travel or missing a
class (for example: UT sports teams, other UT academic teams, TAG, PRSSA). You are required to
contact Dr. Lewis in advance to discuss your absence and provide any necessary documentation.
15. Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or
anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
|CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
     • Brief assessments and referral services
     • Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     • MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     • Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


          16. Dean of Students/Emergency Services: if you have an immediate emergency and must miss
          several classes – you need to speak with the Dean of Students at UT’s Emergency Services. Together,
          we will work out a schedule for missed classes/work. Please visit this website for more
          information/help: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
          17. Title IX and Your Safety
          Important Safety Information:
          If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
          (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232
          5050. Your call can beanonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
          isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                     Title IX Reporting
                     Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
                     harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence andstalking at federally
                     funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
          environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
          community, the University can:
             1.    Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
                  have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s
        Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
        Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violationsof Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
        I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
        writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
        Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to
        ask whether they are a responsible employee.
        What if I don’t want to make an official report but I need help?
        Email advocate@austin.utexas.edu
        For more information about
        reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexa
        s.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such misbehavior.
Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy,
age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender
expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
     •    Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual misconduct
          and discrimination.
                o    File a report of discrimination via online form
                o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu


     •    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
          The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing federal civil
          rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance
          from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office
          for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
          Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that make it
illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected class, including discrimination
on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
Schedule
Assume classes and/or department meetings on every T/Th of the semester. This may change but you should not
schedule internship work, etc. during our 11AM to 12:45PM time slot on T/Th.
