HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                               SPRING 2019
                                                                 ACC 358C / ACC 380K.4
                                                              Auditing & Assurance Services
Time and Location:
MW 12:30 – 1:45, UTC 3.102 (unique 02420 for ACC 358C or 02545 for ACC 380K.4)
MW 2:00 - 3:15, UTC 3.102 (unique 02425 for ACC 358C or 02550 for ACC 380K.4)
MW 3:30 - 4:45, UTC 3.102 (unique 02430 for ACC 358C or 02555 for ACC 380K.4)
Professor
Nicholas Hallman, CPA Ph.D.
Office: CBA 4M.228; Phone: 471-3517; E-mail: Nicholas.Hallman@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office hours: Tuesday 1:30pm – 4:30pm, or as announced, and by appointment.
Teaching Assistants
Sam Hunt (unique 2420, 02430, 2545, and 02555)
Email: samhunt@utexas.edu
Office: CBA 4.304A
Office hours: Wednesday 9:00am – 12:00pm
Daniel Rimkus (unique 02425 and 02550)
Email: Daniel.Rimkus@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office: CBA 1.310E
Office hours: Thursday 1pm – 4pm
Note: Although Sam and Daniel have official course assignments, you should feel free to visit
either TA’s office hours for help. You should also feel welcome to come to my office hours our
use the online discussion board (see below).
Canvas
I will use the Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu) discussion board extensively to make
announcements, post documents, and answer questions. So that you do not miss anything
important, please get in the habit of checking the course Canvas site before every class.
The discussion board benefits you and me. You can use it to post questions, comments, and
responses to others’ posts. In turn, I will use it to offer clarifications to the entire class, not just
the person who asked the question. If you have a question of general interest, please use the
discussion board, not email. That way everyone can benefit.
Required Course Materials:
I will not distribute paper copies of course materials. I will upload to Canvas the PowerPoint
files and other materials that we will use in class discussion.
There is no official textbook for the course.
                                                                                                         1


HALLMAN                           AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                         SPRING 2019
Course Objectives
At the end of the semester, you should have a better and deeper understanding of the following:
    -   The role of auditing in a market economy.
    -   U.S. and international regulation of auditing.
    -   Auditor independence and ethical responsibilities.
    -   Dealing with the potential for fraud.
    -   Internal controls and the integrated audit.
    -   Risk assessment.
    -   Audit sampling.
    -   Audit reporting.
    -   Evaluating and correcting errors.
    -   Fundamental issues arising in recent accounting and auditing scandals.
    -   Academic research in the field of auditing.
Course Schedule
The schedule for this course is subject to considerable change as we proceed through the
semester. An initial outline of the expected schedule is posted on Canvas. I will keep the canvas
version of the schedule updated, and post announcements whenever I make changes.
Attendance Policy
I hated attendance policies when I was a student and I do not enforce them now. This keeps me
honest and forces me to make attending class worth your time. With that said, impromptu in-
class discussions are an important part of the course. The content of all such discussions are “fair
game” for exams. If you believe that you can achieve the grade you desire without attending
class, you are welcome to try. But you probably can’t.
A Few Miscellaneous Notes:
    - This course is not just another requirement to graduate. Rather, given that the vast majority
      of you will either become auditors or will deal with auditors, the primary objective of this
      course is to help you to succeed after graduation.
    - Your primary objective for this course should be to learn the skills required to be a good
      auditor or, at least, to understand auditing, not to get a good grade. But I know that
      probably seems trite, and that your grade matters a great deal to you. I will do my best to
      make sure that the distributions of learning and grades are as congruent (and transparent) as
      possible. However, like most evaluation systems, grading is inherently noisy.
                                                                                                   2


HALLMAN                            AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                          SPRING 2019
Grading
Course grades will be based on a 500-point scale, as follows:
                                                                                Points
                                                                               Possible
              In-class examination 1, Wednesday, February 21, 2018                100
              In-class examination 2, Wednesday, April 4, 2018                    100
              Final examination, Date TBD                                         120
              Cases                                                                90
              End-of-semester group presentation                                   90
              Total points before extra credit (see details below)                500
In awarding final grades, I start by considering the traditional 90%=A, 80%=B, 70%=C cutoffs
based on the 500 nominal points listed above. I sometimes award grades that are more (but never
less) generous than these cutoffs, depending upon the end-of-semester point distribution, to
reflect the following interpretations:
     “A” or “A-” = Exceptional performance, exceeding my expectations. An “A” in this course
         is a sign of distinguishing oneself with particularly strong performance.
     “B+” or “B” = Fine performance, meeting my expectations. The ability to distinguish
         outstanding from very good performance is undermined if everyone gets an “A,” so I
         anticipate that a “B” will be the grade most frequently assigned.
     “B-,” “C+,” or “C” = Performance that falls short of expectations. These grades should be
         infrequent, but that being said, there is no such thing as an “automatic B” in the MPA
         program. If you do not put in the effort necessary to attain a reasonable degree of
         proficiency in attaining the course objectives, I cannot award you a “B.”
     “C-,” “D,” or “F” = Performance that falls far short of expectations, usually reflecting lack
         of sufficient effort. A failing grade can also result from severe cases of scholastic
         dishonesty.
Plus/Minus Grading
                                                                                                    3


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                            SPRING 2019
I award +/- grades in an approximately “GPA neutral” manner. What this means is that I award
plus or minus grades for borderline cases at each grade cutoff (primarily the A/B cutoff), but I
strive to do so in a way that does not significantly alter the grade-point average for the class as a
whole. Thus, the number of students who get an A- instead of an A will be approximately equal
to the number of students who get a B+ instead of a B.
Examinations (two midterms worth 100 points each; final exam worth 120 points)
Examinations will emphasize issues and concepts from the assigned readings, cases, lectures,
and class discussion. I will post practice questions from previous semesters’ exams, although
these these may not be representative of the current year exams (either in terms of subject matter
or difficulty). Exams may involve a mixture of objective and written-answer formats.
The two midterm examinations emphasize the material covered since the previous examination.
The final examination is cumulative, emphasizing material covered after the second midterm
along with reinforcing key concepts from earlier in the semester, as reflected on the midterm
exams.
Cases and Research Exercises (90 points)
To refine written communication skills as well as judgment skills in dealing with a more realistic
and less structured variety of auditing problems than can be found in a textbook, we will cover a
few case exercises based on current policy issues and real-world applications.
I value the interchange of ideas. Thus, in the formative stage of a case assignment, you are
welcome to discuss an assigned case on the course discussion board that is available on Canvas.
That being said, I also value individual accountability. Copying from another student’s prepared
solution is scholastic dishonesty and will be dealt with accordingly. See the “Policy on
Scholastic Dishonesty” later in this syllabus for clarification.
Discussing cases is an important part of the course, so be prepared to discuss and defend your
case responses in class. There may also be questions about the cases on exams. You are welcome
to discuss and clarify case issues by posting to the discussion board on Canvas.
The materials required to complete each case will be posted to Canvas on the due date of the
previous case. The materials required to complete the first will be posted on the first day of class.
All cases will be graded for depth of analysis, originality, quality of writing (if applicable), and
professional impression. Some of these cases involve subjective issues for which multiple views
can be defended. As in an accounting career, it is important to be both complete and concise.
Cases will be graded primarily by the TAs. The TAs’ job will be to order the cases and assign
grades based on a distribution which I dictate. If you have questions about your case grade, your
first stop should be the TA that graded it.
University Writing Center
                                                                                                      4


HALLMAN                           AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                          SPRING 2019
If you experience difficulty with written assignments, consider scheduling a free appointment
with a writing consultant at the UT-Austin University Writing Center (UWC). The UWC is one
of the best student resources available, employing consultants who will work with you to
improve your written assignments in ways that preserve the integrity of your work. For further
details, see http://uwc.utexas.edu.
Group Presentation – “Pick a Scandal” (90 points)
The capstone project at the end of the semester will involve groups of four (or so) students. Each
group will investigate a major accounting / auditing scandal (generally from 2000 to date) to
identify (1) the underlying financial reporting issue(s), (2) what the auditors should have done
differently, and (3) the consequences to management and to the auditors.
Groups will present the results from these investigations in 20-minute presentations at the end of
the semester (see course schedule later in this syllabus). Group member assignments will be
determined randomly. Each group must also submit the PowerPoint or similar file used to
facilitate their presentation, along with a list of references.
Later in the semester, I will provide further details on this assignment and a list of suggested
scandals.
Content from these presentations is “fair game” in the final exam, so I advise you to avoid
missing class when your classmates are presenting.
Extra Credit for Participation and Effort
To reward your attentiveness and participation, I reserve the right to award extra credit points
based on my subjective (but honest) assessment of your performance. We will discuss the extra
credit policy in more detail on the first day of class.
Policy on Notifications via Email and via Canvas
I will frequently post important announcements on our course Canvas site, so it is critical for you
to monitor this resource before every class.
In addition, when necessary, I will contact you by email, consistent with the UT-Austin policy on
email as an authorized vehicle for official University communication. I may use your McCombs
School of Business email address on the School’s “Address Book,” or I may use the email
address registered on our course Canvas site, so if these accounts are different, please monitor
both addresses.
Student Safety and the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
Nothing is more important than safety. Please see http://www.utexas.edu/safety to familiarize
yourself with campus safety initiatives. Also see http://emergency.utexas.edu for emergency
                                                                                                   5


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                        SPRING 2019
notifications. Regarding behavioral issues, if you have concerns or are worried about someone
who is acting differently, consider using the UT-Austin Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
discuss your concerns. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the
Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center, the Employee Assistance Program,
and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal. Of course, you are also welcome to discuss any concerns with
me, and I will take appropriate action as determined on a case-by-case basis.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
My general policy is that medical emergencies, family emergencies, religious holidays, and
university-sponsored conflicts are the only valid reasons for missing an examination or the due
date of an assignment. For each such case, I require some form of supporting documentation,
such as a signed note from a physician. At that point I will determine the best make-up
alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a make-up exam or recalculating the
semester grade to omit the missed component, depending on circumstances. Examinations or
assignments that are missed for other reasons will generally not be accepted. In the case of a
conflict due to a university-sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of the
conflict and before the examination date or assignment due date.
Religious Holidays: Consistent with the UT-Austin policy on Observation of Religious
Holidays, I will work with students on a case-by-case basis to find a suitable make-up alternative
in the event that a religious holiday conflicts with a scheduled examination or assignment due
date. By policy, students must provide at least 14 days of advance notice.
Policy on Students with Disabilities
I do my best to accommodate students with disabilities. For more information, contact the UT-
Austin Office of Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 471-6259, or go to
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/current-students/. If you have an SSD-registered
accommodation letter, please see me with your letter to discuss the accommodations you need
for this course. For SSD accommodations requiring additional examination time, students must
provide a suggested block for the time authorized in the SSD letter between the scheduled
business hours for the McCombs Testing Center of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on the date of the
exam, or, if necessary, the day after the exam. Students must make SSD-related requests well in
advance in order to ensure that accommodations can be made. Please note that the McCombs
Testing Center can fill up during peak examination periods, so reservations at the requested
date/time may not be possible without sufficient notice. SSD-related requests for exam
accommodations must be made via email before each exam! If I don’t hear from you before a
scheduled exam, I will assume that you do not wish an accommodation.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Course Assignments
                                                                                                 6


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                         SPRING 2019
The Master in Professional Accounting Program has adopted a Code of Conduct, a Career
Services Code of Ethics, and a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty. It is important for you
to be familiar with all three documents, which are available on the web at the following link:
https://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-Codes-of-Ethics
The following statement applies to each class in the UT-Austin Department of Accounting:
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the department’s Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the
MPA Program (which includes the integrated five-year MPA program and the traditional
MPA program). By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty
responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that
Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification.
In simple terms, integrity is a public good from which we all benefit. I view the above statement
as a commitment to integrity, not as a threat against students. It is my intent to conduct this
course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only achieve this goal if you join me in
maintaining an atmosphere of absolute ethical integrity in this course and in our MPA program.
We cannot afford to tolerate any less.
Personal Policy on Working Together (applies only to this course):
I believe that learning takes place through a healthy exchange of ideas. Therefore, for this class,
you are welcome to discuss issues related to assigned cases and problems with other students.
However, I expect the final product of each assignment to reflect your individual effort (with the
exception of the capstone project that is assigned in groups). You may not copy or paraphrase
from others’ solutions. Examples intended to clarify this policy follow:
Examples of collaborative efforts that I welcome (applies only to this course):
•    A student is confused about an ambiguous aspect of a case or homework problem, and asks
     another student what s/he thinks.
•    Students ask questions and share insights in the class discussion board. (This is appropriate
     because everyone benefits.)
Examples of collaborative efforts that I do not tolerate:
• Student X completes a case before student Y (or in an earlier semester). Y asks X for X’s
  solution. Y bases his/her solution on X’s solution, changing a few words here and there to
  make it look original. This is an example of plagiarism, which takes advantage of student X
  and does not evidence any meaningful learning on the part of student Y. Both X and Y are
  guilty of scholastic dishonesty.
                                                                                                    7


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                          SPRING 2019
  In addition to the (sometimes subtle) changes I make to the cases each semester, students
  should be aware that assignments required to be submitted online via Canvas may be analyzed
  with a plagiarism-detection tool such as Turnitin.com. Turnitin.com is a software resource
  intended to address plagiarism. The software works by cross-referencing submitted materials
  with an archived database of journals, essay, newspaper articles, books, and other published
  works. I also maintain a repository of completed cases submitted in prior semesters. Other
  methods may also be used to determine originality. Plagiarism software is not intended to
  replace or substitute for the faculty member’s judgment regarding detection of plagiarism.
• A student finds a source relevant to a case or presentation and copies from it, without using
  quotation marks, indentation, or other references to acknowledge the source. This is another
  example of plagiarism, which is a clear instance of scholastic dishonesty.
• A student completes a data related case and gives the solution file to another student. Blatant
  copying of this nature is a serious form of scholastic dishonesty.
• Any collaboration or breach of security on a course examination is scholastic dishonesty of the
  most severe variety. Cheating on an examination can result in a significant academic penalty,
  including the possibility of an “F” for the course.
For more information on University policies and procedures regarding scholastic dishonesty, see
the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
When in doubt, you should always feel free to ask me.
If you have read this far, thank you! The fact that you read 8 pages of syllabus material shows
that you care about this class and want to succeed. History suggests that only about half of all
students read the entire syllabus, so I want to give you a small token of my appreciation for being
in that half. Accordingly, if you send Sam an email (his email address is listed at the top if the
syllabus) with your name, UTID, and section in the subject line by Monday, January 28th, 2019,
I will award you one extra credit point.
                                                                                                   8
