Harlem Renaissance ARH 374/AFR 374F
Eddie Chambers
Fall Semester 2019, DFA 2.204, Tuesday and Thursday, 9.30 – 11.00
Eddie Chambers
Office 3.324 Art Building
Office ‘phone 512 471 7554
eddiechambers@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours, Tuesday, 11:00 – 1:00 and by appointment
This course carries the Cultural Diversity flag. The Cultural Diversity requirement
increases your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. Courses carrying this flag ask you to explore the beliefs, practices, and
histories of at least one cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
Many of these courses also encourage you to reflect on your own cultural experiences.
See https://www.utexas.edu/ugs/flags/students/about/cultural-diversity
The Harlem Renaissance, sometimes referred to as the New Negro Movement, stands as
a towering and defining cultural moment in 20th century American history. It was in
some respects the period in which African American artists, writers, poets and others
tabled bold new agendas for the ways in which they, as individuals, and as a nation-
within-a-nation, might advance in what was to become the American century. This class
will give consideration to the multiple factors that gave rise to this astonishing and
compelling cultural moment. The mixed results of the reconstruction era; the Great
Migration, which saw very large numbers of African Americans move from the South to
other parts of the country, namely the West coast and the great northern industrial
centers; the defining contribution of Howard Professor Alain Locke, and so on. The class
will also look at the variety of cultural expressions and artistic practices emerging out of
the new epicenter of Black American life, Harlem. The Harlem Renaissance is of course
something of a misnomer. It was not limited to Harlem, but in effect took place in many
different parts of the US, from San Francisco to Chicago. Furthermore, it was perhaps a
cultural birth, as much as it was a cultural rebirth, hence the important differentiation
between the New Negro and the Old predecessor. Setting the Harlem Renaissance into a
multiplicity of contexts, from African American art practices of the 19th century, to the
reception African Americans received in European cities such as Paris, the class will be
hugely informative, not just on what African American artists were doing in the early
20th century, but also the ways in which so many of today’s debates and questions on
race matters in the US can be traced back to what was happening in the country a century
ago. It will use texts such as Rhapsodies in Black: Art of the Harlem Renaissance; Black
Women of the Harlem Renaissance Era; The Power of Pride: Stylemakers and
Rulebreakers of the Harlem Renaissance; and Harlem Renaissance: Art of Black
America.
Learning Goals
By the end of this course you will be ready to:


• Pose critical questions of the ways in which the Harlem Renaissance/New Negro
Movement was such a defining period in the history of African Americans during the 20 th
century.
• Develop close reading and visual literacy skills in order to experiment with different
methods of investigation and synthesize those findings into coherent verbal and written
arguments
• Thoughtfully and respectfully critique the intellectual work of others, and evaluate its
usefulness in relationship to your own inquiry and academic interests
• Have a greater understanding of the meaning and manifestations of African American
contributions to wider American culture, during the first four decades of the 20th century
• Articulate your own opinions, arguments and understandings of African American art
during the Harlem Renaissance/New Negro Movement
Draft Syllabus
An introduction to Harlem Renaissance ARH 374/AFR 374F
Richard J. Powell, “Introduction: The Dark Center” and Chapter One: “Art, Culture and
“the Souls of Black Folk”, Black Art and Culture in the 20th Century, Thames and
Hudson World of Art Series, 1997. (Reissued as Black Art: A Cultural History, 2002)
The Harlem Renaissance – an introduction
Text: Alain Locke, “The Legacy of Ancestral Arts”, in The New Negro, Atheneum, New
York, 1992, pp.254-267 (originally published 1925) and “Exit the Old Negro”, Martha
Jane Nadell, Enter the New Negroes: Images of Race in American Culture, Harvard
University Press, 2004, 10 - 33
The Harlem Renaissance – an introduction/2
Text: “Enter the New Negro”, Martha Jane Nadell, Enter the New Negroes: Images of
Race in American Culture, Harvard University Press, 2004, 34 - 67
Winold Reiss, mentor to Aaron Douglas and illustrator of ‘The New Negro’.
Text: “Folk-Lorist of Brush and Palette”, John C. Ewers, in To Color America,
Smithsonian Institution/National Portrait Gallery, 1989 pp. 41 – 69
Aaron Douglas, giant of the Harlem Renaissance.
Text: “Aaron Douglas”, in A History of African-American Artists From 1792 to the
Present, Romare Bearden & Harry Henderson, Pantheon Books, New York, 1993,
pp.127-135
Carl Van Vechten, Negrophile and photographer.
Text: “Introduction”, Generations in Black and White, Rudolph P. Byrd, the University
of Georgia Press, 1993, pp.xv- xxvii
Palmer C. Hayden
Text: “Hayden: The Persona”, pp.11-15 of Echoes of Our Past: The Narrative Artistry of
Palmer C. Hayden, Allan M. Gordon, The Museum of African American Art, Los


Angeles, California, April 15 – July 31, 1988.
Art of Archibald Motley
Text: “Archibald J. Motley, Jr,” pp.147-156, A History of African-American Artists From
1792 to the Present, Romare Bearden and Harry Henderson, Pantheon Books, New York,
1993.
James Van Der Zee
Text: “James Van Der Zee: Artist and Photographer”, pp.146-192, James Van DerZee,
The Picture Takin’ Man, Jim Haskins, Africa World Press, Inc.1991
Work
Text: Erika Doss, “Toward an Iconography of American Labor: Work, Workers, and the
Work Ethic in American Art, 1930-1945”, Design Issues, Vol. 13, No. 1, Designing the
Modern Experience, 1885-1945 (Spring,1997), pp. 53-66
Palmer C. Hayden and the Story of John Henry
Text: “John Henry” by Guy B. Johnson, Negro Anthology, Nancy Cunard, London, 1934,
pp. 363 – 365 and “On the Trail of John Henry”, Guy B. Johnson, from John Henry:
Tracking Down a Negro Legend, University of North Carolina, 1929, pp. 8 – 26
New Negro Artists and Paris
Text: Theresa Leininger-Miller, New Negro Artists in Paris: African American Painters
and Sculptors in the City of Light, 1922-1934, Rutgers University Press, 2001, chapter
tbd
‘Black Folk Art’ in early 20th Century America
Text: Jane Livingston, “What it is”, in Black Folk Art in America 1930-1980, Corcoran
Gallery of Art/University Press of Mississippi, Jackson, 1982, pp.11-23
The Art of Horace Pippin
Text: Selden Rodman, Horace Pippin: A Negro Painter in America, The Quadrangle
Press 1947 pp.3 – 28
Cinema and the New Negro
Text: Donald Bogle, “Into the 1920s; the Jesters”, Chapter Two of Toms, Coons,
Mulattoes, Mammies, and Bucks: An Interpretive History of Blacks in American Films,
New York: the Continuum International Publishing Group Inc., 2001
International Dimensions of the New Negro Movement
Text: Samantha A. Noel, “Envisioning New Worlds: The “Tropical Aesthetics” in the Art
of Wifredo Lam and Aaron Douglas”, Art Journal, 77:3 (2018), 76-91
Listening to the Harlem Renaissance
Text: Gary D. Wintz, “Harlem”, Harlem Speaks: A Living History of the Harlem
Renaissance, Naperville: Sourcebooks, Inc, 27 - 49


Problems and Progress: African-American Artists towards mid 20th Century
America
Text: Richard J. Powell, “Pride, Assimilation, and Dreams”, Chapter Four [87 - 120]
of Black Art and Culture in the 20th Century, Thames and Hudson World of Art Series,
1997. (Reissued as Black Art: A Cultural History, 2002)
3500-word paper due
Particulars
Students are required to produce response papers, relating to the previous week’s class.
The first response paper is due____tba__________. The reaction papers should be a word
length of about 500 words. Similarly, students are required to produce a précis, (a
summary) of one of the previous week’s assigned readings. Précis and Response papers
will comprise 30% of the final grade. A 3500-word research paper, relating to some
aspect of the class, must be submitted no later than 10.00am on ________tba________.
There is no required textbook. All readings will be posted on Canvas.
Accommodation.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Students with disabilities may
request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-2557,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/ For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students, http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
Academic Integrity
University Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: “Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Please see UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics)
and an explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism (Link to University Honor
Code: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/spot_honorcode.php). For further information
please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
Class Attendance
Students are required to attend all classes. Please inform instructor ahead of time if you
will miss any class. Full attendance is 20 points. For every unexcused absence from class,
a student will drop 5 points. University policy on holy days states, “A student who misses
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as


possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence.” Unless absences have been notified in advance,
students failing to sign the class attendance sheet will be considered absent. Class
attendance and participation will count towards final grade.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
Assignments and Grading
Attendance 30 points
Class participation 10 points
Response papers 30 points
Research Paper 30 points
Total…………………………………..100 points
A……………………………………….90-100 points
B……………………………………… 80-89 points.
C…………………………………….... 70-79 points.
D…………………………………… …60-69 points.
E……………………………………….50-59 points.
F………………………………………. Below 50 points.
There are no exams relating to this class
Class readings will be made available on Canvas. Likewise, class announcements will be
posted on Canvas - http://canvas.utexas.edu/
No laptop use in class
No cell phone use/texting in class
No note-taking on cell phones
