                                                           Syllabus
                          Accounting 312: Fundamentals of Managerial Accounting
                                                         Spring 2019
Class Hours                     Unique #                                Location
TTh 9:30-11 am                  02341                                   GSB 2.120
TTh 11 am-12:30 pm              02340                                   UTC 3.122
TTh 2-3:30 pm                   02325                                   UTC 4.134
Professor:           Anindita Roy Bardhan                               Office:          GSB 5.126C
E-mail:              anindita.roybardhan@mccombs.utexas.edu Phone:                       (512) 471-5329
Office Hrs:          W: 11am-12 pm; Th: 3:30-4:30 pm and by appointment
TA:                  Chad Wilson                                        Office:          TBA
E-mail:              chad.wilson@utexas.com                             Office Hrs:      TBA
Required Materials
         1. MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING, by Ronald W. Hilton & David E. Platt (11th edition, McGraw-Hill
             Education, ©2017)
         2. McGRAW-HILL CONNECT and COURSESMART, on-line study and homework managers
                 Follow this link once you have purchased the textbook:
             http://connect.mheducation.com/class/a-roy-bardhan-spring-2019_template_tth
         3. ACC 312 CASE PACK, from UT Copy Center (GSB 3.136). Available in early February.
    CANVAS will be used for course management and any additional readings or study materials will be
    posted there. I also will use Canvas for communicating with the class.
    During the first week of class, you must ensure that:
          you can access the class site on Canvas and have set up your communication preferences;
          your Connect access (including LearnSmart) is functioning properly.
    This course is supported by UT’s Peer-Led Undergraduate Studying (PLUS) program. PLUS study
    groups provide an opportunity to collaboratively practice skills and knowledge you need for success in this
    course. Attending study groups regularly is a great way to ensure that you are keeping up with the material
    so you don’t fall behind. Groups will start in early February and meet several different times each week;
    feel free to attend any study group at any point in the semester. More information on times and locations
    will be announced through Canvas. Additional information on PLUS, including an introductory video, may
    be found at http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/support/plus.
 Learning Objectives
    If you stay engaged with the course by participating in class, reading the assigned text, completing the
    assigned work, and preparing well for cases and exams, you should obtain the results listed below:
              Expected Result                        What We’ll Do Together                 How We’ll Assess the Results
       Understand how accounting          Discuss chapter readings, cases, and          Interesting and lively class
       systems provide data useful         current topics together in class.             discussions about cases and
       for management decisions in        Relate managerial accounting to what is       application of materials, including
       all business areas.                 going on in the business world.               current business news.
       Gain experience structuring        Work problems together and discuss them.      Homework, cases, and exam
       business problems and              Analyze business cases that you have          performance (grades).
       analyzing management                prepared for class discussion.
       decisions.
         Spring 2019                         Syllabus – ACC 312 ROY BARDHAN                                     Page 1


 This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning Flag. QR courses are designed to equip you with skills that
 are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your
 adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
 your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
Class Preparation and Success
 You are encouraged to ask questions in class, both to seek technical clarification of points discussed and
 to understand how a particular topic relates to your personal interest in business.
 Class attendance and doing the study questions and homework are the two keys to success in this class.
 Students who do well are generally those who attend class regularly and can participate in class
 discussions because they have prepared. Although problems may seem fairly intuitive when we do them in
 class, you will be surprised how hard it is to set them up and solve them on your own. Practice is key.
Classroom Standards
 A 2017 study by McCombs marketing professor Adrian Ward showed that having your phone present
 (even when it’s turned off!) takes up some of your brain power. Other recent studies have shown that
 using computers in class leads to worse performance. So, although you will use your computer extensively
 for class-related work (LearnSmart pre-study and Connect homework), during class there will be no
 computer use, and your phone should be silenced and in your bag.
 Other class rules:
      Be prepared to do calculations in class. Your phone calculator will not be allowed on the exam so
         it’s best if you practice with your financial calculator. I recommend the HP 10bII+ financial
         calculator because it is (1) acceptable for ACC 311 and FIN 357, (2) relatively inexpensive (usually
         under $30), and (3) non-programmable and therefore acceptable for exam use.
      No extraneous conversation or disruptive behavior.
      You should arrive on time. On the rare occasion when you don’t, please enter and set up quietly
         and engage with the class as quickly as possible.
      If you must leave early, please notify me in advance.
 You MUST come to the class section in which you are officially registered. Class limits are set to ensure a
 quality experience for everyone. Also, during the semester we might do some activities in class, perhaps in
 teams, and the activities could be required for course credit as described below.
Assessment
 Course grades will be determined using the following assignments and weights:
              Two (non-cumulative) Midterm Exams
                  Lower midterm                          15%
                  Higher midterm                         25%
              Final Exam (cumulative)                    30%
              Quizzes and Case Assignments               10%
              Homework (Connect):
                  LearnSmart                             10%
                  Review Problems                        10%
                                                        100%
 The BBA Program recommends a mean GPA of 3.0-3.2 for this course, but the actual grades assigned will
 be based on what you earn. All sections of ACC 312 follow the same grading policy, and you may assess
 your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-, 80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and
 below 60% = F. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing "extra credit" work either
 before or after the end of the semester. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances and
 according to university policy.
     Spring 2019                        Syllabus – ACC 312 ROY BARDHAN                            Page 2


   Grade Appeals: If you believe a grading error has occurred, you must appeal within one week after the item
   is returned to the class or the grade is posted on Canvas or Connect. Submit a written explanation of your
   concern, attached to the graded item in question, to me in class or at office hours. After one week has
   passed, no appeals will be considered.
Exams
   Exams are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. There will be two non-cumulative
   midterm exams. Midterm exams will be closed book/notes and will be held on the dates and times
   indicated in the Class Schedule. All sections of ACC 312 will take the exams at the same time. We will try
   to return the graded exams one week after the exam date. Calculators that are programmable or can store
   text are NOT allowed for exams and will be confiscated.
   There will be a common, cumulative final exam for all sections of ACC 312 at the end of the term. The final
   exam will be closed book/notes and we will advise you of the date for the final exam as soon as we receive
   it. Do not make travel arrangements until you are certain of your exam schedule!
   Anyone with a non-standard exam schedule (SSD or other approved exception) MUST make exam
   arrangements with me at least one week in advance. No early exams will be given FOR ANY REASON,
   including to accommodate travel schedules.
   Alternate exams: If you have another UT class or UT exam at the same time as one of the midterm exams,
   you will be allowed to take an alternate exam that will be given the day after the scheduled exam. Similarly,
   if you have another UT final exam that directly conflicts with our scheduled final exam, there is a provision
   for an alternate exam. However, in all cases permission to take an alternate exam is at my discretion and
   the request must be made at least one week in advance. Note that conflicts such as classes at other
   educational institutions and work schedules will not constitute an acceptable reason to take an alternate
   exam. If you also have a class or exam conflict with the alternate midterm exam, we can, with my prior
   approval, make arrangements for you to make up the exam. Individual makeup midterm exams must be
   taken within 72 hours of the original exam date. These exams will be given at the Testing Center located
   on the fifth floor of the McCombs School, and I will work with you to schedule it. If you do not take the
   makeup exam as scheduled, you will receive a 0 on the exam.
   If you miss an exam due to a severe illness or other emergency, you should notify me before the exam, if
   possible, and you must provide prompt notification and proof of emergency to Student Emergency Services
   (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of the emergency and will provide
   me official acknowledgement of the emergency. However, I have final authority to determine if your
   absence is excused. If so, and if it is feasible for you to take the scheduled alternate exam or an individual
   makeup midterm exam (see prior paragraph), you may do so. Otherwise, students with an excused
   absence from a midterm exam will be required to add the weight of that exam (“lowest midterm” weight) to
   the weight of the final exam. Unexcused absences will result in an exam grade of 0.
Quizzes and Case Assignments
   No collaboration is allowed on quizzes. For cases, discussion is encouraged, but case
   assignments are individual work and they must be written individually, no collaboration allowed.
   Quizzes: Quizzes may be given during any class of the semester, and they may be announced or
   unannounced.
   Cases: We will discuss three cases during the course to provide context and additional dimensions to the
   concepts we are studying. We will spend the whole class addressing the case on the day indicated in the
   Course Schedule, so coming to class well prepared is critical. Read the case carefully and prepare
   answers to the questions in the case. Each case class will have a related assignment, often a quiz, and
   due at the beginning of class. If the assignment is something other than a quiz, I will provide specifics of
   the assignment at least one week in advance. Attendance during the entire case discussion constitutes
        Spring 2019                     Syllabus – ACC 312 ROY BARDHAN                               Page 3


     50% of the grade for that assignment.
     Homework (two types, both done in Connect)
     Homework must be completed individually in Connect, however you are permitted to collaborate
     with classmates on figuring out how to structure the solution to assigned questions. Two types of
     homework are due in this class, both administered via Connect:
         During your preparation before class, you must complete the LearnSmart module for that class,
          denoted by the LS icon in the Connect assignments list. You will answer comprehension questions
          relating to the assigned reading. When you miss a question, Connect will ask additional questions until
          you demonstrate comprehension. Your LearnSmart grade will be based on the percentage of each
          module that you finish. LearnSmart work must be completed by 8:00 a.m. on the day of class.
         Each week, Review Problems covering that week’s class material will be due to be submitted in
          Connect. The Course Schedule lists these problems. The Review Problems grade is the percent of all
          points on Review Problems that are correct as submitted. Responses to these problems must be
          submitted in Connect by 5:00 p.m. on Saturday of that week. A solution will be provided in Connect
          after the submission window ends.
     Late homework will not be accepted. Also, note that for most questions, Connect will change the numbers
     in the problem for each student, so your data will differ from the textbook and your solution will not be
     identical to your classmates’ solutions. Connect will grade these questions, provide solutions to Review
     Problems (after all sections of ACC 312 have submitted their homework), and indicate areas where you
     need to do additional study.
     If you have difficulty using Connect or LearnSmart, or encounter a problem with the technology, please
     email your question to the course TA, listed on the first page of this syllabus. Depending on the problem,
     the TA may be able to help or you might need to contact the Connect Help Desk (click Help in Connect).
     If you have questions about how to solve the exercises or problems, please see the TA during his/her office
     hours. Or come see me during my office hours.
     No homework assignments will be dropped. However, LearnSmart will offer multiple opportunities to
     demonstrate your mastery of the material, and we have configured Connect to allow you unlimited
     opportunities to check your work on Review Problems, without penalty, prior to submission. So you have
     ample opportunity to do well on homework assignments.
Other Assignments
     Other additional graded work may also be assigned, depending on my assessment of class progress and
     preparation. Examples would include (but are not limited to) quizzes in Canvas, extra problem
     assignments, extra case work, in-class check questions, and chapter outlines. If I choose to make such
     assignments, their scores will be treated as part of the LearnSmart homework grade.
                                               Important Notifications
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me
at any time with any concerns.
          Spring 2019                     Syllabus – ACC 312 ROY BARDHAN                              Page 4


Religious Holy Days
Per the UT Austin General Information Catalog, you must notify me “as far in advance as possible” (I expect at
least 14 days advance written notice) of your pending absence due to the observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss an examination or other assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, and you notify me
appropriately, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
In the Assignments section above, you can find specific guidance regarding individual and group work for each
of the evaluation elements in this course.
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By remaining in this
class, you agree to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear to you in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, which could include failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: copying work on tests or assignments, representing
(copying) the work of another person as your own or allowing another person to represent your work as their
own, collaborating without authorization with another student during an exam or in preparing academic work,
using or having on your desk unauthorized material or aids to complete a quiz, group exercise, or exam (e.g.,
cheat sheets, solutions, programmable calculators, cell phones, etc.). You should refer to the Student Conduct
and Academic Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty and more on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Dishonesty harms other students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, so
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. All acts of academic dishonesty receive significant
penalties and are reported to Student Judicial Services and attach to your record. This record is consulted as
part of application processes at UT (e.g., study abroad applications) and after (e.g., law school and MBA
applications, which generally require you to provide access to this record). IT’S NOT WORTH IT!
Campus Safety
BCAL: For concerns about individual behavior, call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050.
BE SAFE: See campus safety information at http://besafe.utexas.edu/safety-tips-apps.
     Up-to-date information regarding university operation and emergency procedures can be found at:
        http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
        buildings when an official announcement is made.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember,
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     Students requiring evacuation help should inform the instructor in writing the first week of class.
     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
        University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Privacy in Canvas
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that if I teach multiple sections of this
course I will use a merged Canvas site for all sections. This will allow students in other sections to see that you
are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your
email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please
contact the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 for help removing your name from the view of other students.
        Spring 2019                       Syllabus – ACC 312 ROY BARDHAN                              Page 5


                  Using Your Calculator for ACC 312 Homework Assignments in Connect
                          Carefully observe the rounding instructions in Connect.
            If no specific guidance is provided, do not round to less than four decimal places.
Please make sure your calculator does not round to less than four decimal places (e.g., 0.2078 does not round
to 0.208 or shorter). Four decimal places will be adequate for any homework or exam problems.
Here are the instructions for the recommended HP 10bII+ calculator (if you have a different calculator, check
your manual or search on-line). The default on this calculator is two decimal places, which is too short for
many problems.
Instructions for HP 10bII+:
        Spring 2019                    Syllabus – ACC 312 ROY BARDHAN                              Page 6


SYLLABUS SIGNATURE PAGE: Due Dt.: Thursday, February 21, 8 am
I have read the above syllabus, rules and regulations and agree to abide by them. I understand that any behavior on my
part that goes against the above mentioned regulations will subject me to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
__________________________________________                         ______________________
Signature of Student                                                       Date
__________________________________________
Name of Student (PLEASE PRINT)
         Spring 2019                         Syllabus – ACC 312 ROY BARDHAN                                   Page 7
