                                    Media Psychology
                                          Spring 2020
                            Tuesday and Thursday 12:30 – 2:00pm
Instructor
Matthew S. Eastin, PhD
Associate Professor
Office Hours:
BMC: 4.324
Email: matt.eastin@utexas.edu
Required Resources
1. All reading will be located on Canvas or handed out in class.
Course Goals
This class is designed so that each student will develop a thorough understanding of
media engagement. We will discuss different theoretical frameworks practically and
theoretically to understand the psychology behind media consumption. In many cases,
this will allow you to examine each theoretical area within the context of your research
interests.
Course Structure
At the start of each class, I will generally present a few core ideas and then open the class
up for discussion. Many classes will be designed by students (see below for details)!
Following our general discussion, during some classes students will develop a
DISCUSSION surrounding the topic of the day. Research for your “DISCUSSION topic”
will be in additional to the assigned readings (discussed below) and should contextualize
the class to fit your interests. The goal is to bring many different perspectives into the
classroom. In addition to your discussion leader project, you will also work through a
client pitch. Finally, you will complete a “final” research paper for the class. The
structure and topic of this paper will be negotiated with Dr. Eastin.
Course Breakdown
Class Presentation (15%) and Paper (10%) – 25%
Client Pitch (15%) and Paper (10%) – 25%
Reaction Paper – 10%
Final Paper – 40%
Grade Breakdown
93-100 = A 87-89 = B+               77-79 = C+         65-69 = D+        59 and below = F
90-92 = A - 83-86 = B               73-76 = C          60-64 = D
                80-82 = B -         70-72 = C –


Class Presentation and Paper
Groups of students will lead the class during an assigned day. Students should plan on
managing at least 30 minutes of class time. IN ADDITION to the presentation, each
individual will also need to complete a 5 page paper (double spaced not including
references or figures) on their topic. This paper should be a written/formal version of the
presentation.
Client Pitch
Each student will be need to consider the next hot topic. For this assignment you will
need to pick an area or topic, then think about where your topic/area has been, currently
is, and where it is going. The “where it is going” is the pitch! Each student will produce a
6-7 page paper (double spaced not including references or figures) and present the
“pitch” to the class. This should NOT feel like a lecture. This is your one chance to
convince me (or your boss) that your idea is the best in the room.
Reaction Paper
All students must do one, two page reaction paper (double spaced not including
references or figures) based on a class reading. The paper MUST be turned in the day
we discussion the reading. And, you MUST sit in the reaction paper designated area. The
reaction paper only needs to be on a papers assigned for that class.
Make-up Policy
Academic Dishonesty
Any form of academic dishonesty, including plagiarism, manufacturing quotes or
sources, using another’s reporting, research or quotes without giving proper attribution,
will result in an automatic grade of “F” for your assignment, possibly the course and
possibly worse. If you’re ever unsure whether you’re crossing the line, ask – that’s what
good practitioners and good journalists do. Here’s the basic university policy on
academic dishonesty: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of
fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line):
 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it
probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
  Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based
       discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct,
       dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
       institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
       environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct
       occurs in our community, the university can:
           1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.


            2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have
            experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
            3.  Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
       Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible
       Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to
       report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
       Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed
       in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any
       faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
       they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support
       or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
       advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
       resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
       titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you
to report such misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran
status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can
be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
    •    Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
         The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve
         complaints of sexual misconduct and discrimination.
             o   File a report of discrimination via online form
             o   Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
    •    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
         The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is
         responsible for enforcing federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in
         programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance from the
         Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title
         IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
    •    Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
         The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for
         enforcing federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant
         or employee on the basis of a protected class, including discrimination on the
         basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-
         4000.
Special needs: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a


documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services
for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official
accommodation letter from SSD. Please see me at the beginning of the semester if you
have special needs or require alternative testing.
Tentative Nature of this Syllabus
This syllabus represents a contract in the works. Events that transpire during the quarter
may, in rare circumstances, require me to modify the syllabus. I will announce the
modification in class and on the course Canvas. Meaning the syllabus will update weekly
with new reading and any changes in topics. Ultimately, it is your responsibility to keep
up with any such modifications and be aware of current policies, deadlines, etc.
