ADV/PR INTERNSHIP
  ADV350, PR 350, ADV350s, PR 350s, ADV151, PR151, ADV 395
Internship Supervisor                                                Internship Coordinator
Dr. Isabella Cunningham                                              Sally Lim
Isabella.Cunningham@austin.utexas.edu                                srs.internship@gmail.com
Office Hours: M 9:30-11:30AM (BMC 4.330)                             Office Hours: T 9-11AM (BMC 4.326)
COURSE OVERVIEW
     1.   Have an approved internship
     2.   Make sure you are registered for the course
     3.   Check your email and Canvas frequently
     4.   Attend a mandatory orientation and complete a quiz on Canvas
     5.   Complete all 4 course assignments, 2 evaluations (mid-term and final) and 1 final report *
     6.   Attend at least 5 out of 8 speaker events and complete a quiz by the end of each lecture
     7.   Remind your supervisors to submit both the midterm and the final evaluation by deadlines
     8.   Have an above 70% score on your final evaluation from your supervisor
     9.   Participate in the course discussion forum on Canvas
* Please note that failure to meet deadlines and successfully complete all course requirements will result in a failing
grade/NC/Incomplete for the class.
REQUIRED READING MATERIAL
(Apply to PR 350/PR 350s/ADV 350/ADV 350s/ADV 151/PR 151)
Killing the Cover Letter: How to Get a Job in Advertising & Public Relations in a Changed World
Author: Gene Kincaid, Publisher: Hale Fred Press, ISBN-13: 978-0615255408
Work Wise; Author: Gary Goldsmith, available at Amazon.com
*Textbook can be purchased at UT Co-op.
Note that students enrolled in ADV 151 and PR 151 are ONLY required to have their supervisor complete the Mid-term and the
Final evaluations and must also complete the final paper.
SPEAKERS REQUIRED ATTENDANCE:
The presentations by all speakers will be on Tuesdays from 6:30 to 7:30 in BMC 1.202. The speakers’ schedule and a short bio
for each speaker will be posted on CANVAS the week preceding each speaker presentation. There will also be a mandatory
orientation on September 11 from 6:30 to 7:30 in BMC 1.202 and every student is required to attend it.


IMPORTANT COURSE DATES
 Internship Application   Deadline for submitting application forms for     September 10
                          internship approval                               by 5:00 pm
 (Auto-Drop)              Students who fail to obtain an approval on their  September 13,
                          internships by this deadline will not qualify to  by 5:00 pm
                          enroll and will be automatically dropped from the
                          course.
 Mandatory Orientation    All students are required to attend a mandatory   September 11,
 (Physical class meeting) orientation and complete an orientation quiz in   6:30 – 7:30 pm
                          order to complete this requirement.               (BMC 1.202)
 Course Assignment 1      Submit your up-to-date resume, cover letter and   February 17,
                          digital business card                             by 5:00 pm
 Speaker Event 1                                                            February 25,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                   6:30 – 7:30 pm (BMC
                                                                            1.202)
 Speaker Event 2                                                            October 2,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                   6:30 – 7:30 pm (BMC
                                                                            1.202)
 Course Assignment 2      Complete an assignment based on                   October 3,
                          Sections 1-4 of the required reading material     by 5:00 pm
 Course Assignment 3      Complete an assignment based on the rest of the   October 9,
                          required reading material                         by 5:00 pm
 Midterm Evaluations      Both supervisors and students are required to     October12,
                          submit a mid-term evaluation on students’         by 5:00 pm
                          performance during their internship
 Course Assignment 4      Complete an assignment based on the rest of the   October 15,
                          required reading material                         by 5:00 pm
 Speaker Event 3                                                            October 16,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                   6:30 – 7:30 pm (BMC
                                                                            1.202)
 Speaker Event 4                                                            October 30,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                   6:30 – 7:30 pm (BMC
                                                                            1.202)


  Discussion Forum                  The discussion forum on Canvas will be closed at        November 1,
                                    5:00 pm. Questions will no longer be accepted           by 5:00 pm
                                    afterwards.
  Speaker Event 5                                                                           November 6,
  (Physical class meeting)                                                                  6:30 – 7:30 pm (BMC
                                                                                            1.202)
  Speaker Event 6                                                                           November 19,
  (Physical class meeting)                                                                  6:30 – 7:30 pm (BMC
                                                                                            1.202)
  Speaker Event 7                                                                           December 4,
  (Physical class meeting)                                                                  6:30 – 7:30 pm (BMC
                                                                                            1.202)
  Final Evaluations                 Both supervisors and students are required to           December 7,
                                    submit a final evaluation on students’ performance      by 5:00 pm
                                    during their internship
  Final Report                      Submit a final report of your internship (the report    December 10,
                                    guidelines will be posted on Canvas).                   by 5:00pm
* Please note that the course does not require in-person attendance every week; physical meetings are highlighted
in orange shade, and the date, time and venue of these lectures are subject to change. Please refer to the TA’s
Canvas announcement if necessary.
NOTE: If changes in the schedule become necessary, you will be notified of such changes
on CANVAS a week before the change.
COURSE REQURIEMENTS
     1.  INTERNSHIP APPROVAL
         All students must submit an application form for Dr. Cunningham’s review and approval by September 10
         by 5:00 pm. Students who fail to secure an approved internship by the 12th class date of the semester will
         be automatically dropped from the course.
     2.  MANDATORY ORIENTATION
         All students are required to attend the mandatory orientation on September 11, 6:30 – 7:30 pm
         (BMC 2.106), and to complete a quiz by the end of the orientation. The orientation requires students’
         physical presence. Students who do not attend the orientation in person will not receive a “Complete” on
         the task. Exception: Students who are part of the UT LA program need to arrange a 1-to-1 meeting with the
         TA (by phone or by Skype) prior to the orientation date.
     3.  COURSE ASSIGNMETS


   In total, there are 4 written assignments for students to complete throughout the course. Students who fail
   to complete any one of these assignments on time will receive an “Incomplete” for the course. Exception:
   Students who enroll in ADV 395 or ADV 151 are not required to complete assignments pertaining to the
   reading materials, i.e. Course Assignment 2~4.
4. SPEAKER EVENTS
   Students are required to attend at least 5 out of 7 speaker events during the course. Please refer to the
   above chart of Important Course Dates for the date, time, and venue of each speaker events. By the end of
   each speaker event, students will be asked to complete a quiz regarding the lecture topic in class, which
   counts for the completion of each speaker event. Additionally, students who use electronic devices
   (including laptops and/or smartphones) during the lecture will be asked to leave the lecture hall and thus
   will not receive a complete grade on the task.
5. DISCUSSION FORUM
   A discussion forum will be set up on the course Canvas site. Students can post any question regarding their
   internships on to the forum, and Dr. Cunningham will reply to these questions via Canvas. Students can
   post their questions anytime, but inquiries will no longer be accepted after November 1, at 5:00 pm..
6. MIDTERM AND FINAL EVALUATIONS
   Both supervisors and students are required to complete a mid-term and a final evaluation on students’
   performance during the internship. The mid-term evaluation will be released on October 5, and is due on
   October 12, by 5:00 pm; the final evaluation will be released on December 1 and is due on December 7,
   by 5:00 pm.
        a.    Student Evaluation: A link to students’ self-evaluations will be posted on Canvas.
        b. Supervisor Evaluations: Supervisors’ evaluations will be sent directly to them via email from the
              TA. Student will be asked to provide their supervisors’ email contacts during the mandatory
              orientation. If there is a change in supervisors’ means of contact, please inform the TA as early as
              possible. It is students’ responsibility to confirm whether their supervisors have received the
              evaluation forms and remind their supervisors to complete the task by deadlines. In addition,
              students will be notified if they receive below 70% scores for their mid-term evaluations; and all
              students must receive above 80% scores in their final evaluations in order to pass the course.
7. FINAL REPORT
   The final report serves as your synopsis and final evaluation of the internship experience. It is important to
   be honest when it comes to evaluating your internship. Report Guidelines will be available in a separate
   document and will be posted to Canvas later in the semester. The final report is due on December 10, by
   5:00 pm, and late submissions will not be accepted unless previously arranged with Dr. Cunningham.


GRADING POLICY
This is a Credit/No Credit course. As such, students will not receive credits for this class unless you complete
ALL course requirements by the specific deadlines set in the course syllabus.
In particular, your “grade” will be determined by the following criteria:
        1. Did you complete all course assignments on time?
        2. Did you complete the required work hours?
        3. Did you show improvement between your midterm and your final supervisor evaluation?
        4. Did you submit a well-written, edited and honest final evaluation by the deadline?
        5. Did you notify the Internship Coordinator if your internship duties changed significantly?
COURSE POLICIES
Academic Integrity and Standards
Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and integrity in all course activities and
assignments. It is expected that there shall be no deception regarding the representation made by the student of
his/her preparation, participation or performance.
Plagiarism is presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own and is a form of fraud. Plagiarism includes
(but is not limited to) the presentation of a sequence of words from another writer, utilized without proper
attribution. It is critical that students properly acknowledge the work of others and that the acknowledgement be
accurate and complete.
The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and plagiarism are subject to the standard
policies and procedures for all UT-Austin students as established by UT-Austin.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice)
or 232-2937 (video phone). Also, see http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Use of Canvas
In this class we will use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected access—to
distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to distribute assignments, and to
give students online quizzes and surveys.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading
your email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the
university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—


I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting in a disturbing manner, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050
or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize
yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the
one you used when you enter the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the
first week class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the
Fire Prevention Services Office.
Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that
number.” You can find advice, models, templates, and other resources for designing your course syllabus on the
DIIA website at http://www.utexas.edu/academic/diia/
