Course Title: Plains Archaeology: Prehistory and History
Ant 326E (Unique # 31715)
TTH 3:30 -5:00 pm. - SAC 4.174
Spring 2019
Instructor: Dr. Mariah F. Wade Office: SAC 4.146
Office Hours: TTH 1-2 pm or by appointment
Telephone: 512-232-4876                Email: m.wade@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description:
Life on the Plains has never been easy. The ecological characteristics of the Plains enabled varied human populations to adapt and
change in response to environmental and historical circumstances. This course explores the evidence of human activities on the Great
Plains, with a primary focus on the central and southern plains from prehistoric to historic times (ca. 13.000 BP to ca. CE 1850). We
will review, critically, the principal environmental concepts used to define the plains, discuss the impact of specific resources such as
the bison, and examine a number of archaeological sites as well as some relevant historical records.
Requirements: Upper division standing or consent of the instructor.
Required Text Books:
1998       Archaeology on the Great Plains, edited by W. Raymond Wood
          Other assigned readings will be on Canvas
Policies and Administrative details
     •    Pre-requisites There are no pre-requisites for this course other than those shown above. However, students should have
          taken Ant. 304 or have some knowledge of Archaeology, otherwise they might have problems following the material.
     •    Attendance is required.
     •    Canvas             Lecture materials will be placed on Canvas after the class. Some maps, information sheets, articles and
          review sheets will be also on Canvas.
     •    Test policy        There will be no make-up tests, except when the absence is unavoidable in which case the student is
          expected to contact me, and I will require proof of the problem.
     •    Tests              Exams will include a mixture of short answers, identifications and mini-essays. Fact sheets provided before
          the exam will include possible topics for the mini-essays.
     •    Poster Project Information on the Poster Project will be given later in class. But, as the name indicates, students will be
          expected to create a poster that will include text and images related to a topic, an archaeological time period or an
          archaeology site. You will choose between doing the project individually or as a pair. In either case you will give a 5- minute
          presentation on the finished product. You may want to check these two sites for templates, ideas and guidance.
     •   https://www.canva.com/create/posters/
     •    http://www.saa.org/AbouttheSociety/AnnualMeeting/GuidelinesforPosterPresentations/tabid/192/Default.aspx
     •    https://www.google.com/search?q=archaeology+poster+presentations&client=firefox-a&hs=IVS&rls=org.mozilla:en-
          US:official&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=JeYbUv-
          mNbD22QWi2YHgCg&ved=0CDQQsAQ&biw=1410&bih=718
     •    Scholastic honesty           Scholastic dishonesty will not be tolerated and the rules of the University of Texas will apply.
          Please make sure that you well aware of the content of these rules, by visiting this site:
          http://www.cwrl.utexas.edu/integrity/
          Plagiarism         You may also want to see these other sites, which include information about plagiarism and how to deal
          with web sources. Use of web material, particularly text, has to be referenced as completely as if you were dealing with a
          library book.
     •    http://newark.rutgers.edu/%7Eehrlich/plagiarism598.html
     •    http://www.indiana.edu/%7Ewts/wts/plagiarism.html
     •    Computers          Students have access to the Student Microcomputer Facility (SMF). Please visit this site for more
          information: http://www.utexas.edu/smf/
     •    Disabilities       The University of Texas at Austin provides students with qualified disabilities with academic adjustments
          to their needs. For more information please visit this site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/ or call 471-6259. If
          you have a disability please let me know by the second week of classes.
     •    Cell phones        Please make sure that your cell phones and other electronic devices are turned off while in the classroom.
     •    Recording          According to University Rules tape-recording of lectures is not permitted, unless the instructor has granted
          permission.
     •    Contact            You can contact me by email, by coming to the office hours, or by appointment. I will not answer emails
          received after 9:00 pm.
                                                                                                                                          1


Evaluation and Grading:
         Tests #1 and # 2: 25 points each (students can elect to drop, or not to take, one of these 2 tests).
         Test # 3: 30 points
         Poster Project: 30 points. Students who prefer to do a 5-page paper on a specific archaeological site instead,
can elect to do so.
         Map test: 5 pts
         Attendance/Class Participation: 10 points
Assignments:
    •    Reading assignments have to be completed before class.
    •    There will be no make – up texts (see above).
    •    Class attendance is required (see above)
Syllabus
Week 1 – January 22 - 24
         Introduction
         The history of archaeology in the Plains –overview
Readings:
         January 24 – “Introduction” R. Wood
Week 2 – January 29-31
         Definition of the Plains – Environment and Culture Areas
         Climate and Topography
Readings:
         January 29- “The Great Plains Setting” M. Kay pp.16-28
         January 31– “The Great Plains Setting” M. Kay pp. 28-39
Week 3 – February 5 -7
         The History of the Prehistory of the Plains
         Problems of Taxonomy
Readings:
         February 5 – “A history of the Great Plains Prehistory” R. A. Krause pp. 48-78
Week 4 – February 12-14
         The Direct Historical Approach
         Paleo-Indians
Readings:
         February 12 - “The First Americans” and “Who got there first” (on Canvas)
                           “Blackwater Draw” (on Canvas)
         February 14 - “The Paleo-Indian Cultures of the Great Plains” J. L. Hoffman and R. W. Graham pp. 87-103
                        “The Buttermilk Creek Complex” (on Canvas)
                           q   Fact sheet for Test 1 delivered
Week 5 – February 19-21
         Paleo-Indians – Hunters and gatherers
Readings:
         19 - “Evolving views on the Pleistocene colonization of North America” (on Canvas)
         “Explaining the origin of fluting in North American Pleistocene weaponry” (on Canvas)
    ü   February 19– Video
                           q   Test 1: February 21
Week 6 – February 26-28
         Late Paleo-Indians/Plains Archaic – Hunters and gatherers
Readings:
         February 26– “The Paleo-Indian Cultures of the Great Plains” J. L. Hoffman and R. W. Graham
         pp. 103-123 –
         “Clovis Hunting Strategies or how to make out with plenty of resources” (on Canvas)
                                                                                                                     2


        February 28 – “Observations on butchering” (on Canvas)
   ü   February 28- Video ?
   ü  
Week 7 – March 5-7
        The Archaic - Mobile Foragers
Readings
        March 5 - “The Northwestern and Northern Plains Archaic” G. Frison pp.140-166
        March 7 - “Lithic Networks reveal early regionalization in Late Pleistocene North America” (on Canvas)
                    “Better Homes and pastures” (on Canvas)
                    “Early Paleoindian Women” (on Canvas)
Week 8 – March 12 -14
        The Archaic – Mobile Foragers
Readings:
        March 12 - “Central and Southern Plains Archaic” M. Kay pp.173-195
        March 14 - “The Horse Creek Site: Some Evidence for Gender Roles in a Transitional Early to Middle Plains Archaic Base
Camp” (on Canvas)
                     “Season of Bison Mortality at Three Plains Archaic Kill Sites in Wyoming” (on Canvas)
                     “Head-Smashed-In: 5500 years of Bison Jumping in the Alberta Plains” (on Canvas)
         http://www.cbc.ca/archives/categories/lifestyle/travel/unesco-world-heritage-sites-in-canada/the-great-story-of-head-
        smashed-in-buffalo-jump.html
                           q   Fact sheet for Test 2 delivered
                           q   SPRING BREAK 18 -23
Week 9 – March 26 -28
        The Plains Woodland Complexes
        Early Village Tradition
        The Central Plains Tradition
Readings:
        March 26 – “The Plains Woodland” A.M. Johnson and A.E. Johnson, pp.201-225
        March 28- “The Central Plains Tradition” T.L. Steinacher and G.F. Carlson, pp.235-259
                    “Adoption of the bow and arrow” (on Canvas)
Week 10 – April 2-4
                           q   Test 2 – April 2
         April 4 - Early and Late Village Tradition.
Readings:
         April 4 – “The Middle Missouri Tradition” R. P. Winham and F. A. Calabrese.pp.269-307
Week 11 – April 9 -11
        The Middle Missouri Tradition
        Late Village Tradition/ Late Prehistoric
        The Coalescent Tradition
Readings:
        April 9 - “Adoption of the Bow in Prehistoric North America” (on Canvas)
                   “The Coalescent Tradition” C.M. Johnson pp.308-333
Week 12 – April 16-18
        The Southern Plains
        Early and Late Villagers
Readings:
        April 16 - “Southern Plains Villagers” R. R. Drass, pp.415-427
        April 18 - “The Southern Plains Villagers” R. R. Drass, pp.427-447
                           q   Fact sheet for Test 3 delivered
Week 13 – April 23 - 25
        The Late High Plains Hunters
                                                                                                                               3


         Historic Plains and Riverine Groups
         The Arrival of the Europeans
                           q   Test 3 – April 23
Readings:
         April 25 -
         “Bison Processing at the Rush Site, 41TG46, and Evidence for Pemmican Production in the Southern Plains,” M. Quigg.(on
         Canvas)
         “The Late High Plains Hunters” J. R. Hanson pp. 456-469
         “Landscape Engineering” (on Canvas)
Week 14 – April 30 – May 2
         Conflict and Removal
Readings:
  “Euro-American Archaeology” Douglas Scott pp.481-510.
Week 15 – May 7-9
         Project Presentations
                           q    May 9 is the last day of this class
                                What you should expect to get (and know!) when you finish this course
                                                A sense of place and a place of living
         What characteristics made the Plains region special and how these characteristics enabled specific human systems of
culture and lifeways.
         How and why different populations through time adapted and profited from the physiographic and environmental
conditions of the Plains.
         Distinguish, identify, and characterize the principal archaeological features of the main archaeological Periods (i.e.
different projectile point sequences, dwelling styles, burial customs, survival strategies…).
         Understand and be able to explain how and why human populations on the fringes of the Plains region, or in certain
areas of the Plains, developed different living and subsistence strategies (i.e. you should be able to write a comprehensive essay
that compares, contrasts and exemplifies Paleoindian lifeways to Archaic lifeways; Archaic lifeways to Village Tradition
lifeways…).
         Understand and explain how and why the European colonizing process affected Native populations and their
subsistence base.
         You should have pondered and be able to discuss how the definitions of the Plains through time, as well as its
organization for modern human purposes affects the way we view and study archaeology and the human populations that
have inhabited the Plains.
This  course  provides  students  with  the  following  readiness  competencies  and  skills:  
     •   Critical  Thinking/Problem  Solving  
     •   Analytical  thinking  
     •   Oral/Written  Communications  
     •   Global/Multicultural  Fluency  
     •   Analytical  thinking  
     •   Collaboration    
     •   Time  Management  
                                                                                                                                 4
