                    M f362K PROBABILITY I – FIRST DAY HANDOUT
          Summer 2019, Unique # 86370, MTWThF 1:00 pm to 2:30 pm, RLM 6.104
Instructor: Kanthimathi Sathasivan, Ph.D. (You can call me Dr. Satha)
Course Website: https://canvas.utexas.edu/
Course Description: An introductory course in the mathematical theory of probability,
fundamental to further work in probability and statistics, includes basic probability properties,
conditional probability and independence, various discrete and continuous random variables,
expectation and variance, central limit theorem, and joint probability distributions. Principles of
set theory and a set of axioms for probability are used to derive some probability density and/or
distribution functions. Special counting techniques are developed to handle some problems.
Properties associated with a random variable are developed for the usual elementary
distributions. Problem solving is required, and some theorem proving can be done, but the course
emphasizes computation and intuition. A student may not receive credit for M316 after
completing M362K with a grade of C- or better. Mathematics 362K and Statistics and Scientific
Computation 321 may not both be counted.
Prerequisite: M 408D, 408L or 408S with a grade of at least C-.
What will be learned?
Basic combinatorics: Counting principle, permutations, combinations.
Basic concepts: Sample spaces, events, basic axioms and theorems of probability, finite sample
spaces with equally likely probabilities.
Conditional probability: Reduced sample space, independence, Bayes' Theorem.
Random variables: Discrete and continuous random variables, discrete probability functions and
continuous probability density functions, distribution functions, expectation, variance, functions
of random variables.
Special distributions: Bernoulli, Binomial, Poisson, Geometric, Negative binomial, Hyper-
Geometric, and Uniform discrete random variables, Uniform, Normal, and Exponential
continuous random variables, approximation of Binomial by Poisson or Normal.
Jointly distributed random variables: Joint distribution functions, independence, conditional
distributions, expectation, covariance
Sums of independent random variables: expectation, variance.
Inequalities and Limit theorems: Markov's and Chebyshev's inequalities, Weak and Strong Law
of Large Numbers, Central Limit Theorem.
Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
The ability to think and approach a problem mathematically, to develop problem solving skills,
to improve written and organizational skills, to explain and reason solutions, to apply the
techniques and skills to other areas, to prepare the fundamentals for other courses


Required Text: A First Course in Probability, tenth edition by Sheldon Ross
GRADING: Final grade for the course will be determined using two midterm tests worth 25%
each, final exam worth 30%, and homework and quizzes worth 20%. Minimum score needed for
the + and – letter grades are given in the table below.
Percent     93%     90%     87%      83%     80%     77%      73%      70%   67%     63%      60%
Grade        A       A-      B+       B       B-      C+       C        C-    D+       D       D-
TESTS (50%): The two midterm tests will be given during your regular class period. Tentative
test dates and chapters covered are June 19th (Chapters 1, 2, 3 and sections 4.1 to 4.5) and
July 3rd (sections 4.6 to 4.8.2, Chapter 5, and sections 6.1 to 6.5). Prior to each midterm, I
will announce in class information about the midterm. Tests will be returned in class. If you have
grading questions you need to return the test to me right away and I will hold on to your test until
you come and talk to me in my office. Any questions concerning the grading must be addressed
within one week after papers are returned in class. There will not be any makeup or rescheduled
tests for any reason. If you must miss a test, your final exam grade will replace the missed test
grade.
FINAL EXAM (30%): Final exam is mandatory and it will be given on Saturday, the 13th of
July from 9 am to 12 noon. The location will be announced during the last week of classes. The
final exam will be comprehensive.
You may use any scientific calculator (no graphing or no professional calculators) that does not
do integrals on midterm tests and the final exam. Make sure it has !, nCr, and nPr.
Recommended (easy to use) calculators are TI-30XIIS, TI-30XIIB (MultiView okay). Other
common calculators are TI30xa, TI30xs. You will not be allowed to use graphing calculators or
professional (Pro) calculators or calculators that can do integration.
HOMEWORK and QUIZZES (20%): Homework will be assigned over the lecture.
Homework will be posted on canvas. It will be easier to do the homework if you collaborate with
another student or do it in a group. Get some contact information from your classmates. You are
encouraged to discuss homework assignments with your peers but you are expected to keep a
homework notebook of your own work. Always provide the reason and enough work to check
the validity of your solution. Few problems from your assigned homework will be collected and
graded. Assignments are due at the beginning of the class on the due date and WILL NOT BE
ACCEPTED LATE OR EARLY FOR ANY REASON. Do not send your assignment
electronically through email. It will not be accepted. Use smooth edged paper to do the
homework. If you rip off paper from your notebook, make sure you cut the edges. You should
staple your homework papers before class, fold in the middle lengthwise with page 1 inside and
PRINT your full name, EID, homework number, and M f362K – 1 pm - Dr. Satha, on the inside
right top and outside right top. There may be quizzes in class on the material covered before or
discussed in the lecture using Squarecap or on paper. (Squarecap is free for our class. Do not buy
Squarecap.) Four lowest grades in this category (Homework and quizzes) will be dropped and
that will accommodate students who must miss a class or homework due to any reason.


LECTURE: We will cover a fair amount of material from Chapters 1 to 8. We will not cover all
sections. There is a wealth of examples in the text. The instructor has time to present only some
of them. That does not prevent you from going over them by yourself. The material covered in
roughly the second half of this course is more difficult than the material in the earlier chapters.
ATTENDANCE: I expect you to be committed to attend all classes and to be on time. If you
must miss class (unavoidable), you should get the notes from a classmate. The material covered
in class and the homework problems assigned will give you an idea of the level of difficulty
considered in this class. The material becomes difficult after chapter 3 and do not underestimate
the class using the first three chapters or your first test grade.
ELECTRONIC DEVICES: All cell phones and other electronic devices (e.g. laptop, ipod,
ipad) must be turned completely off and put away during lecture and exams. Using these devices
or reading newspapers or sleeping during class is a distraction to the faculty and to your fellow
classmates and they don’t like it.
How will students learn?
Students attend lectures and solve problems by actively involving and participating in every
learning activity. Attempt and solve the problems assigned for practice. Complete all the
assigned homework with a due date in an organized manner and turn it in on time. Practice
problems to prepare for midterms and exam. Students form group study sessions to review.
OTHER INFORMATION
Students with disabilities: The University of Texas provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office
of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
If you qualify under the University’s Learning Disability Policy, your letter from the Dean will
take effect after it is presented to your instructor.
Academic dishonesty: You are encouraged to discuss homework assignments with your peers
but you are expected to submit your own work. During tests you are expected to keep your eyes
only on your test. Students who violate these expectations can expect to receive a failing grade
on the test or the course and be reported to the Dean of Students office for academic dishonesty.
These types of violations are reported to professional schools, should you ever decide to apply
one day. Don’t do it – it’s not worth the consequences.
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
conjunction with a program course requirement.
University Code of Conduct: The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the


University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct)
Religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a
test, a homework assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Email: If you must email me include M 362K, class time and the brief reason for the email on
subject line. Always include your full name, EID and what you want to communicate in the body
of the email. Before emailing, check if the information you are looking for is available on
canvas, or class work (e.g. due dates, homework, etc). I will answer your email only if it is
necessary (determined by me). Please wait for at least 24 hours or the weekend before you send
me a reminder.
Computer Lab: The 40-seat undergrad computer lab, RLM 7.122, is open to all students
enrolled in Math courses. Students can sign up for an individual account themselves in the
computer lab using their UT EID. The computers have most of the mainstream commercial math
software: mathematica, maple, matlab, magma, and an assortment of open source programs.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Student Services Bldg (SSB), 5th Floor
Hours: M--F 8am--5pm
512 471 3515
www.cmhc.utexas.edu


Emergency evacuation procedure from the Office of Campus Safety and Security:
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
6. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
7. A link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Weapons Policies and Safety:
It is our intention to create a peaceful and secure environment that is conducive to active
learning in our classroom. We expect that all students will respect one another, the TA and the
Professor. With the exception of concealed handguns, no weapons may be brought into the
classroom.
For more detailed information about Campus Carry consult (http://campuscarry.utexas.edu/).
Four Key points:
1. The law does NOT allow open carry on campus
2.    A person must have a license to carry a concealed handgun on campus.
3.    One must be age 21 or older to obtain a license to carry
4.    The law still makes it a crime for a license holder to carry a concealed handgun while
     intoxicated.
Course participants with a license to carry a handgun who choose to bring a gun on campus,
must keep it concealed, with the trigger locked, and on their possession at all times. If a gun or
any other weapon becomes visible, the person who sees the weapon should leave the classroom
and immediately call 911 so that law enforcement personnel can take appropriate action and
restore an atmosphere conducive to learning.


Handguns may not be brought to the classroom in backpacks, bags, purses, or other objects that
could separate you from your weapon. University policy and the implementation of the law
would be violated by the separation of the gun owner from their weapon that would result from
these required classroom activities.
We encourage students to develop habits that keep them safe without the need to carry guns. For
example, when traveling on campus, especially after dark, be sure to travel in groups of 2 or
more friends. If you must stay late to work on a project and have no one to escort you, call
SURE walk 512-232-9255 or book a walk on line at orderasurewalk@gmail.com to obtain an
escort, or call 911 any time you feel unsafe. Talk with your fellow students to develop buddy
systems that help you to be safe and secure at parties and other events, especially where you
might become intoxicated. We encourage you to share your knowledge of maintaining health
and safety with others.
Please keep our classrooms safe and peaceful conducive to effective learning.
IMPORTANT DATES FOR FIRST-TERM
June 7th, Friday: Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration
require the approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean. Last day
undergraduate students may register and pay tuition without the approval of the registrar. (See
General Information, chapter 4, for details.)
June 11th, Tuesday: Fourth class day; this is the date the official enrollment count is taken. Last
day an undergraduate student may add a class, with required approvals except for rare and
extenuating circumstances.
June 26th, Wednesday: Last day an undergraduate student may change registration in a class to
or from the pass/fail basis or credit/no credit basis.
July 11th, Thursday: Last day to drop a class, with required approvals.
DEADLINES FOR DROPPING A COURSE: If you drop a class on or before the 4th class
day, the class will not show up on your transcript. If you drop a class after that date, the course
will show up on the transcript with a “Q” grade. After the last day to withdraw, it is not possible
to drop a course except for extenuating (usually non-academic) circumstances.


                            Tentative Schedule - Mf362K Summer 2019
                (Textbook: A First Course in Probability, tenth edition by Sheldon Ross)
Class     Date      Day       Sections                                   Topic
  1      June 6    Thurs      1.1, 1.2      Introduction, Basic principle of counting
  2      June 7     Fri       1.3, 1.4      Permutations, Combinations
  3     June 10    Mon      2.1, 2.2, 2.3   Introduction, Sample Space and Events, Axioms of
                                            Probability
  4     June 11     Tue     2.4, 2.5, 2.7   Some Simple Propositions, Sample Spaces Having Equally
                                            Likely Outcomes, Probability as a Measure of belief
  5     June 12    Wed        3.1, 3.2      Introduction, Conditional Probabilities
  6     June 13    Thurs      3.3, 3.4      Baye’s Formula, Independent Events
  7     June 14     Fri       4.1, 4.2      Random Variables, Discrete Random Variables
  8     June 17    Mon        4.3, 4.4      Expected Value, Expectation of a Function of a Random
                                            Variable
  9     June 18     Tue          4.5        Variance
 10     June 19    Wed        TEST 1        Sections 1.1 to 4.5
 11     June 20    Thurs     4.6, 4.6.1     The Bernoulli and Binomial Random Variables, Properties
                                            of Binomial Random Variable
 12     June 21     Fri      4.7, 4.8.1,    The Poisson Random Variable, The Geometric Random
                                4.8.2       Variable, The Negative Binomial Random Variable
 13     June 24    Mon        5.1, 5.2      Introduction, Expectation and Variance of Continuous
                                            Random Variables
 14     June 25     Tue       5.3, 5.4      The Uniform Random Variable, Normal Random Variable
 15     June 26    Wed       5.4.1, 5.5     The Normal Approximation to the Binomial Distribution,
                                            Exponential Random Variable
 16     June 27    Thurs         5.7        The Distribution of a Function of a Random Variable
 17     June 28     Fri       6.1, 6.2      Joint Distribution Functions, Independent Random
                                            Variables
 18      July 1    Mon           6.3        Sums of Independent Random Variables
 19      July 2     Tue       6.4, 6.5      Conditional Distributions: Discrete Case, Continuous Case
 20      July 3    Wed        TEST 2        Sections 4.6 to 6.5
 21      July 8    Mon      6.6, 7.1, 7.2   Order Statistics, Introduction, Expectations of Sums of
                                            Random Variables
 22      July 9     Tue          7.4        Covariance, Variance of Sums, and Correlations
 23     July 10    Wed        8.1, 8.2      Introduction, Chebyshev’s Inequality and the Weak Law of
                                            Large Numbers
 24     July 11    Thurs      8.3, 8.4      The Central Limit Theorem, The Strong Law of Large
                                            Numbers
 25     July 13     Sat   COMPREHENSIVE FINAL EXAM – 9 am to 12 noon
    Note: The above schedule is tentative and it is subject to change. Any change to this
    schedule will be announced in class.
