                                                    Course ID: ADV s378
                                                    Title: AI & Ethics
                                                    Location: BMC 4.204
                                                    Professor Erin Reilly
                                                    Phone: (207) 251-1617
                                                    Email: ebreilly@utexas.edu
                                                    Summer II 2019
                                                    Office Hours: By Appointment (I will be in my
                                                    office most Wednesdays from 10-12:30 PM)
                                                    Office Location: BMC 4.368
      Course Description
      From SIRI to search engines to self-driving cars, Artificial Intelligence (AI) is rapidly transforming society. It
      informs the mobile apps, websites and the IoT objects of everyday life and increasingly serves as the key
      mechanism driving interactivity, participation and decision making in support of many human needs. This is
      a workshop-style seminar where students will tackle real-world problems to better understand what AI is,
      explore the values and ethical norms of AI, and discuss how these important topics relate to live, learn,
      work and our role in society.
      Required Text
      Move Fast and Break Things (Taplin, Jonathan) – specific chapters noted per week
      Readings will be posted in the weekly reference folder on the class canvas or direct link in the lecture
      documents. Students are responsible for reading articles and watching videos posted by professor and
      commenting/participating in discussions on readings.
      Course Learning Outcomes
           •   Demonstrate understanding of the history of artificial intelligence, including promises, challenges
               and shared decisions between man and machine in our everyday lives.
           •   Recognize the impact of AI with our jobs and economy.
           •   Understand AI in the media landscape in the context of ethics, law and diversity.
           •   Develop a comprehensive understanding of AI’s current inequalities.
           •   Assess and evaluate if AI is undermining our democracy.
           •   Create and present a research paper and creative project related to AI and society.
      Course Schedule: A Weekly Breakdown
 Week                Monday – In Class                 Wednesday – On your Own                     Friday – With your Peers
    1        7/15 – In Class                       7/17 – On your Own                          7/19 – W/ Peers
Intro to     Review Syllabus / Expectations        Assignments                                 Assignments
  AI &           • Review Discussion                • Read Erin’s Lecture                         • Prep Monday’s Discussion
 Ethics               Memo expectations &                (Lesson1B): Understanding                   w others in your group
                      Assign Discussion leads            Ethics and Giving Voice to


              •    Review Final Project            Values                                 • Final Project Pitch Video
              •    Sign Up to lead                 o Make sure to watch each                  due (Post Video by
                   Discussion on                        of the Giving Voice to                Sunday, July 21 at 5 PM)
                   Understanding GVV                    Values video in the
                   Framework and its                    lecture
                   relationship to the topic
                   of Artificial Intelligence  •   Choose 2 other readings /
                   in our Society (Must be         videos from References in
                   able to incorporate 1 or        Monday or Wednesday
                   more of the GVV Pillars         Lectures to discuss in your
                   and notes from Weekly           Weekly MEMO.
                   Memos)
          Assignment
              • Read Erin’s Lecture
                   (Lesson1A): Introduction
                   to Artificial Intelligence
    2     7/22 – In Class                     7/24 – On your Own                       7/26 – W/ Peers
 Gaps in  Discussion (30 Minutes ea x 4)      Assignment                               Assignment
    AI     • Understanding GVV                 • Choose 2 readings / videos               • Prep Monday’s Discussion
               Framework and its                   from References in Monday’s                w others in your group
               relationship to the topic of        Lecture to discuss in your
               Artificial Intelligence in our      Weekly MEMO.
               Society
                                               •   Work on Final Project.
           •   Sign Up to lead Discussion
               on AI & Diversity
          Assignment
           • Read Erin’s Lecture
               (Lesson2): Artificial
               Intelligence and Diversity -
               Gaps in AI
    3     7/29 – In Class                     7/31 – In Class                          8/2 – W/ Peers
AI in our Discussion (30 Minutes each)        Ethics Canvas Activity                   Assignments
Personal   • Understanding GVV                  • Teams will choose a network             • Prep Monday’s Discussion
  Lives        Framework and its                   application (ie: Whatsapp) and             w others in your group
               relationship to Diversifying        using the Ethics Canvas will
               AI                                  brainstorm issues, ethical             • Final Project Progress
                                                   impacts, different                         Report due (Post
           •   Sign Up to lead Discussion          stakeholders and offer                     Document by Sunday,
               on AI in Our Personal Lives         solutions to ethical impacts.              August 4 at 5 PM). Make
                                                                                              sure to include the Ethics
          Assignments                         Assignment                                      Canvas to refine your final
           • Read Erin’s Lectures:             • Choose 2 readings / videos                   project and submit with
               o (Lesson3) AI in our Social        from References from either                report.
                    Lives                          Monday or Wednesday’s
               o (Lesson4): AI in our              Lectures to discuss in your
                    Homes                          Weekly MEMO.
                                               •   Work on Final Project
                                                                  Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 2 of 4


    4        8/5 – In Class                          8/7 – On your Own                          8/9 – In Class (10AM – 12PM)
AI in our    Discussion (30 Minutes each)            Assignment                                 – We will host this In Class
Careers       • Understanding GVV                     • Choose 2 readings / videos              session online via Zoom
                   Framework and its                       from References from either          Discussion (30 Minutes each)
                   relationship to AI in our               Monday or Wednesday’s                   • Understanding GVV
                   Personal Lives                          Lectures to discuss in your                 Framework and its
                                                           Weekly MEMO.                                relationship to AI in our
              •    Sign Up to lead Discussion         • NOTE – This MEMO is not due                    Careers
                   on AI in Our Careers                    on the usual Saturday at 7pm
                                                           as it’s the last discussion and
             Assignments                                   we will discuss on Friday 8/9.
              • Read Erin’s Lecture: AI in                 This MEMO IS DUE this
                   our Careers                             evening 8/7 by 7PM
    5        8/12 – In Class                         8/14 – In Class                            8/16 – On your Own
  Final      Group 1 Final Project                   Group 2 Final Project                      Assignment
Projects     Presentations                           Presentations                                 • SUBMIT your Final Project
              • SIGN UP                               • SIGN UP                                        Product
      Grades
      Each student should keep track of his/her own grades. There is a total of 316 points possible in this course,
      and grades will be based on the following:
           •    Four Discussion Memos posted in the bulletin board worth 20 points each for a total of 80 points /
                15% of grade.
           •    Four Discussions participated in during class worth 3 points each and additional points for each
                time you lead a discussion. Initial total is 12 points with extra points for leading / 15% of grade
           •    One In-Class Activity worth 20 points for 10% of your grade.
           •    A final project worth 200 points / 60% of grade. This is broken into individual grades: Project Pitch
                Video (20 points); Progress Report (20 points); Presentation (50 points); Product (50 points); Peer
                Feedback (60 points).
      Discussions | 30%
      Each week, you will write a very short prompt (ie: MEMO) of approximately 350-500 words that engage
      with Professor Reilly’s Overview of that week’s theme and at least two of the week’s readings or videos,
      and ends in at least one question to anchor that week’s discussion.
      You have considerable freedom: you can pose questions you had as you read; contrast readings; connect
      themes you saw emerging among texts; critique authors’ arguments; situate texts in relation to networked
      technologies. The goal is to reflect upon the readings and share reflections with your classmates so you
      arrive to class ready to participate.
      Please share your memos (short prompt) with the entire class by 7 pm each Saturday night before
      Monday’s class. Each memo is worth 20 points broken into the following point system so you are clear on
      expectations:
           •    20 points is ‘check-plus’ = thoughtful and sophisticated analysis that moves a conversation forward
           •    16 points is ‘check’ = a good effort that contributes to class, but could have been stronger
                                                                           Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 3 of 4


     •    14 points is ‘minus’ = not quite up to expectations, let’s talk about how to improve
     •    0 points if not submitted on time. Due to discussions weekly that your peers will lead, discussion
          posts will not be accepted past the deadline each week.
These memos are a major contributing factor to the weekly Discussion held each Monday during in-person
class time. Almost every week, you’ll be assigned to lead one of the discussion points from the readings.
You can team up on a discussion topic or you can choose to work individually. This can be nice as you could
set it up as a debate with multiple viewpoints. If you’re leading one of the discussions for the week, you
should make sure to read your colleagues’ memos before Monday’s class. My suggestion is to do it anyway
whether you're leading or not to come prepared to participate in the discussions.
Your participation whether you’re leading the session or not is critical to success and will be graded. Each
discussion is worth 3 points broken into the following point system so you are clear on expectations:
     •    3 points are ‘check-plus’ = thoughtful and sophisticated analysis that moves a conversation
          forward
     •    2 points are ‘check’ = a good effort that contributes to class, but could have been stronger
     •    1 point is ‘minus’ = not quite up to expectations, let’s talk about how to improve
     •    0 points = not present in class or didn’t speak at all during the discussion
     •    +1 Additional point – For each time you lead a discussion. This is given if you've been successful in
          framing the topic, having taken time to read peer memos and incorporate them into the
          discussion, and you ensure during the discussion that all classmates have time to digest, reflect
          and offer contributions.
In Class Activity | 10%
Wednesday, July 31st is one day outside of Monday’s In Class time that I would like us to meet. It’s half-way
through the class and the Ethics Canvas activity is a group brainstorm with a tool that will be useful for your
final project.
Final Project | 60%
This final project is driven by your curiosity on how AI is impacting our society. The final project reflects a
possible career this course is preparing you for in the future.
Scenario: You’ve been hired by a global company that focuses on networked technology. You can choose
what role this global company is vested in based on any domains impacted by AI (i.e.: social lives such as
WhatsApp, home such as Nest, media industries such as AI-driven storytelling, work such as advertising
models, transportation such as autonomous vehicles, social justice such as use of algorithms in the penal
system).
You’ve been hired in this position because you have an understanding of the complex intersections of
human and technology and offer senior leaders of this corporation an ethical systems-based approach to
offering new forms of research, recommendations on new developments grounded in inquiry of the social
and cultural implications.
Final Project Output: The output for this final project can take many forms. Possible forms include
authored submission to a conference or journal relevant to the course work; a class exhibition (i.e.: see
Museum_Trendswatch.pdf), podcast, website for general audience, policy recommendations, case studies
with policy recommendations; speculative design, etc. It is your choice the direction but it must begin with
a question and be rigorous, grounded in original research.
Your final project starts Week 1. This will be an iterative process with weekly check-ins via Canvas and
                                                                   Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 4 of 4


presentations to your peers and guests during Week 5. Each check-in is due Sunday at 5 PM giving peers
and the professor time to review before our Monday in-class time.
     •    Week 1 - Project Pitch Video (5% |July 21 at 5 PM). These are not formal presentations, but you
          should prepare a short talking head video (2 minutes max) to post and receive feedback from your
          peers and professor. In this Project Pitch, you should choose what’s the global company (the
          domain you’ll focus on), the key research question you’ll address in your project and proposed
          output you plan to develop.
     •    Week 3 - Progress Report (10% | August 4 at 5 PM). A more formal version weekly update.
          Submission of your own Ethics Canvas based on final project will be due, along with taking stock of
          your project’s status, realistically assess what you can accomplish by the end of the course, identify
          challenges and figure out a strategy to finish, clearly state your deliverables.
     •    Week 5 - Final Presentation / Product (30%)
               o Group 1 presents August 12 in Class (SIGN UP)
               o Group 2 presents August 14 in Class (SIGN UP)
          Be ready to present a 15-20 minute presentation of your project similar to the kind of talk you’d
          give at a conference. Delivery of your final product in agreed-upon format (i.e.: a mix of scholarly
          writing, public-facing articles, case studies w recommendations, multimedia products) will be due
          Friday, August 16th via Canvas.
     •    Week 1, 3 and 5 - Peer Feedback (15% | In Class ): Each student will offer a constructive written
          response via Canvas for each progress report and final presentation.
Grading Breakdown
                     Assignment                       Points      % of Grade
                     Weekly Memo                              80                 15
                     Discussion Participation                 12                 15
                     Activity: Ethics Canvas                  20                 10
                     Final - Project Pitch Video              20                  5
                     Final - Progress Report                  20                 10
                     Final - Presentation                     50                 15
                     Final - Product                          50                 15
                     Final - Peer freedback                   60                 15
Classroom Expectations
 Class attendance
 Attendance is required every Monday and other days as specified in the calendar dates above. There will
 be no excused absences. Failure to attend any of these meetings will affect your grade and could reduce
 your final grade by as much as two letter grades. Attendance means showing up to the class or meeting on
 time. Habitual lateness will affect your grade.
 Class participation
 Deadlines: Deadlines are noted in the calendar above. Deadlines are non-negotiable. All assignments must
 be handed in on time. Late assignments or projects will not be accepted and you will not earn any points
 (i.e. you will receive a grade of 0) for that assignment. The usual litany of excuses (I slept through my
 alarm, I missed the bus, I have a cold, my grandmother died) won’t work. In the real world, failure to meet
 a deadline could result in you losing your job. Now is the time to practice time management and
 adherence to deadlines.
                                                                   Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 5 of 4


Time management: This course is only 5 weeks and very demanding on your time. Your teammates in this
class will judge you on how much, and the quality of, work you contribute to your class project. Do not lose
track of what is most important.
Communication: The primary way I will communicate with you outside of class is through canvas. You are
responsible for making sure you get any messages from me and you are responsible for the content of
those announcements. I may notify you via canvas about a change in meeting times or assignment
deadlines. Failure to check your canvas does not excuse you from meeting the responsibilities outlined in
the message. At a minimum, you should check your canvas once every day.
Plagiarism: Everything you produce in this class must be your original work. If you have help from anyone
outside this class it will be considered a breach of UT’s policy on Scholastic Integrity and will be dealt with
accordingly.
                                               Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through
UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would
like.
Grading Policies
Weekly meetings and participation:
We will consistently meet in person on Mondays and a few others based on calendar above. Most
Wednesdays and Fridays are meant for you to work on your own and with your peers. It will consist of you
reading and reflecting via canvas on my lectures and other recommended articles, watching videos,
developing discussions to lead, and working on your final project. Your attendance, attitude, contribution
and participation in these meetings and in the field will be assessed and will contribute to your final grade.
Attendance and Professionalism
Attendance at all classes and meetings is required. It is also assumed that students will be active
participants in class. Simply being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be engaged and
involved scholars. Participation – not just attendance – is integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to
you earning a high grade. Active participation means contributing to the discussion, listening to what your
colleagues have to say and engaging with the readings and in-class activities. It means showing up on time,
not checking Facebook or email on your computer, not texting on your phone. NOTE that if you do not
participate in class discussions, you will not earn full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
Grading System:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s provost office
(http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/). Advertising and PR majors are required to have a
minimum grade of C in all communication courses and in all required and elective courses in order to
continue in the program.
                                                                  Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 6 of 4


NOTES on Grading:
     • Late work is not accepted.
     • I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6% that translates into
        a B+ and will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
     • Any questions or comments about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7) days after
        the grade is announced or posted.
     • When I grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the
        work and the accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100
        points and then lose them based on mistakes you make. Your final points represent the total
        points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
Absences
 The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating
 circumstances due to an emergency. You will be given attendance/participation credit for any session that
 you miss that is documented to the teaching team in writing by a medical doctor’s statement, or an official
 statement from a UT faculty member about an ensemble or other organization’s off-campus commitment.
 NO OTHER ABSENCES WILL BE EXCUSED.
                                 Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •  You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •  You have a right to respect.
     •  You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •  You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •  You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •  You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
        learning environment.
     •  You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
        isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
        teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. •
        Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
        and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
        excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
        these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                                               Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 7 of 4


Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender
pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate
changes to my records.
                                              University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use
words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your
sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action,
including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and
the       University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
                                                                   Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 8 of 4


If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                      Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t
feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
      1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
      2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
           become involved in a Title IX investigation.
      3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing,
discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX
related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
      •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
           week of class.
      •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
                                                                  Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 9 of 4


          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                               Syllabus for Erin Reilly - ADV s378, Page 10 of 4
