                                                          Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
                     Measuring Racial Inequality:
 indexes to calculate social disparities and segregation
                                        (AFR 350, # 30605)
                                        (LAS 322, # 39205)
                                             Spring 2020
                     Palmer Heyden (USA, 1890 - 1973), Midsummer in Harlem, 1938.
                          UT Art & Collection History Visual Resources Collection.
Flagged as:
    ✓ Cultural diversity
    ✓ Global cultures
    ✓ Quantitative Reasoning
Dr. Marcelo Paixão – African and African Diaspora Studies Department (AADS) / Teresa
                         Lozano Long Institute of Latin American Studies (LLILAS)
                                                                                                                       1


                                                     Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social disparities and segregation (Spring
2020)
A. Course Instructor and TA:
    ✓ Instructor: Dr. Marcelo Paixão
         .
B. Objectives of the course
“Measuring Racial Inequality” is an undergraduate course that aims at introducing the
students to the main methods of calculation and theoretical interpretation of indicators,
indexes, and scales for the study of socioracial inequality, discrimination and segregation. It
includes the understanding of the importance of an index and indicator, the statistical
development of these indexes, their theoretical properties, and how these approaches
dialogue with social theory and problems of currents societies all over the world.
We understand an index as a number designed to capture some aspect of the social reality (for
instance, income distribution, segregation, diversity, etc.) on a specific scale, usually ranging
from zero to one (sometimes for practical reasons, from zero to one hundred). These scales
mirror levels of intensity of some social phenomena: from lesser (closer to zero) to higher
(closer to one). Indexes are generated from one or more demographic indicators (prices,
incomes, schooling, etc.) but express this dimension through easier visualization and
interpretation.
In its statistical and mathematic dimensions, our course will focus on how to construct,
calculate, and understand these indexes applied to measure social and racial inequality, as
expressed by Gini, Theil, and Atkinson Indexes, as well the Oaxaca-Blinder method of
decomposition to calculate the height of the marginal effect of discrimination on the
inequality. We will also use the indexes to study problems of dissimilarity and segregation in
the urban space and to measure ethnic-racial distance, including an introduction to the
multivariate analysis. Summing up, the students will learn how to calculate these Indexes and
how to interpret these different methods and apply them in their social, political, and cultural
dimensions.
We expect the students will develop the following skills:
    i)      Interpreting indexes and indicators properties to measure social/racial inequality,
            social distance and attitudinal or behavioral patterns – including by the calculation
            and theoretical interpretation of those indicators;
    ii)     Representing indexes of social and racial disparities through graphs, tables, charts,
            and diagrams (like, for example, meanings and function of the Lorenz Curve);
    iii)    Formulating explanations using appropriate language to express, analyze and
            criticize index on social or racial inequality;
    iv)     Learning how to use index and scale of social inequality and distance, as well as of
            patterns of ethnic-racial interactions in order to communicate, both in oral and
            written forms, aspects of the social reality, normative judgments, and alternative
            proposals to improve the social fabric.
                                                                                                                  2


                                                             Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
The course focuses on U.S. statistics, because of the availability of dozens of sources of
demographic data by gender, race, and ethnicity. But we will include statistical references of
selected Latin American countries like, for example, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, and Mexico.
It allows us to make comparative studies of different national realities. That is why the course
is flagged as “Quantitative Reasoning,” “Cultural Diversity,” and “Global Cultures.”
On January 27, 2014, CBS News broadcasted a debate on social inequality in the USA. On the website, we read:
“There are two common ways of measuring the degree of inequality. One is to build graphs showing how the share
of the nation's income has changed over time for income groups. The second is to calculate what is known as the
Gini coefficient”. On June 19, 2015, Aaron Blake, a CBS journalist, wrote: “only a few other major metropolitan
areas that rank ahead of D.C. on the dissimilarity index -- Detroit, New Orleans, Memphis, and Atlanta - are as
heavily African American.”
These examples show how often words like Index, Gini, Theil, Atkinson, Dissimilarity Index, among others, are
contained in newspapers, websites, and in the public debate in order to assess levels of social inequality, injustice,
and segregation. These Indexes are also tools both for policymakers and for the empowerment of communities and
social activists.
Do you know what these concepts mean? How are they calculated? Do you know their limits and potentiality to
debate problems of social and racial disparities and injustices? We hope to be able to give you the essential tools
to answer these questions during our course.
The course is divided into three units. In the first one, we will study some scales for the
measurement of social inequality with special focus on Lorenz Curve, Gini Index, and
Atkinson Index.
The second part will cover the decomposition method the entropy measure (Theil Index – T
and L) and an introduction to Oaxaca-Blinder. The unit will focus on decomposition methods
to the analysis of ethnic-race and gender inequality and discrimination.
The third unit is centered on questions of calculation, interpretation of Indexes for the study
of social distance, and segregation: Dissimilarity, Isolation, and Interaction Indexes. This part
will also incorporate an introduction to the Multivariate analysis using the General Social
Survey (GSS).
C. What are the classroom and university rules?
Classroom conduct. The Professor is committed to creating a class environment framed on
student participation, creativity, critical thinking, respect, and mutual understanding. The
Professor will also attempt to guarantee a respectful and cheerful space of work and
discussion. As such, it is expected that the students - and the Instructor as well - attend the
classes with a high spirit of tolerance, understanding and openness to hear divergent opinions
in the debate. Based on these principles, the Instructor encourages all the students to
participate in the classroom, exposing their ideas and doubts honestly, asking questions, and
expressing their opinions regarding each subject under discussion. Participation and
questioning will be very positively evaluated.
                                                                                                                          3


                                                     Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
The Professor will not accept any kind of derogatory or inappropriate behavior directed to
classmates. Moreover, all forms of discrimination based on gender, sexual orientation, ethnic,
color, race, nationality, or any other kind of intolerance and mistreatment are strictly
forbidden. The Instructor also asks the students to avoid napping or dozing off during the
classes.
Use of computer devices. By default, all devices must be placed offline. It is not allowed to use
electronic devices to surf the web or for any other purpose not strictly related to class learning
and assignments. It is strictly forbidden the use in the classroom of cell phones, apps, or
electronic devices that can produce noises, divert attention or disturb in any way the lecture.
In the case of unauthorized use of any device, the students will be invited to leave the
classroom, and their attendance will be considered as an unexcused absence.
Policy on scholastic dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such fraud harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For
further information, please visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity
website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
Students with disabilities. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
the Services for Students with Disabilities website: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
and/or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to- register-with- ssd/
Religious holy days. Students who miss a class or examination, due to this reason will be given
an opportunity to complete the missed assignment within a reasonable time after the absence,
if they have adequately notified each instructor. The students must inform the Instructor at
least fourteen days prior to the class when they will be absent to observe their religious duties.
Unauthorized attendance. Except previously and expressed allowed by the Instructor, no one
else but the Instructor, the TA, and the enrolled students in the course “Measuring Racial
Inequality” is authorized to stay in the classroom during the classes. In case of any
unauthorized presence, this person will be invited to leave, and if they do not do so,
immediately the class will be suspended.
                                                                                                                  4


                                                         Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
                                      Delays and Attendance Rules
     At the beginning of each class the Instructor will open a sign-in sheet to be signed by each
     student. This list will be available for the next 10 minutes. If a student needs to leave class
     early, the Instructor must be informed at the beginning of class. If not, student attendance
     will be nullified.
     Attendance is mandatory and the absence must be justified. We consider an excusable
     absence the impossibility to attend the class for legal or health problems followed by medical
     or legal documentation signed by a lawyer of a physician within one week from the absence.
     The maximum number of unexcused absences is nine (9) classes. After this, the student will
     have a penalty of 1.5 point per absence in the final grade (see the grading method in section
     D). Student will automatically be failed if they have more than sixteen (16) unexcused
     absences.
     The exams, in-class assignements, and wekly assignment are mandatories. Deadlines and
     exam dates are no-negotiable. All quizzes and assignments must be written in Times New
     Roman 12 and the calculation in an electronic spreadsheet (Excel, Notepad, etc.). Late
     assignments will result in a 5 points deduction per day of delay in the grade.
D. Grade Method
D.1. Assigment Weights
 ✓       1st Exam (25% of the total)
 ✓       2nd Exam (25% of the total)
 ✓       3rd Exam (25% of the total)
 ✓       In-Class Assignment (10% of the total, an average of ten best grades)
 ✓       Weekly Assignment (15% of the total)
D.2. Numeric and Correspondent Letter Grading:
Approving:
A = 94-100 / A- = 90-93 / B+ = 87-89 / B = 84-86 / B- = 80-83 / C+ = 77-79 / C = 74-76 / C-
        = 70-73 /
Failing:
D+ = 67-69 / D = 64-66 / D- = 60-63 / F = 00-60
                                                                                                                      5


                                                    Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
We will also use this numeric grade to score each assignment: In-Class Assignment,
Weekly Assignment, and Exams.
E. Class Method, Assignments and Exams
Every class will last 1:15 minutes.
On Mondays, the class will focus on the statistical dimensions of each concept that will be
introduced. It includes explaining how the index is calculated and general statistical
properties. The Instructor will teach using Excel and IBM Statistical Package for Social Science
(SPSS) in class.
On Wednesdays, we will deepen our analysis of the concepts introduced on Monday, and we
will present possible interpretations of the sociological, cultural, or political meaning of the
indexes. The students will be making an in-class assignment (about 25 minutes) that will need
to be uploaded to Canvas at the end of the class. The students are free to choose if they want
to work alone or with one (1) partner.
Every Wednesday afternoon, the Professor will upload a quiz on Canvas to be answered and
uploaded by the students to Canvas by Friday at 11:59 p.m. The first assignment will be
released on January 29 and needs to be uploaded to Canvas by January 31.
On the first day of the semester, the students will answer a (non-graded) quiz. They will
answer about their academic background, acquaintance with statistics, and general interest in
attending the course.
The students will make three in-class exams, each of one covering one part of the course Units.
All the exams will have two to three questions that may be subdivided in subsections. One
question will be based on a statistical calculation of some index, and the other will be based
on the interpretation of statistical data on social/race inequality or social distance. The first
exam will be held on February 19, the second on April 1, and the last on May 6.
Although the Instructor is expecting that every student already has some previous basic
understanding of elementary knowledge of mathematics and statistics, we also know that
“Measuring Racial Inequality…” is an introductory course. As such, we also expect that even
students with a basic level of can attend the classes and make the assignments.
Students are encouraged to make direct contact with the Instructor. You can use the e-mail
Intranet on Canvas or e-mail him (marcelopaixao@utexas.edu). Please, allow 48 hours (2
business days) for a response to e-mail inquiries. We also recommend you to be in touch with
the TA to solve your questions and doubts, get further information about the course, and
provide you academic support during the semester.
                                                                                                                 6


                                                             Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
                                 Paulo Freire, QR and the Fight for Freedom
Paulo Freire is not only one of the most relevant
Latin American educators of the last hundred years
but also one of the most influential educators in the
contemporary era worldwide. He achieved
popularity following the publication of two of his
books in which he systematizes the lessons learned                                                       Paulo Freire
                                                                                                      (Brazil, 1921-1997)
during his work in Brazil and Chile in the 1960s:
Educação como prática da Liberdade (Education
as freedom practice, 1967), and Pedagogia do
oprimido (Pedagogy of the Oppressed, 1970).
His critical pedagogy focuses on the most significant problems in the lives of the students, using their vocabulary
and examples elicited from the community to which they belong. This method allows the Instructor to challenge
the students to overcome an uncritical vision of the world and inspire reflexive thinking.
We cannot mechanically transpose Freire´s proposal into a classroom at UT. However, despite the differences
between a poor rural village and a U.S. prestigious university, we can envision a nexus between these distinct
universes. The chronic difficulties encountered by students from historically underserved communities with
Quantitative Reasoning courses can be interpreted – paraphrasing Freire – as a form of illiteracy or functional
illiteracy on numbers. Also, the Brazilian educator stressed that the difficulties of the poor communities’ literacy
process were a consequence of the limitations of the traditional teaching methods, and he encouraged alternative
and critical pedagogies.
Similarly, scholars have already proved that the causes of the challenges faced by historically underserved
communities are not due only to the humble familiar backgrounds but are mainly driven by discriminatory
practices and prejudices in the educational system since the first days of school.
F. Course schedule
Unit 1. Indexes Applied to the Study of Social Inequality: Gini and Atkinson
Week 1 – January 22: Professor, TA, course Syllabus, and student’s introduction.
Week 2 – January 27 and 29: Why is social inequality a big problem of humanity today? / Scales
for the Measurement of Social Inequality: frequencies, proportion and disproportions,
quintiles and deciles, ratios.
Reading
      ✓ Cowell, Frank A. 2013/1977. Measuring Inequality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
          Chapter 2 (Charting Inequality), p. 17-38;
      ✓ Stiglitz, Joseph. Globalism´s Discontents. The American Prospect; Winter 2002;
          ProQuest, p. A16-A21;
      ✓ Alvaredo, Facundo et alii. World Inequality Report, Executive Summary, p. 7-21;
      ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
          disparities and segregation, Week 2.
                                                                                                                          7


                                                Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
   ✓ . Class Presentation Week 2
Week 3 – February 3 and 5: Lorenz Curve and Gini Index Calculation / Gini Index, properties,
and applications.
Reading
   ✓ Bellù, Lorenzo Giovanni: Charting income inequality: the Lorenz Curve. Agricultural
       Policy Support Service, Policy Assistance Division, FAO, Rome, Italy, 17 p.;
   ✓ Lorenz, Max. O. 1905. Methods of concentration of wealth. American Statistical
       Association Vol 9, no 70, Jun. pp. 209-219;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
       disparities and segregation, Week 3.
Week 4 – February 10 and 12: Gini Index, properties, and applications.
Reading
   ✓ Coulter, Philip B. 1989. Measuring inequality: a methodological Handbook. Boulder /
       London: Westview Pres Inc. Part of Chapter 2 (Inequality Theory), pp. 50-58;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
       disparities and segregation, Week 4;
   ✓ Watch the video The Gini Coefficient
       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yu8ehXSNobI
Reading
Week 5 – February 17 and 19. Social Welfare Function - Atkinson Index and the aversion to the
inequality, definition, interpretation, and calculation / Atkinson Index, properties,
applications, and quantifying moral judgments about social inequality.
Reading
   ✓ Coulter, Philip B. 1989. Measuring inequality: a methodological Handbook. Boulder /
       London: Westview Pres Inc. Part of Chapter 6 (Indexes based on the social welfare
       model), pp. 115-128;
   ✓ Haughton, Jonathan and Shahidur R. Khander. 2009. Handbook on poverty and
       inequality. Washington D.C.: The World Bank. Chapter 6 (Inequality measures) pp.
       107-108;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
       disparities and segregation, Week 5.
Week 6 – February 24 and 26: Revision for the first exam / First Exam.
(No In-Class and Weekly Assignments)


                                                   Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
     February 26: First Exam
Unit 2. Measures of Entropy, Calculating Discrimination
Week 7 – March 2 and 4: Measure of entropy, Theil T Index / Theil L Index properties, and
applications.
Reading
   ✓ Coulter, Philip B. 1989. Measuring inequality: a methodological Handbook. Boulder /
        London: Westview Pres Inc. Part of Chapter 3 (Indexes based on the deviations model),
        pp. 101-113;
   ✓ Haughton, Jonathan and Shahidur R. Khander. 2009. Handbook on poverty and
        inequality. Washington D.C.: The World Bank. Chapter 6 (Inequality measures) pp.
        106-107;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
        disparities and segregation, Week 7.
Week 8 – March 9 and 11: Theil T and L Index Decomposition / Comparing Theil T and L
Indexes.
Reading
   ✓ Hero, R.; Levy, M. – The racial structure of the economic inequality in the United
        States: Understanding continuity and change in the era of “great divergence”. Social
        Science Quarterly, vol. 97, n. 3, Sep., 2016, pp. 491-505
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
        disparities and segregation, Week 8.
Week 9 - Spring Break (March 16 and 18 no class)
Week 10 – March 23 and 25: Introduction to Correlation and Regression for the Calculation of
Social and Racial Inequality.
Reading
   ✓ Guerrero, Anna-Leon and Chava Frankfort-Nachmias. 2015. Washington D.C.: Sage,
        Selected part of Chapter 11 (Correlation and Regression), pp. 281-318.;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
        disparities and segregation, Week 10.
Reading
Week 11 – March 30 and April 1st: Oaxaca-Blinder model, definition, calculation, interpretation,
and application.


                                                   Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
Reading
   ✓ Blank, R; Dabady, M; Citro, F. 2004. Measuring racial discrimination. National Research
        Council (this PDF is available from the at: http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10887.html),
        2004. Chapter 4 (Theories of discrimination) pp. 55-70 and 7 (Statistical Analysis of
        Observational Data), p. 118-137;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
        disparities and segregation, Week 11.
Week 12 - April 6 and 8: Revision for the second exam / Second Exam.
(No In-Class and Weekly Assignments)
     April 8: Second Exam
Unit 3. Measurement and Indexes of Social Distance
Week 13 – April 13 and 15: Definition of Social Distance and Segregation, Exploring the
General Social Survey (GSS).
Reading
   ✓ Wark, Colin and John F. Galliher. 2007. Emory Bogardus and the Origins of the Social
        Distance Scale. The American Sociologist, Vol. 38, No 4 (Dec.), pp. 383-395;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
        disparities and segregation, Week 13;
   ✓ Third text to be defined
Week 14 – April 20 and 22: Concept of Segregation, Dissimilarity or Duncan Index / Using Gini
Index to Calculate Social Distance.
Reading
   ✓ Duncan, O; Duncan, B. - A methodological analysis of segregation indexes. American
        Sociological Review, Vol. 20, n. 2 (Apr., 1955), pp. 210-217
   ✓ Telles, E. – Race in another America: the significance of skin-color in Brazil. Princeton:
        Princeton University Press, 2004. Chapter 8 (Residential segregation, pp. 194-215);
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
        disparities and segregation, Week 14.
   ✓
Week 15 – April 27 and 29April: Interaction Index / Isolation Index
Reading


                                                  Measuring Racial Inequality, Spring 2020, Dr. Marcelo Paixão
   ✓ Massey, D.; Nancy, D. - The Dimensions of Residential Segregation. Social Forces, Vol.
       67, No. 2 (Dec., 1988), pp. 281-315
   ✓ Robinson, Vaughan. 1980. Lieberson's Isolation Index: a case study evaluation. Area,
       Vol. 12, no 4, pp. 307-312
   ✓ Weinberg, Iceland, Steinmetz. 2002. Measurement of segregation by US Bureau of the
       Census in racial and ethnic residential segregation in the United States: 1980-2000. Appendix
       8 (Measures of residential segregation), pp. 119-123;
   ✓ Paixão, Marcelo. 2018. Measuring Racial Inequality: indexes to calculate social
       disparities and segregation, Week 15.
   ✓
Reading
Week 16 – May 4 and 6: May 4 - Revision for the Third Exam
     May 6: Third Exam
(No In-Class and Weekly Assignments)
