Course:        ADV370J/PR367                       Integrated Communications Management
Semester:      Spring 2020
Meeting:       T/Th 12:30PM to 1:45PM and 2PM to 3:15PM
Classroom:     BMC 4.208 (12:30PM class) and CMA 3.120 (2PM class)
Texts:         1. Integrated Brand Promotion Management: Text, Cases, and Exercises, Murphy, Cunningham, and
               Stavchansky Lewis, Kendall Hunt Publishing, 2011 at the UT COOP
               2. Subscription to the Wall Street Journal (on-line)
               https://store.wsj.com/v2/shop/60616004?trackingCode=aaqntppl&cid=WSJ_SC_NA_SALE_PROF
               School Zip:                 78712
               School Name:                U Texas Austin
               Professor Name:             Lewis, Liza
               Cost:                       15 weeks for $15 (print + digital or just digital)
Professor:     Dr. Liza Stavchansky Lewis (Dr. Lewis/she/her/hers), BMC 4.366, 512.471-1101,
               lizalewis@mail.utexas.edu
               Office Hours: T/Th 10AM to 10:50AM
T/A:           Brooke Borglum, BMC 4 Floor Station #15, kbrookeborglum@gmail.com
                                           th
               Office Hours: M/W 1PM to 2PM
ULA:           Jacob Gonzales, BMC 4 Floor Station TBD, gonzalesj@utexas.edu
                                        th
               Office Hours: M/W 9:20AM to 10:45AM
               Weekly Lab Session: W 5:30PM to 6:30PM, TBD
Commencement
               “The University of Texas at Austin is an inspiring place that cultivates exceptional people. Our
               graduates have upheld the highest standards of academic achievement. With their new degrees in
               hand, they are better equipped to make valuable contributions to their families and society, and to
               pursue their own personal ambitions. They are ready to make their mark on the world.”
               Larry R. Faulkner, Former President, The University of Texas at Austin
Course Description
Philosophy:    This course requires you to:
               1. assess problems, isolate key facts, and rank-order salient management issues,
               2. think in a precise and structured manner, then follow a structured decision-making process,
               3. make decisions and create action plans appropriate to the situation under consideration,
               4. efficiently and persuasively write up your analysis and sell your recommendations, then
               5. defend your case against criticism from your peers and others.
               Come to class prepared for discussion. As you read the text, outside readings and cases, do the
               following. Create a written outline of the material, list unanswered questions, boil the reading down
               into 4 to 5 sentences or phrases, then ask yourself, "How can I use this on a day-to-day basis?" Think
               of examples that illustrate and support your interpretation of the case. Find examples that contradict
               the prevailing position. Quantify your position. Inspect extreme solutions first. Be prepared to
               respond to a very simple question at all times, “Why do you recommend we do that?”
Objectives:    The course has several objectives.
               1. To present you with a wide range of interconnected advertising and public relations management
               decisions that are similar to what you will encounter in the business.


             2. To present you with a structured, field-tested approach to decision-making that is a practical and
             useful method for addressing a variety of communications management issues.
Assumptions: 1. Participants in this class have successfully completed all prerequisite courses and have a solid
             foundation in the fundamentals of marketing as well as the various advertising and public relations
             functional areas. Given the wide range of academic experiences in prerequisite courses, students are
             required to quickly identify and resolve any gross conflicts, fundamental inconsistencies, or
             background voids that exist. Because the course requires a common advertising and public relations
             foundation, students are responsible for timely background leveling.
             2. Advertising and public relations management teams form the basis for a significant portion of the
             course. The ability to work effectively and efficiently within a small group is essential to successfully
             completing this course.
Strategy:    1. Utilize class discussions of the text, cases, outside readings, and current events as a common
             framework for the study of advertising and public relations management.
             2. Utilize individual case analyses and individual assignments to demonstrate your writing skills and
             communication problem solving abilities.
             3. Utilize the management team case analysis and class presentation to closely approximate the work
             environment of a management position on the client side or from within an agency.
Tactics:     1. Measure individual performance with a subjective evaluation of participation and preparedness.
             The narrative portions of the Murphy, Cunningham, and Stavchansky Lewis text are very short and
             to the point, reflective of the fact that this course integrates information and concepts presented in
             depth by prerequisite courses. Class discussions will require your total command of the text material.
             A demonstrated command of the material coupled with a clear, concise, active presentation style is
             required to score above average on this dimension.
             Significant emphasis is placed on class participation, especially questions, comments, and discussion
             among peers. You must strike a balance between passive, silent listening and dominating the
             discussion with ill conceived or trivial remarks. Neither of these two extreme positions is acceptable.
             Neither earns you many participation points. Come prepared; take a stand. A lively discussion
             among peers is the objective. Air your ideas. Rebut others.
             Thorough preparation and concise expression are valued. Quality outweighs quantity. Enthusiasm
             counts. Contribute, don’t disrupt. Ask questions. There are no dumb or wrong questions. Throughout
             your academic career you’ve heard this phrase. But in ADV370J/PR367, it is imperative that you
             believe it. This course is filled with uncertainty, inadequate information and not enough time. If you
             refrain from asking questions, you limit your exposure to fresh insights from others.
             2. Measure individual group participation with a structured peer evaluation system.
             Learning to write peer evaluations is a key management skill. Early in your career you will be on the
             receiving end of many such evaluations. Later, you will be required to assess the professional
             performance of subordinates in measurable, precisely articulated, easily understood terms. You will
             begin your understanding of this difficult management task with this required assignment.
             3. Measure individual resourcefulness, organization, and writing skills with unannounced crash
             projects.
             4. Measure individual problem solving and writing skills with case brief assignments. The core of this
             course revolves around case brief analyses. A premium is placed on the development of quantitative
             dimensions in support of case solutions.
             5. Measure management team performance based on major management team analyses and
             presentations.


Evaluation: Course participation                                           =         20%
            Management team peer evaluation                                =           5%
            Individual crash projects (3)                                  =         15%
            Case brief assignments*                                        =         35%
            Written team analysis and class presentation (50:50)           =         25%
                              Total                                        =        100%
            *Your first individual case brief is worth 5%; the remaining are 10% each.
            Optional Final Exam Case may be substituted for your lowest individual case score or a crash project.
            It is important to note that the optional final cannot replace the written team analysis or team
            class presentation.
            Course Participation Grade: Your participation in this course is worth 20% of your grade – two letter
            grades. The 20% will be divided up as follows:
                     a.  10%: Attendance will be taken fifteen (15) random times during the semester. If you’re
                         here 15 of those times, you earn 100%. If 14 times it’s a 93%, if 10 times it’s a 67%, etc.
                         Note: Attendance is taken at a random time during class as well. Thus, if you’re late and
                         attendance has already been taken, you’re counted as absent. If you leave early one day
                         and attendance has not been taken, you will also be counted as absent.
                     b.  5%: Case and lecture discussion - may include work turned in during class (graded for
                         accuracy)
                     c.  5%: Wall Street Journal discussion and weekly article analysis you’ll turn in.
+/- System  UT at Austin has implemented +/- grading system for undergraduate students.
            The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
            A=       93.5 to 100
            A- =     89.5 to 93.4
            B+ =     86.5 to 89.4
            B=       83.5 to 86.4
            B- =     79.5 to 83.4
            C+ =     76.5 to 79.4
            C=       73.5 to 76.4
            C- =     69.5 to 73.4
            D+ =     66.5 to 69.4
            D=       63.5 to 66.4
            D- =     59.5 to 63.4
            F=       59.4 or below
            Note: you must earn a ‘C’ or higher to move forward to IC Campaigns – a “C-“ will require that you
            take this course over again.
            Please ask your questions early in the semester regarding the +/- grading system.
Deadlines &
Standards:  1. All reading assignments are to be completed prior to class discussion.
            2. Materials are often distributed in class.


3. Attendance is required at all class, presentation, and account team meetings. Given the nature of
the class, wherein marketing communication account teams make up an essential portion of the
course, significant absence from class, team, and other meetings can reduce your final grade in the
course by up to two letter grades (see participation grade). On our 2nd class day (Jan. 23rd) I will
create a seating chart and name plates. You must then always sit in your assigned seat. You will
be counted as absent and may lose participation points if you’re not in your assigned seat – even if
you’re in class.
4. Everything produced for this class is to be your original work. Enlisting aid from anyone outside
the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and will be dealt with accordingly.
5. Management team analyses, individual case briefs, crash projects, WSJ weekly assignments and
peer evaluations are due on Canvas. Late assignments are scored 0. Turn in cases and/or crash
projects early if you have a conflict with the deadline.
6. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors can reduce your score by one to two letter grades. If
you need help with writing please use the undergraduate writing center.
7. Team presentations are to be presented using Microsoft Office’s Power Point or another
professional presentation program.
8. E-mail Policy/Canvas Messaging: As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate in
academia and industry, you must learn to use it appropriately. People have been fired from their
jobs for misuse of this communication tool. Thus, when e-mailing me, you will address it formally.
Communication between professors and students is professional in nature, not informal. Begin your
e-mail with, “Dear Dr. Lewis:” and use block business format. Write professionally, as if you are
writing to your boss at work, not to your friend.
I will return your e-mail within 24 hours of receiving it on weekdays or by Monday evening if
I receive it on the weekend. Many times I will e-mail you back much faster. E-mail is an excellent
way to communicate with me if done appropriately.
The same policy applies to messaging me via Canvas.
9. Any questions regarding grades are to be asked within 7     days of learning your grade –
including attendance (attendance is part of participation).
10. The schedule of events is tentative and can change. Students are responsible for changes to the
schedule as announced in class.
11. All students agree to read and abide by The University of Texas at Austin Policy on Academic
Integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
If you have any questions about what constitutes plagiarism, or any other form of Scholastic
Dishonesty, ask me or any other member of the faculty. Students are responsible for their own
conduct and for reporting any violations to their instructor or other member of the Department of
Advertising faculty.
12. University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
13. Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact Services for Student with Disabilities at 512.471.6259 (voice) or 512.232.2937
(video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
14. This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly


during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor
to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more
assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore e
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes
meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
15. Religious Holy Days Observance Policy/Military Duty/Excused Absences: The Texas
Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day,
including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not
be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment
from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so
that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
If you are in the military and are called to duty for a short time I will also work with you.
Please read UT’s policy below:
Visit: https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-
procedures/attendance/
The only other excused absence from class is for an official UT event that requires travel or missing a
class (for example: UT sports teams, other UT academic teams, TAG, PRSSA). You are required to
contact Dr. Lewis in advance to discuss your absence and provide any necessary documentation.
16. Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or
anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
|CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
     • Brief assessments and referral services
     • Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     • MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     • Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
16. Dean of Students/Emergency Services: if you have an immediate emergency and must miss
several classes – you need to speak with the Dean of Students at UT’s Emergency Services. Together,
we will work out a schedule for missed classes/work. Please visit this website for more
information/help: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
17. Title IX and Your Safety
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call B
CAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be
anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.


                    Title IX Reporting
                    Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
                    harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence andstalking at federally
                    funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
          environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
          community, the University can:
             1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
                 have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s
        Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
        Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violationsof Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
        I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
        writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
        Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to
        ask whether they are a responsible employee.
        Wh a t i f I d on ’ t w an t t o ma ke an of fi c i al r e por t b ut I n e ed h e lp?
        Email advocate@austin.utexas.edu
        For more information about
        reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexa
        s.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such misbehavior.
Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy,
age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender
expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
     •    Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual misconduct
          and discrimination.
               o    File a report of discrimination via online form
               o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
     •    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
          The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing federal civil
          rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance
          from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office
          for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
     •    Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
          The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that
          make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected class, including
          discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
