ARC/ARI F310K DESIGN I                                                                                          Summer 2019
M-F 8am-12:30pm
INSTRUCTOR
Jeffrey Blocksidge             blocksidge@utexas.edu| office: tbd | office hours: by appointment
TA
Ji Ye Song                     jiyesong@utexas.edu
PREREQUISITES
Registration for ARI 311K or ARC 311K.
An introduction to the forms and methods of design for architects and interior designers, with an
emphasis on inhabitation including body, light, and movement.
APPROACH
The projects and exercises explored during the course of this term are intended to provide the student with a
foundation in the perceptual, conceptual and technique‐based skills necessary for subsequent design work in
architecture / interior design. Sequentially linked projects will begin by introducing a question, tested through a
series of variables and end with a possible design response. Projects have been devised to encourage many avenues of
inquiry with students taking responsibility in framing their own investigations.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
      •   To guide students in forming a design foundation on which their own values will be developed
      •   To provide students with a basis through which to view, assimilate, evaluate and implement design ideas
      •   To introduce students to designing in the realm of the senses
      •   To encourage an understanding of form as a dependent variable or as a result of multiple
          considerations
      •   To find ways to bring something extra to your studio work, constantly seek additional inputs to your
          design process ‐ anything from going to the library to bring in copies of related material to finding a
          video from which the class might benefit.
SEMESTER SCHEDULE (T/TH typically are studio work days. Attendance is required. Ji Ye Song will be in studio)
6/6       First day of Class | Set up Studios | Begin Assignment 1.1
6/10      Pinup – Visual Notes Due
6/17      Pinup – Visual Notes Due
6/24      Pinup – Visual Notes Due
7/1       Pinup – Visual Notes Due
7/4       Holiday No Class
7/8       Final Review
VISUAL NOTES (2x 8.5x11 non‐lined sheets w/hand‐sketched diagrams, drawings, tables, etc.)
Readings will be assigned every week. These will form the basis of your critical approach and design statement as the
semester progresses. Instead of writing a response to these readings, record your responses visually through hand‐
sketched drawings or any way you deem effective to communicate your ideas. Be creative.
STUDIO BEHAVIOR from 8am‐12:30pm (followed in VISCOM as well)
      1. No cell phone use especially social media, texting, surfing
      2. Decorum: no blankets, pajamas, or food. Breakfast please before class. Drinks are OK.
      3. Attentiveness: the entire studio time is class time and deserves the same considered attention whether
          during lectures, instructional direction or production. Discussions with fellow students are encouraged and
          should be directed toward studio work.
      4. If you have questions or are confused you must ask the instructor or TA. Don’t leave if you are unsure.
      5. Questions are the key to expanding your capabilities as a designer. Get in the habit of asking direct and clear
          questions about your work.


STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning encourages dialogue,
collaboration, risk‐taking, innovation, and learning‐by‐doing. The studio offers an environment where students can come
together to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting
professionals, and the public‐at‐large. Studio learning offers intensive one‐on‐one instruction from faculty members, and
provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities.
The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project‐based learning becomes the foundation for
developing an understanding of and commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental mission: to improve the quality of
the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture‐studio‐culture
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is derived
from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions
for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
      Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
            The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self‐determined concomitant method of inquiry
            The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
                models, etc.) in the development of the design
            Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is asked;
                direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
      Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in companion
      courses.
            A strong and clearly stated design objective
            Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements – and
                sectional development
            Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through creative
                engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and environmental system
                integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
            Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and
                assembly
      Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final design
      presentation.
            Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
                displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
      Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of
Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C‐ will not satisfy degree requirements.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS


A/A-               Excellent
                   Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual
                   rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond
                   what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-            Above Average
                   Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues
                   ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is
                   complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C               Average
                   Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication
                   and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-         Poor
                   Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level‐
                   appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F                  Fail
                   Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this
                   grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X                  Excused Incomplete
                   Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on
                   time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with
                   the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be
                   completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to
                   the School of Architecture policy.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter
grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written
documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to
excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence.
Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify
instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may
not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their
instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a
religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and
the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and


Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general‐information/the‐university/#universitycodeofconduct
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well‐being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing
thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
      In‐house CARE counselor (see below)
      For immediate support
               o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                    M‐F 8am‐5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512‐471‐3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
               o CMHC Crisis Line:
                    24/7 | 512‐471‐2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
      Free services at CMHC:
               o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
               o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
               o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
               o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or
schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally
and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students
to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512‐471‐3115 (M‐F 8am‐5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from
the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471‐6259 voice or 471‐4641 TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning
of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the
needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a
necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not
leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studiomates
accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce material
consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with white bags. The
Material Exchange, a give‐and‐take system for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio and
fabrication coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab. All
unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the end of the
semester.
BCAL


Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be reported to
the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512‐232‐5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel
right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
           fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
      Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
      Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
           In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
           University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
WOODSHOP USE
The course makes use of the School’s woodshop throughout the semester. In order for students to gain access into
the shop, each student must take a short online tutorial and test through UT’s Environmental Health and Safety
(EHS). The course module ID is OH 500 “Machine Shop Safety” and can be accessed with EID through the following
link: https://goo.gl/oqVJrL
You should have done this already, but if you have not, this must be done by the end of the first day of classes. You
will need access to the woodshop at the very beginning of the semester; if you do not have access to the
woodshop, you will not be able to appropriately complete course assignments.
The online tutorial provides you with access into the shop. In order to use the shop’s machinery additional tutorials
by the shop staff may be required. Much of this will be handled through the work in the Visual Communication 1
course.
Be smart. Be safe.
MATERIALS & SUPPLIES
     1. Co‐op Supply Kit. See list of supply kit materials. Available from the UT Co‐op
     2. Poetics + Pragmatics: A Design Studio Companion by Smilja Milovanovic Bertram and Joyce Rosner
           *Please note that additional materials and supplies will be required for specific projects
           and exercises as we move throughout the semester.
