                                        Africa and Rome:
                               History, Memory, and Identity
                                 C C 348 (33573), AHC 330 (33414)
                                HIS 364G (38859), AFR 374C (30698)
                                      TuTh 11-12:30, MEZ 1.216
Instructor: Dr. James F. Patterson (Department of Classics)
Contact: james_patterson@utexas.edu, WAG 205
Office Hours: TBD and by appointment
Course Description
This course explores the rich history of the ancient Maghrib from the Mediterranean coast to the Sahel
and how that history is received today in Africa. Our focus in the second half of the course is on the
3nd-6th centuries CE when competing brands of Christianity were taking root and Africa gave birth
to what is now called “Catholic” theology. However, to understand this material we begin in the first
half with the Phoenician colonization of the African coast in the 9th century BCE and move from
there through the fall of Carthage and the rise of the kingdoms of Numidia and Mauretania to the
provincialization of Africa by Rome. We study the interaction of various ethnic groups over time with
emphasis on Berbers, Punics, and Romans. Ancient Africa was one of the greatest melting pots the
Mediterranean had ever seen. Our study connects North Africa to Sub-Saharan Africa via Berbers,
Ethiopians, and Trans-Saharan trade routes, Asia via Phoenicians and Abrahamic religions, and
Europe via various groups of colonizers, both ancient and modern.
Most ancient histories written about Africa were colonialist and Roman. These histories have
informed modern Eurocentric narratives that, like their ancient predecessors, cast Africa as barbaric
yet claim African intellectual products as their own. This course looks through these narratives to
uncover the reality of life in Roman Africa. We examine African identities in contrast to colonial
mythologies and explore the ways this rich history has been received in modern Maghribi countries.
To this end, we study ethnography, colonialism, post-colonialism, racialization, immigration, and
emigration, among other topics, both in antiquity and today.
Your grade is determined by two written exams (20% each x 2 = 40%), regular quizzes (20%), a
report on a topic concerning the reception of antiquity in Africa (20%), editorial work helping other
students prepare their reports (10%), participation (10%), and attendance.
Among the ancient authors we read are Vergil, Livy, Polybius, Sallust, Pliny the Elder, Tertullian,
various African martyr narratives, and Augustine. We also read selections from Ibn Khaldun. The
course concludes with Fawzi Mellah’s Elissa, a distinctly Maghribi take on the ancient myth of Dido.
Along the way, we explore the literary and intellectual contributions of Assia Djerbar, Frantz Fanon,
Abdelaziz Ferrah, Tahar Ben Jelloun, Albert Memmi, and other modern North African authors.
                                                    1


Required Texts
Mellah, F. Elissa (trans. H. Curtis), Quartet 1998 [Forty Acres Press, 2020]
Ruden, S. Confessions: A New Translation, Modern Library, 2017
Woodman, A. J. Sallust: Catiline’s War, The Jugurthine War, Histories, Penguin, 2008
All other texts will be distributed in class and made available as PDFs on Canvas
All handouts, PowerPoints, and posts on the course website are required reading
Grading and Assessment
Exams: 20% x 2 = 40%. Exams will be a blend of multiple choice, fill-in-the-blanks, short responses,
and essays.
Quizzes: 20%. Most days begin with a short quiz. Quizzes test basic factual information (maps,
names, dates), ask comprehension questions about that day’s reading to encourage sufficient
preparation, and pose interpretative questions to open class discussion. Quizzes may not be made up
even in the case of a University-approved absence, but I will drop your lowest quiz.
Report: 20%. Each student will write a report of ca. 1000 words on a topic of reception or on a theme
relevant both to antiquity and to modernity. See “Reports” at the end of this document for details.
Work as editor/commentator: 10%. Over the course of the semester, you will help three of your
colleagues develop the draft of their reports into polished final products. Your work as
editor/commentator is worth 10% of your final grade. See “Reports” at the end of this document for
details.
Participation: 10%. This grade is meant as a reward for those who prepare assignments thoroughly
and contribute thoughtfully to class discussion. It is a large class, and I cannot call on everyone
individually every day. The participation grade largely reflects your own initiative, so raise your hand
and contribute!
Attendance. Students are allowed two unexcused absences. Each subsequent absence will result in a
deduction of one point from one’s final grade.
Make-Ups and Late Work
Exams may be made-up and report deadlines delayed only in the case of University-approved
documented absences. Each part of a report will lose 1 point for each day it is otherwise late. Likewise
for late editorial work. Quizzes and participation cannot be made up even in the case of approved
absences. University-approved documentation includes a letter from a physician explicitly telling me
to excuse you from the specific hour you were absent from class that day. A prescription slip,
appointment reminder, or photograph of your severed finger is not University-approved
documentation.
                                                   2


Disabilities and Accommodations
UT provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information,      contact     SSD      at     512-417-6259         or      find     them     online     at
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. Students who use the service must provide an official
accommodation letter authorizing specific accommodations as soon as possible and before the graded
assignment in question.
Religious Holidays
If you need to miss a class or other required class activity for the observance of a religious holiday,
you must notify me at least 14 days in advance so we can make alternative arrangements for your
absence.        The       University's        Religious         Days          Policy      is      online:
http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/.
Behavioral Concerns
If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
(BCAL) to discuss your concerns by phone. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Scholastic Dishonesty
Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a 0 on that assignment and an F for the
course. Scholastic dishonesty includes any kind of cheating, unsanctioned collaboration on graded
assignments, or submitting work that is not your own or accurately attributed to its source. For more
information,      contact    Student      Judicial      Services     at      471-2841,    or     go    to
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ acint_student.php/. I will report to the SJS if I am aware of any
cheating.
Technology in the Classroom
The use of cellphones, laptops, abacuses, etc. is strictly prohibited in the classroom with the exception
of laptops used to read texts that you cannot otherwise print. If I suspect unauthorized use of a
computer or sense the presence of a cellphone, I will mark you absent.
Tentative Course Schedule
Beginning on the next page is a tentative schedule of main topics discussed each day, readings
scheduled for that day (i.e. to be read before coming to class), and due dates for drafts of reports.
Nothing much should change, but some readings will contract and others expand.
Websites
Canvas and africa.terraetransmarinae.com
                                                     3


                    PART 1: FROM THE OUTSIDE LOOKING IN
                                       Week 1: Orientation
Tuesday, Jan. 21. Syllabus and introductions. Where is Africa and what is the Maghrib?
Periodization.
       Readings: None
Thursday, Jan. 23. Mapping the Mediterranean from antiquity to modern colonial borders.
Climate, topography, and ecology.
       Readings: Pliny the Elder 5.1-46; Albert Camus, The Plague, p. 3.
       Report 1: Ibn Khaldun on Rome
                               Weeks 2 and 3: Libya and Carthage
Tuesday, Jan. 28. Rome’s “first” encounter: Vergil, Aeneid 1.
       Readings: Vergil, Aeneid 1
       Report 2: Where Is North Africa?
Thursday, Jan. 30. Is anything Vergil said true? Part 1: “Libyans.” Greek and Roman
ethnographies. Hiempsal’s Punic Books.
       Readings: Sallust, The Jugurthine War 17-19
       Report 3: Sub-Saharan Africa
Tuesday, Feb. 4. Is anything Vergil said true? Part 2: Phoenicians from Canaan to Carthage.
“Punic” religion; D’Annunzio, Cabiria
       Readings: Aristotle, Politics 1272b24-1273b26, Strabo 1.4.9, Diodorus Siculus 20.14
       Report 4: Phoenician Ethnic Identity
       Report 5: European Representations of Punic Religion
Thursday, Feb. 6. Rome’s Dido: Vergil, Aeneid 4.
       Readings: Vergil, Aeneid 4
       Report 6: The Reception of Dido in European Christianity
       Report 7: Eastern Women and the Other
                                 Weeks 4 and 5: The Punic Wars
Tuesday, Feb. 11. Sicily, the First Punic War, and the Mercenary War.
       Readings: Polybius (3.9-14) and Nepos on Hamilcar
       Report 8: African Colonialism of Europe in Antiquity
       Report 9: Imagining Blackness in Europe
Thursday, Feb. 13. The Second Punic War, Part 1. Carthage, Spain, and Italy.
       Readings: Polybius (9.22-26), Livy (21.4), Varro (23.5.12), and Valerius Maximus (9.2. ext.
       2) on Hannibal
       Report 10: Your Enemy Is My Hero
                                                 4


Tuesday, Feb. 18. The Second Punic War, Part 2. Carthage and Numidia.
      Readings: Livy (30.8-15) on Syphax, Sophonisba, and Masinissa
Thursday, Feb. 20. The Third Punic War.
      Readings: Polybius (38.7-8), Plutarch (Apophthegmata 19-20), and Appian (The Punic Wars
      27.131) on the fall of Carthage
      Report 11: African Immigration to Europe
      Report 12: European Immigration to North Africa
                          Weeks 6, 7, and 8: Numidia and Mauretania
Tuesday, Feb. 25. Numidia and Jugurtha. Postcolonial tripartite ethnographies.
      Readings: Sallust, The Jugurthine War
      Report 13: Geography and Regional Identities
Thursday, Feb. 27. Numidia and Jugurtha, cont’d.
      Readings: Sallust, The Jugurthine War
      Report 14: North Africa and “The Fall of Europe”
Tuesday, March 3. Other people’s wars from Rome’s Civil War to WWII. Juba I.
      Readings: Ps.-Caesar, The African War 57, 73, and 94; Plutarch, Life of Cato the Younger
      70-72
      Report 15: Africans in Other People’s Armies
Thursday, March 5. Juba II and Mauretania.
      Readings: TBD
      Report 16: Berberism
Tuesday, March 10. Africa, “the Granary of Rome.”
      Readings: TBD
      Report 17: Exploitation of African Resources
Thursday, March 12. Exam 1.
Tuesday, March 17. Spring Break.
Thursday, March 19. Spring Break.
                                               5


                     PART 2: FROM THE INSIDE LOOKING OUT
                                  Week 9: The African Periphery
Tuesday, March 24. Colonialism, post-colonialism, and decolonization.
        Readings: Memmi, Colonizer and the Colonized
        Report 18: The Psychology of Colonization
        Report 19: Outward Appearances
Thursday, March 26. Claiming and reclaiming a North African identity. “Romanitas” and
“Africitas.”
        Readings: Apuleius, Apology 24 and 41; Tertullian, On the Cloak
        Report 20: Africitas (“Africanity”)
        Report 21: Westernization
                            Week 10: The Rise of African Christianity
Tuesday, March 31. Abrahamic Religions in North Africa.
        Readings: TBD
        Report 22: Religious Pluralities
Thursday, April 2. Martyrdom.
        Readings: [Anonymous], The Acts of Cyprian; Tertullian, Apology 1 and 7-9; On Spectacles
        5-7 and 29-30
        Report 23: The African Context of African Literature
                                Week 11: From Periphery to Center
Tuesday, April 7. The Persecutions and martyr narratives. Women and the African church.
        Readings: [Anonymous], The Passion of Perpetua and Felicity
        Report 24: The Place of Women in North African Societies
Thursday, April 9. African Catholicisms and the “Donatist” schism. Latin and non-Latin Africa.
        Readings: Optatus, On the Donatist Schism 1.13-20 and Appendix 1 (Acta apud
        Zenophilum); Augustine, Summary of the Meeting with the Donatists. 3.16.29, Against the
        Letter of Parmenian 1.3.5, and On Heresies 69
        Report 25: Art and Architecture
                                 Weeks 12 and 13: Africa Divided
Tuesday, April 14. The “Donatist” schism, cont’d. Circumcellions and the “Macarian” Persecution.
        Readings: Optatus, On the Donatist Schism 3
        Report 26: Terrorism
Thursday, April 16. Augustine the Roman.
        Readings: Augustine, Confessions (selections from Books 1-9)
        Report 27: North Africa’s Reception of Saint Augustine
                                                 6


Tuesday, April 21. Augustine the African.
       Readings: Augustine, Confessions (selections from Books 10-11)
       Report 28: The Languages of North African Literature
Thursday, April 23. The Gildonic War
       Readings: Claudian, The War Against Gildo
       Report 29: Civil Wars
                            Weeks 14 and 15: After the Fall of Rome
Tuesday, April 28. Vandals and the Fall of Rome
       Readings: Procopius, The Vandal War 4.8
       Report 30: The Politics of North African Archaeology
Thursday, April 30. Fragmentation, histories, and historiography. Rewriting western
representations.
       Readings: Mellah, Elissa
       Report 31: From Trees to Seas: Nature and Identity
Tuesday, May 5. Land and sea: Mediterranean identities.
       Readings: Mellah, Elissa
Thursday, May 7. Individual and collective memory. Myth and reality. Nations and tradition.
       Readings: Mellah, Elissa
Finals Period. Exam 2.
                                                7
