           AFR376-30760, “Senior Seminar: 20th Century Caribbean Thought”.
                                         Spring 2020 Semester
  Instructor: Dr. Bedour Alagraa (pronounced Bee-dur Allegra)
  Pronouns: She/Her/Hers
  Email: bedour.alagraa@austin.utexas.edu
                                        Course Description:
This course is an undergraduate reading seminar which surveys the long and varied
intellectual traditions and conversations in the field of Caribbean thought. Generally, the
readings will engage 20th Century Caribbean political thought, and the political/intellectual
predicaments that preoccupied (and continue to preoccupy) Caribbean thinkers. These
include colonial violence, rebellion/revolution, aesthetic movements, and other themes.
Readings will include selections from key interlocutors in these intellectual conversations,
including Aimé Cesaire, Derek Walcott, Frantz Fanon, Sylvia Wynter, CLR James, and
others. The goal of this seminar is to place these ‘long 20th century’ conversation(s) in
Caribbean thought in conversation with transnational and broader hemispheric
considerations which meditate on similar predicaments and themes.
   What will I learn?
   Main skills and attitudes to be developed
              • Close reading
              • Presentation skills
              • Critical thinking
              • Academic writing
   Learning Outcomes
       1. Students will be able to conduct close readings of complex theoretical and
          literary texts.
       2. Students will be able to offer a cogent oral presentation on the content of the
          reading(s).
       3. Students will be able to think in concert with their peers during classes, and
          will extend these conversations to their research more broadly.
   How will I learn?
      1. Classes will consist of students presenting on the contents of the reading, and
         brief remarks offered by the instructor. The remainder of the class will consist
                                                 1


         of guided discussion regarding the texts. Students are encouraged to use the
         discussions to seek clarification, assist one another, and raise questions that
         might enhance their understanding of the material.
   Pre-requisites for the course: Must be enrolled in a degree-granting graduate
   program.
   How to succeed in this course:
   1. Completion of all readings, assignments, and assessments to the best of your
      ability.
   2. Engaging in class discussions thoughtfully and with respect for fellow classmates.
   3. Synthesizing information across weeks to draw theoretical connections, highlight
      divergences, and build a general understanding for the broader intellectual
      tradition.
Writing:
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can
expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects,
and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will
also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to
read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion
of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.
                                 Course Requirements:
 Required Texts (available at the University co-op and through the Library)
 Full-length Monographs:
 Aimé Cesaire, Discourse on Colonialism. Monthly Review, 2000.
 Alejo Carpentier, The Kingdom of this World, Farrar Straus and Giroux, (New
 York, 1985).
 Derek Walcott,. Dream on Monkey Mountain: and Other Plays. New York: Farrar, Straus and
                                              2


Giroux, 2003.
Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove/Atlantic, 2008.
Frantz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove, 1965.
Michel –Rolph Trouillot, Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History.
Essays, Articles, and Book Chapters (available through canvas):
Anthony Bogues, “The Dual Haitian Revolution and the Making of Freedom in the
Modern World,” in S. Wilmot(Ed) Freedom: Retrospective and Prospective (Kingston: IRP
Press, 2009)
Anthony Bogues, Black Heretics, Black Prophets Radical Political Intellectuals. New York:
Taylor and Francis, 2015 (selected chapters).
Bedour Alagraa, "Homo Narrans and the Science of the Word: Toward a Caribbean
Radical Imagination." Critical Ethnic Studies4, no. 2 (2018): 164-81.
Claudia Jones. "An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the Negro Woman!”
(online source).
CLR James, The Black Jacobins; Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution. New
York: Vintage, 1963 (selected chapters).
David Scott, “On the Question of Caribbean Studies.” Small Axe: A Caribbean
Journal of Criticism 17, no. 2 (January 2013): 1–7.
Derek Walcott, “The Muse of History”, in What the Twilight Says, Farrar Straus and
Giroux (1999).
Édouard Glissant, Poetics of Relation. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press, 2010.
George Lamming, The Pleasures of Exile. London: Pluto Press, 2005 (selected
chapters).
Jane Nardal, “Black Internationalism” in Negritude Women, eds. Sharpley-Whiting, T.
Denean Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2003.
                                               3


 Marcus Garvey, UNIA declaration (digital source).
 Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. London: Verso,
 2007 (selected chapters)
 Stuart Hall, “Caribbean Identity and Diaspora”, in Identity: Community, Culture,
 Difference. Ed. John Rutherford, London: Lawrence and Wishart Ltd, 1998.
 Stuart Hall, “Negotiating Caribbean Identities, NLR I/209, January–February
 1995.” New Left Review, n.d. https://newleftreview.org/I/209/stuart-hall-
 negotiating-caribbean-identities.
 Suzanne Césaire, The Great Camouflage: Writings of Dissent (1941-1945). Edited by
 Daniel Maximin. Translated by Keith L. Walker. Middletown, Conn: Wesleyan
 University Press, 2012.
 Sylvia Wynter, "Beyond Miranda’s Meanings: Un/Silencing the ‘Demonic Ground’
 of Caliban’s Women.” Out of the Kumbla: Caribbean Women and Literature. Ed. Carole
 Boyce Davies and Elaine Savory Fido. Africa World Press, 1990. 355-372.
 Sylvia Wynter, "Novel and History, Plot and Plantation." Savacou 5 (1971): 95-102.
 Walter Rodney, The Groundings with My Brothers. London: Verso, 2019 (selected
 chapters).
 *Primary Source: The Code Noir (1685), uploaded to canvas.
Assignments:
Grading for this Course:
Each member of the seminar will be responsible for offering a presentation (15
minutes) in pairs, during the week of April 28th, on any of the themes indicated in the
syllabus, incorporating the readings and other source material if necessary. Students will
also be responsible for vocal participation in class seminars. In addition, each student
will be required to submit one 5-page critical reflection. This critical reflection will
consist of the readings and theme from one particular week, and will synthesize the
group of readings into a coherent reflection of the organizing theme for said week.
                                             4


Members of the seminar will also be responsible for submitting one 5-page proposal
for the final paper, which will explore possible themes/arguments, and source material
for the final product. Finally, each member of the seminar will produce one 15-20 page
paper, reflecting the themes from the course and drawing on the readings from the
syllabus and elsewhere. All written assignments must be submitted in hard copy in
class, with one soft copy uploaded to canvas. Soft copies should be submitted in
PDF form.
   Assignments                                Points Possible: Percentage of Total
   In-class presentation                             20                      20%
   Class Participation                               10                      10%
   Critical reflection, (due February 27,            20                      20%
   2020)
   Final Paper Proposal (due March 26,               20                      20%
   2020)
   Final Paper (due May 7, 2020)                     30                      30%
   Course Outline
   All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the
   Canvas website at
   https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions
   about the course schedule.
   Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require.
   It is your responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do
   my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as much advanced notice as
   possible).
 Weekly Readings & Topics:
 Week 1 (January 21 & 23, 2020): Introduction, Orienting Questions
        January 21: Introduction, no readings.
        January 23: David Scott – on the Question of Caribbean Studies
                                              5


 Week 2 January 28 & 30, 2020): Aime Cesaire’s Discourse on
 Colonialism
     January 28: Aimé Cesaire, Discourse on Colonialism, pp. 31-46.
     January 30: Aimé Cesaire, Discourse on Colonialism , pp. 47-78.
 Week 3 (February 4 & 6, 2020): Coloniality (continued)
     February 4: Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks, Intro, Chapter 1, Chapter
     5, Conclusion.
     February 6: Fanon, Frantz. The Wretched of the Earth, (Chapters 1, 4 and 5).
Week 4 (February 11 & 13, 2020): Slavery and Plantation Life
     February 11: The Code Noir, 1685 (online source)
     CLR James, The Black Jacobins, Chapter 1, “The Property”
     February 13: CLR James, The Black Jacobins, Appendix, pp. 391-395.
     Eric Williams, Capitalism and Slavery, Chapter 1, “The Origins of Negro Slavery”,
     Chapter 12, “The Slaves and Slavery”.
 Week 5 (February 18 & 20, 2020): The Haitian Revolution:
     February 18: Anthony Bogues, “The Haitian Revolution and the Making of
     Freedom in the Modern World”.
     CLR James, The Black Jacobins, Chapter 4, “The San Domingo Masses Begin”.
     February 20: Michel Rolph-Trouillot, Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of
     History, Chapter 3, “The Haitian Revolution as a Non-event”.
Week 6 (February 25 & 27, 2020): Historiography: **CRITICAL REFLECTION
DUE IN CLASS ON FEBRUARY 27**.
     February 25: Derek Walcott, “The Muse of History”.
     Michel Rolph Trouillot, Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History Chapter 1,
                                             6


     “The Power in the Story”, Chapter 3, “The Three Faces of Sans Souci.”
     February 27: Anthony Bogues, Black Heretics, Black Prophets, “Carribean
     Historiography and Dread History,” pp. 176-185. (Dread History) – selections
Week 7 (March 3 & 5, 2020): Beyond Man, Beyond Feminism(s).
     March 3: Claudia Jones. "An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the Negro
     Woman!”
     March 5: Sylvia Wynter: Sylvia Wynter, "Beyond Miranda’s Meanings: Un/Silencing
     the ‘Demonic Ground’ of Caliban’s Women.”
 Week 8 (March 10 & 12, 2020): Hemispheric Connections
     March 10: Marcus Garvey, “UNIA declaration”.
     Walter Rodney, The Groundings With My Brothers, Chapter 3, “Black Power, its
     Relevance to the West Indies”.
     March 12: Paul Gilroy, The Black Atlantic, Chapter 1,“The Black Atlantic as a
     Counterculture of Modernity”.
     Derek Walcott, “A far cry from Africa”.
     Jane Nardal, “Black Internationalism”.
 Week 9 (Spring Break, no class):
 Week 10 (March 24 & 26, 2020): Identity. **FINAL PAPER PROPOSAL
 DUE IN CLASS ON MARCH 26**
     March 24: Edouard Glissant, Poetics of Relation, “Transparency and Opacity”, pp.
     111-120, “For Opacity”, pp. 189-194.
     George Lamming, “Caliban Orders History”.
     March 26: Stuart Hall, “Negotiating Caribbean Identity”.
     Stuart Hall, “Caribbean Identity and Diaspora”.
                                          7


 Week 11 (March 31 & April 2, 2020): Literary Traditions
     March 31: Alejo Carpentier, “On the Marvelous Real” (Intro to The Kingdom of this
     World)
     Jacques Stephen Alexis “On the Marvelous Real of Haitians”
     April 2: Suzanne Cesaire, “Surrealism and Us”.
     Sylvia Wynter, “Novel and History/Plot and Plantation”.
 Week 12 (April 7 & 9, 2020): Literary Traditions (Continued)
     April 7: Aime Cesaire, “Poetry and Knowledge”.
     Bedour Alagraa, “Toward a Caribbean Radical Imagination”.
     April 9: Alejo Carpentier, The Kingdom of This World
 Week 13 (April 14 & 16, 2020): Space/Place
     April 14: Carole Boyce Davies, ‘Caribbean Spaces’, Introduction, Chapters 1 &2.
     April 16: Derek Walcott, Dream on Monkey Mountain.
 Week 14 (April 21 & 23, 2020): Exile/Migration:
     April 21: Dionne Brand, Map to the Door of No Return (selections).
     April 23: Dionne Brand, Map to the Door of No Return (continued).
     George Lamming, “An Occasion for Speaking”
Week 15 (April 28 & 30, 2020):
     In class presentations.
Week 16 (May 5 & 7, 2020):
     May 5: Peer review of drafts (in-class)
     May 7: Paper submission: no class.
                                           8


                                        Policies:
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations
because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you
from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also
encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are
listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you
would like.
Grading Policies
As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success
in this course. If you miss a smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier
journal entries, your grade will not be impacted significantly. Consequently, the final
grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
          Grade         Cutoff       Points
          A             94%          940
          A-            90%          900
          B+            87%          870
          B             84%          840
          B-            80%          800
          C+            77%          770
          C             74%          740
          C-            70%          700
          D             65%          650
          F             <65%         <650
 GRACE POLICY: Time-bank options
  Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to
  accommodate any unexpected, unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks”
  into our course. You do not have to utilize this policy, but if you find yourself
  struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to e-mail me as soon as
  possible to notify me that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy
  one of two ways (please choose, and let me know):
                                              9


 You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
 You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
 Absences
 If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing
 your team with the necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial
 to keep in communication with your team members; you are responsible for letting both us and your
 team know if you cannot make it to a class.
 Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious
 holidays or extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class
 due to observance of a religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in
 advance. You will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be
 responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for
 details or arrangements.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
    • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical
       wellness.
    • You have a right to respect.
    • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups
       to improve your learning environment.
    • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No
       student shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
       communicating with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel
       out of control or overwhelming.
    • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always
       respectful of others. • Your experience with this course is directly related to the
       quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of
       your peers’ experiences.
    • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up
       when someone is excluded.
    • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards,
       holding each other to these standards, and holding the teaching team
                                             10


        accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to
individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics,
sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are
provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a
“preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will
gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what
appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze,
etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
 Services for Students with Disabilities
     This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and
     abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning environment and
     activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me,
     or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated,
     please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment
     for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
     possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any
     student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
     should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-
     410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
     authorized         accommodations.          For     more       information,      visit
     http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well,
     exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time
     to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There
     are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the
     college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
     rather than later is often helpful.
                                               11


    If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events,
    or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
    http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
    tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
    information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
    (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns
have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns
have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how
you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to:
wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
    If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
    Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050.
    Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
    isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
    The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
    Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
    http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
    Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
    required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation
    or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •  Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
    occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
    entering the building.
 •  Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
    during the first week of class.
 •  In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
                                            12


        Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention Services office.
   •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
        procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
  Title IX Reporting
  Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination,
  sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and
  stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to
  fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its
  forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
           1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
           2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have
              experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
           3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees”
or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of
Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must
report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or
one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title
IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report
to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about
reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office
at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB
212), the professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further
investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual
assault, dating violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or
employee. Federal law and university policy also requires reporting incidents of sex-
and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title
IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such
incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain
confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-
6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-
2255). We strongly urge you make use of these services for any needed support and
that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
                                               13


The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office
of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
University Policies
Academic Integrity
    Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas
    Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
    abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
    Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or
    ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you
    must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
    subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You
    are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
     Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
    http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
    If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q
    drop before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the
    semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in
    college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
    http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                            14
