AFR 374E                                                                              Fall 2018
                                      Puerto Rico in Crisis
                              African and African Diaspora Studies 374E
                                    AMS 370, HIS 363K, MAS 374
                                                Fall 2018
Instructor: Dr. Mónica A. Jiménez
Email: Via Canvas
                                    COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course will provide a history of Puerto Rico’s relationship with the United States focusing in
particular on questions of catastrophe and capitalism. The course will center around two questions:
What is Puerto Rico to the United States? And how did we get to the present moment of crisis? In
answering these questions, we will focus in particular in the ways that law has racialized islanders and
conceived of them as unprepared and undeserving of rights and full citizenship. This conception has
thus shaped the way that capitalism has worked as a force in shaping the islands possibilities
throughout the 120 years of its relationship with the US. Ultimately, we will examine how the early
20th century imperial moment, which created the US-Puerto Rico relationship, continues to define
that relationship today. As was made glaringly visible when Hurricane Maria hit the island in
September 2017, the island’s long-standing colonial relationship with the US continues to have real
ramifications for Puerto Ricans living there today. This course will focus in particular on topics of
law, economic policy, politics and migration to understand Puerto Rico’s continuous exclusion and
precarious status.
This course carries the Cultural Diversity in the United States, Global Cultures and Writing flags.
Learning Goals
Students will encounter the broad arc of 20th century Puerto Rican history while engaging specific
moments that have helped shape the island’s present. Students will gain a sense of historical
processes of change over time, and a broad methodology for assessing how events and experiences
influence the choices people make, what they believe is possible, and how these inform human
activity today. Through this engagement students will strengthen analytical and critical thinking
skills, while also developing and deepening their reading comprehension and writing skills.
                                                     1


AFR 374E                                                                                Fall 2018
Grade Breakdown
Attendance/Active Class Participation           15%
News Summaries                                  20%
2 Short Response Papers (15% each)              30%
In-class Exam                                   15%
Book Review                                     20%
Guidelines for all assignments, including the papers exam, will be distributed during the semester.
Expectations and Assignments:
ATTENDANCE AND ACTIVE CLASS PARTICIPATION (15%): The success of this course
requires your consistent presence in class as well as your contribution to class discussion.
Each student is expected to attend class, participate in discussions, and complete all reading and
writing assignments by the deadlines indicated in this syllabus or any written addenda. Class
discussions are an important component and students will be graded on their participation,
contributions to discussions and engagement with their peers.
The first three absences do not affect your grade. The fourth unexcused absence and every one
thereafter will deduct 2 points (out of the 20 possible) from the attendance grade in the class. You
are responsible for keeping track of your absences.
*** Cell phone use will not be tolerated in class. Please keep your cellphone silenced and in your
pocket or bag. If you are texting in class, I will ask you to leave and you will be counted absent for
that day.
NEWS SUMMARIES (20%)
Given that the history of Puerto Rico in crises is literally being written daily, an essential part of this
course will be to keep track of the events on the island as they relate to the topics of our course.
Students will explore the ways in which media sources report on and interpret contemporary issues
and events in Puerto Rico and the Puerto Rican community in the United States. Each week you will
read a minimum of two articles about Puerto Rico and Puerto Ricans and craft a brief (1-1.5 page)
written summary in your own words.
    • Please note the title, date and source of your newspaper articles and include a web address.
    • Sources should be legitimate media/ news sources and not simply entertainment or opinion
        blogs or websites. Acceptable examples include NY Times, Washington Post, Huffington
        Post, BBC, Guardian, etc. Sources in Spanish are acceptable.
    • Please come to class prepared to discuss the current events on the island and how they relate
        to the topics discussed in class. These discussions will feature prominently in our course.
    • Summaries will be due each Thursday before.
SHORT PAPERS (15% each)
                                                     2


AFR 374E                                                                                 Fall 2018
Students are expected to write two thoughtful 3-page response papers to the readings. For response
paper #1, you should choose a reading from weeks 2-8. For response paper #2, you will respond to
the readings and symposium held in week 14.
IN-CLASS EXAMINATION (20%)
Held on November 15th.
BOOK REVIEW (20%)
You will be expected to produce a thorough and well-written 5 page book review. You will have the
opportunity to determine which book you will review and can chose from literary works (fiction,
poetry, film, etc.) or more traditional academic works (history, anthropology, etc.) You should
choose a work that is directly and obviously linked to the themes of our course. It should be a work
that interests you and that you have not read before.
You will be asked to write a one-paragraph pitch about your choice and how the text is relevant to
the course. This will be due on October 18th. I will approve the book or suggest that you choose
something else. The final book review will be due on December 14th. Guidelines for the book
review will be posted on Canvas.
Deadlines:
Book review proposal (1 paragraph): October 18, 2018
Response Paper # 1 (3 pages): October 25, 2018
In Class Exam: November 15, 2018
Response Paper #2 (3 pages): December 6, 2018
Book review (5 pages): December 14, 2018
** All assignments will be turned in via Canvas.
University Writing Center:
If you know that you struggle with writing, or do not have a lot of experience with academic and
historical writing, I encourage you to make an appointment with the Undergraduate Writing Center
as soon as possible. (http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/)
Accommodations:
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the office of Services for
Students with Disabilities: phone: 512-471-6259; Videophone: 512-410-6644; email
ssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Please see me in my office within the first two weeks of class to discuss any necessary
accommodations.
Readings:
Available electronically via UT library:
    • Cesar Ayala, Puerto Rico in the American Century: A History since 1898.
    • Jorge Duany, The Puerto Rican Nation on the Move: Identities on the Island and in the US
                                                   3


AFR 374E                                                                             Fall 2018
All other readings will be available on Canvas at least one week before they are due.
Useful background texts available at https://puertoricosyllabus.com
                                           Course Schedule
The professor reserves the right to deviate or modify parts of this schedule. All changes will include
notice and any modified syllabi will be posted on Canvas.
NB – Please prepare all readings for Tuesday’s class.
                                              Week One
August 30, Introduction and Course Overview
https://www.villagevoice.com/2018/03/19/a-cartoon-history-of-colonialism-in-puerto-rico/
                                               I: Crisis
                                              Week Two
September 4 and 6, September 20, 2017
https://theintercept.com/2018/03/20/puerto-rico-hurricane-maria-recovery/
                                             Week Three
September 11 and 13, Un-Natural Disaster
    • Yarimar Bonilla, “The Wait of Disaster”
    • Marie Cruz Soto, “In Vieques, Life Amid Devastation”
    • Alexis Santos-Lozada, “In Puerto Rico, Counting Deaths and Making Deaths Count”
    • Hilda Lloréns, “Ruin Nation”
                                              Week Four
September 18 and 20, The Crisis Before Maria
    • Yarimar Bonilla and Rafael A. Boglio Martínez, “Puerto Rico in Crisis: Government
        Workers Battle Neoliberal Reform”
    • Juan Gonzalez, “Puerto Rico’s Debt Crisis: Economic Collapse in America’s Biggest Colony
        and What Can Be Done About It” available at
        https://www.democracynow.org/2015/11/26/juan_gonzalez_on_how_puerto_ricos
                                              Week Five
September 25 and 27, Broken PROMESAs
    • Alyosha Goldstein, “Promises Are Over: Puerto Rico and the Ends of Decolonization”
    • Marisol LeBrón, “People Before Debt”
                                   II: The Crises that Came Before
                                               Week Six
October 2 and 4, What is Puerto Rico?
                                                    4


AFR 374E                                                                                Fall 2018
   •    Luis Martínez-Fernández, “The Rise of the American Mediterranean, 1846-1905.”
   •    Brenda Gayle Plummer, “Building U.S. Hegemony in the Caribbean.”
   •    Cesar Ayala, Puerto Rico in the American Century: A History since 1898, pp. 33-51.
                                               Week Seven
October 9 and 11, The Unincorporated Territory: To be “foreign in a domestic Sense”
   • Excerpts from Downes v. Bidwell, 182 US 244 (1901)
                                               Week Eight
October 16 and 18, Americanization Like it or Not
   • Solsirée del Moral, “Negotiating Colonialism ‘Race,’ Class, and Education in Early
        Twentieth-Century Puerto Rico.”
   • Eileen J. Findlay, “Love in the Tropics: Marriage, Divorce, and the Construction of
        Benevolent Colonialism in Puerto Rico, 1898-1910.”
   • Ellen Walsh, “The Not-So-Docile Puerto Rican: Students Resist Americanization, 1930.”
October 18 – Book Review Proposal Due
                                               Week Nine
October 23 and 25, The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
   • Cesar Ayala, Puerto Rico in the American Century: A History since 1898, pp. 137-178.
October 25 – Reading Response #1 Due
                                                Week Ten
October 30 and November 1, Puerto Rico Transformed
   • Cesar Ayala, Puerto Rico in the American Century: A History since 1898, 179-200.
   • Jorge Duany, The Puerto Rican Nation on the Move: Identities on the Island and in the US, pp. 122-
        136.
                                              Week Eleven
November 6 and 8, Puerto Rico in the late 20th Century: Heading towards a Hurricane
Ayala, 267-290?
   • Carlos Pabón, “The Political Status of Puerto Rico: A Nonsense Dilemma,”
   • Christina Duffy Burnett, “ ‘None of the Above’ Means more of the Same: Why Solving
        Puerto Rico’s Status Problem Matters”
   • Jaime Benson-Arias, “Sailing on the USS Titanic: Puerto Rico’s Unique Insertion to the
        Global Economic Trends,”
                                        III. 21st Century Colony
                                              Week Twelve
November 13 and 15, The Globalization and Development Paradoxes
   • Jeb Sprague-Silgado, “Global Capitalism in the Caribbean”
   • Zaire Z. Dinzey-Flores, “The Development Paradox”
                                                     5


AFR 374E                                                                            Fall 2018
                                             Week Thirteen
November 20, No Class – Happy Thanksgiving
                                             Week Fourteen
November 27, Environmental Degradation and Energy Dependence
    • Bret Gustafson, “The New Energy Imperialism in the Caribbean”
    • Hilda Llorens, “In Puerto Rico, environmental injustice and racism inflame protests over
         coal ash” on The Conversation
         https://theconversation.com/in-puerto-rico-environmental-injustice-and-racism-inflame-
         protests-over-coal-ash-69763
    • Interview with Elizabeth Yeampierre: “Capitalism is Going to Kill the Planet”
November 28th – No Class
Symposium – “Puerto Rico in the Wake of Crisis: Towards a Just (After)life of Disaster”
November 30 – 2:00, Eidman Courtroom, University of Texas School of Law
    • 6:00 -- Elizabeth Yeampierre Keynote Event
December 1 – 9:00 a.m. Symposium Day 2, Gordon-White Multipurpose Room
                                              Week Fifteen
December 4 and 6, “No es luto, es resistencia”: Art and Resistance
    • Rocio Zambra, “Colonial Debts”
    • Selection of poetry
    • The Ground Truth Project available at http://thegroundtruthproject.org/portraits-of-
         resilience-puerto-rican-millennials-face-economic-meltdown-with-a-spirit-of-palante/
    • Puerto Rico Under Water exhibit available at https://www.cser.columbia.edu/puerto-rico-
         under-water
December 14th--- Final Papers Due
Grading Policy and Distribution: Please note that this class, will utilize plus and minus options
for final grades. Your grade will be determined based of this scale.
A 94-100 A- 90-93 B+ 87-89 B 83-86 B- 80-82 C+ 77-79 C 73-76 C- 70-72
Late Work:
Late work will be handled on a case-by-case basis. Generally, except in the case of an excused
absence, work submitted after an assigned deadline will not be eligible for full credit. Please
communicate with me if you are having problems keeping to the schedule. It is better to talk
through problems than ignore them.
                                                    6
