                AFS 102L SYLLABUS
          Unique Numbers 43845/43850
     Foundations of the USAF II
Course Syllabus AY 18-19 (Spring Semester)
                 AFROTC Detachment 825
             The University of Texas at Austin
             Capt Thomas Hart, Instructor
                Office Phone: (512) 232-2370
         Office: CLA 5.724 Hours by Appointment
                                                1


                                                                                       Spring 2019
MEMORANDUM FOR AS 100 STUDENTS
FROM: Capt Thom Hart
SUBJECT: Welcome to AS100/Foundations of the United States Air Force
 1. Welcome to your second semester of Air Force Science classes at UT! Foundations of the
 United States Air Force is an introductory course designed to help you transition to an Air
 Force ROTC cadet. Last semester you learned some of the basics in the Air Force. This
 semester we will expound on those topics to cover: Listening and communication skills,
 teams, diversity and harassment in the Air Force as well as some of the specific Air Force
 Installations and what it really takes for an officer to lead. I challenge you to make the most
 out of the class. Make no mistake; I have very high expectations for you and for this class. As
 a minimum, I expect each of you to:
        a. Read the associated lesson before coming to class
        b. Come to class prepared to learn and participate
        c. Know the course requirements
        d. Maintain the highest military standards
2. Study hard and make wise decisions. We need YOU in the Air Force, so keep your grades
above the standard, attend all your classes, and focus on completing all the requirements for
your eventual graduation and commission!
        Integrity First – Service before Self – Excellence in All We Do!
                                                                 // signed //
                                                         THOMAS P. HART, Capt, USAF
                                                         Instructor
                                                         Department of Air Force Science
                               This syllabus is subject to change                                2


                             Foundations of the United States Air Force
                                      Course Syllabus AY 17-18
                 AFROTC Detachment 825, The University of Texas at Austin
Course Location and Hours:
                                         Spring 2019
                                         (43845) Wednesday 1200-1300, CLA 5.404
                                         (43850) Wednesday 1300-1400, CLA 5.404
Office Location and Hours:               CLA 5.724 – hours by appointment
                                         Office: 512-232-2370
                                         E-mail: thomas.hart@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description: The spring semester of AS 100, “Foundations of the United States Air
Force”, is designed to build upon the knowledge learned in the fall semester, and to establish
foundations for future development. It emphasizes critical skills required of Air Force Officers,
to include: listening skills, principles of war, policy and strategy, Air Force Values, human
relations, and leadership requirements. This is a one (1) credit-hour course and requires critical
thinking and understanding of materials presented.
Course Objectives: During the spring semester of AS100, Cadets will be exposed to more
background about the Air Force and its operations, to include soft skills. Cadets should
comprehend the material taught, and be able to think about the implications of the information
gleaned, along with how they will use those tools in the future, and how Air Force Officers can
improve upon those tools. Cadets will also be required to learn core information about the Air
Force and recall that information as reference points in the future.
NOTE: Lesson Objectives are included with reading/lesson materials and are posted in Canvas.
                                           Attendance Policy
AFROTC Attendance Policy (AFROTCI 36-2011, 9.10.1): Cadets must achieve a minimum of
80 percent attendance over the course of the term to receive a passing final grade. Treat class as
a military appointment. If you will be late or unable to attend, make every effort to coordinate
this with the instructor before class. Examples of excusable absences are: Family emergency,
conflicting appointments (i.e. - Air Force physical), and events beyond your control. Examples
of unexcused absences are: Studying for a test, sleeping in, etc. Make-up work may be allowed
for excused absence at the discretion of the instructor.
                                This syllabus is subject to change                                 3


When you must miss class for valid, unavoidable reasons, notify your instructor as soon as
possible but no later than before class start time. In case of unexpected circumstances (i.e.,
emergencies), you should notify me no later than 24 hours after class session. Alternate
requirements or makeup activities will be arranged for the valid, unavoidable criteria listed
below:
            •   Participation in an approved field trip or other official University activity (e.g.,
                athletics, debate, music, theater arts, AFROTC physical). Note: Fraternity and/or
                sorority functions are not official University activities; or
            •   Sickness or medical confinement…must provide documentation (missing class
                because you have a headache from studying late the night before is an unexcused
                absence); or
            •   An emergency (e.g., death in the family, automobile accident).
        ****Administrative Requirement: Regardless of circumstance, if you miss class, email
        course instructor within 24 hours about the absence (with ABSENT as your subject line).
        Any unexcused absence will result in a 2% reduction of your overall class grade.
Academic only (non-cadet) students are not required to meet the 80 percent requirement, but
are strongly encouraged to attend all scheduled classes.
                              Student Responsibilities and Guidelines
Classroom Conduct:
    •   When a ranking officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to
        attention until told to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the
        classroom, the students must again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer
        leaves the classroom. Class members will select a class monitor and alternate who will
        make these announcements for all class sessions.
    •   Students are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class
        discussions, but you must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address
        the instructor as sir/ma’am or by rank (e.g., Captain, Major, and Colonel) and address
        NCOs as sergeant.
                                This syllabus is subject to change                                   4


   •   No, smoking, or use of other tobacco products while in class (tobacco use of any kind is
       prohibited on the UT campus). Drinks are allowed; however, no open lid containers.
   •   Cell phones will be used to support class discussion and use of Kahoot.
   •   Use of laptops/tablets is only permitted for note taking and research to support class
       discussion.
Cadet Standards: Cadets must be aware of membership requirements (refer to AFROTCI 36-
2011). Here’s a recap of your requirements (these are not all-inclusive):
   •   Report all negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72
       hours. If the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets
       may wait to report the involvement NLT 72 hours after their return to classes following
       the break.
   •   Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours (exceptions for final semester) and
       term and cumulative GPA of 2.00 or greater. You must also pass all AS courses with a C
       or better and no F or incomplete grades in any of your classes. For scholarship cadets, If
       term and cumulative GPA of 2.50 or greater is not maintained, a Conditional Event will
       be issued.
   •   Remain in good standing at your institution.
   •   Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with cadre in advance.
   •   Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
   •   Meet medical standards and advise us of any changes in your status.
   •   Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
   •   Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all
       military officers outside, and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all
       ranking cadet officers, of all military services, when in uniform. Unless told to enter at
       ease, you must use proper reporting procedures when entering the office of a
       commissioned officer.
   •   Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming
       and weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and
       appearance standards are followed on- and off-duty.
   •   Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008 cadets will wear their
       uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and
                              This syllabus is subject to change                                  5


        for Practical Military Training (PMT). If not in military uniform, all cadets will wear
        appropriate civilian attire to their AS class. At all times, appropriate uniform or civilian
        clothes will be worn will be worn in CLA. NO HATS will be worn in the buildings at any
        time.
    •   Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with
        military order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of, or inflict
        cruelty on subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or
        privilege to which they are legally entitled. Be honorable, be respectful.
    •   Drugs & Alcohol: No drugs, period. No drinking alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be
        responsible—do not abuse alcohol and never drive while or after drinking.
                                            Administration
Timeliness: Be on time; treat class as a military appointment.
Course Material: The primary textbook is AS-100 Student Study Guide, T-408. We will also
use The Tongue and Quill (AFH 33-337, 27 May 2015 edition) and other study resources as
appropriate. All course material will be posted on Canvas.
Instruction: Academic classes are conducted as a combination of lecture and guided discussion.
Be prepared for class by reading assignments in advance. Be able to share your knowledge and
personal views in class. Classes may be supplemented with videos.
Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011 and detachment policy, each
cadet will meet with their course instructor for an academic plan review and term counseling
interview. Each cadet will complete a counseling session with their instructor and MUST
secure academic advisor Form 48 review prior to 28 Feb 2018.
        Spring Term: All cadets must have their academic plan reevaluated and recertified by
        their university academic advisor every term. The academic advisor will sign/date in the
        “remarks” section of the plan.
Office Hours: If you need my assistance or wish to discuss the course, the Air Force, or
anything else, don’t hesitate to schedule an appointment with me. Please use Calendly to do so at
https://calendly.com/thomas-hart/office-visit. The link will also be posted on Canvas.
Academic Integrity: Integrity is an Air Force core value. Plagiarism and cheating are just a
couple examples of behavior that show a lack of integrity. These and other examples will not be
tolerated. Academic integrity means honesty and responsibility in scholarship. Professors have
to obey rules of honest scholarship, and so do students. Additionally, the core values of the
University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
                               This syllabus is subject to change                                    6


opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. For
further information on academic dishonesty, please visit http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/the-university/
Students with Disabilities: Students with Disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities, (512) 471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Accommodations for Religious Holidays: By UT policy, you must notify me of your pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
miss class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of
fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL: 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                         Course Requirements and Grading Policy
Grading Computation: Your grade is computed using the following scoring system. Please
note the total score possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter grade/4-point GPA
scale used by UT-Austin. Late submissions will incur a 10% penalty for every day that the
assignment is late.
                                                                               Grading Criteria
                           SPRING SEMESTER                                    Score      Letter Grade
     Graded Area                                                Points                    (GPA Points)
     Exam #1                                                       30        93-100          A/4.0
     Exam #2                                                       30         90-93         A-/3.67
                                                                              87-89         B+/3.33
     Writing                                                       20
       Principles of War/Tenets of Airpower Memorandum         10
                                                                              84-86          B/3.0
       Missing Leadership Tenet/Policy Modification Memorandum 10             80-83         B-/2.67
     Current Events Briefing                                       10         77-79         C+/2.33
                                                                              74-76          C/2.0
     Class Participation & On-Time Attendance                      10
                                                                              70-73         C-/1.67
     Total                                                        100         67-69         D+/1.33
                                                                              64-66          D/1.0
                                                                              60-63         D-/0.67
                                                                              0-59           F/0.0
                                        This syllabus is subject to change                             7


Class Participation & On-Time Attendance: Class participation and on-time attendance are
worth 10 points or 10% of your grade. I expect all students to be in-place at the beginning of the
class period. Two (2) minutes late is considered tardy; any/all tarries will be considered when
determining this portion of your grade -- any unexcused absence will result in a 2% reduction of
your overall class grade. Additionally, I expect active participation from all students during
every class period. Active participation is essential to your individual development as a
student…and specifically in this course that is preparing you for your transition into the Active
Air Force. Prior preparation and attentiveness during class are keys to maximizing your
participation credit.
Examinations: There are two examinations, each worth 30 points or 30% of your grade. These
tests may be a combination of short answer, multiple choice, and True/False questions. The
material for the examinations is selected from class discussions and presentations (to include
student presentations), student readings, supplemental readings, guest speakers, and videos.
The Exam #1 will cover material from the first half of the course. The Exam #2 will cover
material from the second half of the course.
Writing Assignments: There are two writing assignments. Follow the general writing
assignment guidelines below as well as unique requirements for each individual assignment.
General Guidelines:
    • All assignments are due not later than the start of class period they are due.
    • Students must hand in a hard-copy & submit an electronic copy of all written
        assignments. Electronic copies will be submitted via e-mail with the following subject
        line: “AS 100 – Cadet XXXXX – Title of Assignment”
    • All references will be integrated and appropriated cited within the flow of your paper.
    • Grading: I will consider three main areas in grading your work: grammar and format;
        justification/clarity/conciseness; and effectiveness in meeting the tasking.
Writing Assignment # 1 – Official Duties (Individual Assignment): Prepare a paper, in a
T&Q format of your choosing, select a military operation in American history. In your paper,
discuss the challenges to the Air Force in that conflict, the outcome, and what principles of war
& tenets of airpower they failed in executing effectively. How could they have executed those
principles and tenets more effectively?
                 o Use format provided in AFH 33-337, The Tongue and Quill.
                 o Limit your response to 2-3 pages.
Writing Assignment # 2 – Transitioning to Your First Assignment (Individual
Assignment): Prepare a paper, in a T&Q format of your choosing, to present information on
what quality of leadership you believe is missing in Air Force culture. Upon identifying that
                                This syllabus is subject to change                                8


quality, explain its importance and how the Air Force would go about implementing emphasis on
that quality using policy and/or strategy.
                 o  Use format provided in AFH 33-337, The Tongue and Quill
                 o  Limit your response to 2 pages.
Below list of ‘ideas/sources’ is not all inclusive; it is simply provided to highlight some
sources/topics you may address in your background paper. The more thought and effort you put
into this assignment, the more valuable the result!
•   Military OneSource (http://www.militaryonesource.mil/): Moving is one of life’s top 4 most stressful
    events. As an Air Force officer, you need to become comfortable and efficient at this to
    reduce the stress on you and your family. Just as important, you need to understand this the
    challenges inherent with this difficult process and the tools available to assist with a military
    move so you can HELP YOUR AIRMEN AND THEIR FAMILIES when they encounter
    difficulties! When you think about planning a military move, you may find the “Military
    Life Topics, Moving Tab” a useful planning link.
•   Your Future, or Anticipated Future … Airman & Family Readiness Center (A&FRC): The
    A&FRC is designed as a one-stop information and referral center for single, married, active
    duty military and retired individuals and their families. From finding on/off base resources
    for everything from child care and financial management to housing & school referrals,
    spouse employment assistance programs, fitness, recreation, and a free household item loan
    lockers when you or your Airmen find yourself without pots/pans, alarm clocks & child
    booster seats. This is only a short list of programs offered or supported by your installation’s
    A&RFC. Simply put, the A&FRC can and will gladly help with your transition. I’ll be
    bold to say all installations have great web A&FRC web pages and awesome – friendly –
    helpful on-site staffs!
•   Active Duty Pay and Benefits: Personal Finance & Budget on Second Lieutenant Pay
         o Prepare a Month budget using an Excel spreadsheet to show the following
                  Base Gross Pay as a 2LT
                  Calculate Net Pay at 25% tax rate
                  BAH entitlement as a 2LT (BAH Calculator: Defense Travel Management
                    Office: http://www.defensetravel.dod.mil/site/bah.cfm
                  Show a detailed list of liabilities with estimates (food, rent,
                    electricity/water/internet/phone bills, car payment/insurance, etc.)
                        • Provide comments detailing how estimates were calculated
                  Show a final balance for the month. What is left for fun, investments, travel,
                    etc.?
•   Active Duty Personnel – Real Life Lessons Learned: Experience is priceless. Where better
    to learn about what to anticipate and what to expect … things you might not expect with your
    first Air Force move.
                                This syllabus is subject to change                                     9


Briefing Assignment: You will brief each of your writing assignment topic. Each briefing is
worth 10 points or 10% of your grade. The presentation will last 5 minutes (+/- 1 min). This
will be an information briefing intended to educate the audience. Powerpoint presentation is
optional. The briefing will be presented in accordance with this syllabus schedule (See course
outline for due dates).
        General Guidelines:
            • Your specific briefing topic will be assigned in class. Reminder, you will present
                either Official Duties, or Transition to First Assignment (not both).
            • Arrive early and ensure the presentation works properly.
            • Powerpoint optional for this presentation/briefing.
            • Grading: I may use the HOLMCENTER Form 6 - Informative Briefing Grading
                Sheet – to grade the briefing.
                    o If your briefing is over or under the allowable timeframe, I will lower your
                        briefing score by one letter grade.
Course critique requirement: Your feedback on the course and course instructor is critically
important for two reasons. First, the feedback helps ensure the course is meeting its objective.
Second, your input helps improve the course and instructor for future students. Specifically, all
UT students must complete item 1 below. All cadets must complete items 1 through 3 below.
        1. Every semester, complete the university critique, “Course Instructor Survey,” online.
        2. Every semester, complete the AFROTC sexual assault assessment found on line (URL
        to be provided by instructor), usually completed NLT two weeks prior to course end date;
        3. At the end of each spring semester, complete AFROTC end-of-term survey on line
        (URL to be provided by instructor), usually completed NLT two weeks prior to course
        end date.
                                This syllabus is subject to change                               10


***This space intentionally blank, course outline begins on next page***
                 This syllabus is subject to change                      11


                  AFS 100 COURSE OUTLINE - SPRING 2018
    Date        Lesson #                             Subject                                     Assignments
   18 Jan         12           Welcome and Course Overview                                 Cadet Reader Welcome
   25 Jan         13           Air Force & Social Media                                    Cadet Reader & Handout
   1 Feb          14           Evolution of the Air Force                                  Cadet Reader
   8 Feb          15           What is War?                                                Cadet Reader
   15 Feb         16           Principles of War & Tenets of Air Power                     Cadet Reader
   22 Feb         17           Principles of War & Tenets of Air Power                     Writing Assignment #1 Due
   1 Mar          18           Department of the Air Force                                 Cadet Reader
   8 Mar                       EXAM 1
 18-23 Mar                     SPRING BREAK
   22 Mar         15           Ethical Decision-Making: Pressure                           Cadet Reader
   29 Mar         15           What the Air Force Brings to the Fight                      Cadet Reader
   5 Apr          19           Air Force MAJCOMs                                           Cadet Reader
   12 Apr         20           Making Policy & Strategy                                    Cadet Reader
   19 Apr         21           The Air Force Leader                                        Cadet Reader
   26 Apr         22           Listening: The Neglected Skill                              Writing Assignment #2 Due
                               EXAM 2
   3 May                       Instructor Surveys & Peer Review
                            Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
    1.  Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
        when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
    2.  Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    3.  Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
        class.
    4.  In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    5.  Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at Austin
        Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                   This syllabus is subject to change                                               12


This syllabus is subject to change 13