ARI 338 / ARI 388 / ARC 386M – Designing for Human Behavior
Instructor:                  Tamie Glass, Associate Professor
Office Hours / Location:     By appointment / GOL 3.104
Email / Phone:               tglass@utexas.edu / 512.529.9351 cell
Class Time / Location:       TH 12:30-3:30pm / GOL 2.110 (unless noted otherwise)
Fall 2019 Syllabus
Catalog Description and Prerequisites
Issues of mood, privacy, perception, proxemics, and preferences applied to the design of interiors.
Three lecture hours a week for one semester. Upper division standing.
Council for Interior Design Accreditation (CIDA) Standards
The following accreditation standards will be addressed in this studio course:
     •   Global Context - Interior designers have a global view and consider social, cultural,
         economic, and ecological contexts in all aspects of their work.
     •   Collaboration - Interior designers collaborate and also participate in interdisciplinary teams.
     •   Business Practices and Professionalism - Interior designers understand the principles and
         processes that define the profession and the value of interior design to society.
     •   Human-Centered Design - Interior designers apply knowledge of human experience and
         behavior to designing the built environment.
     •   Design Process - Interior designers employ all aspects of the design process to creatively
         solve a design problem.
     •   Communication - Interior designers are effective communicators.
     •   Light and Color - Interior designers apply the principles and theories of light and color
         effectively in relation to environmental impact and human wellbeing.
     •   Products and Materials - Interior designers complete design solutions that integrate
         furnishings, products, materials, and finishes.
         Course Objectives
         Specifically, this course will provide the following:
         Students will have an understanding and awareness of:
         • how social, economic, cultural, and physical contexts inform interior design
         • breadth and depth of interior design's impact and value
         • theories related to the impact of the built environment on human experience, behavior,
              and performance
         • the relationship between the natural and built environment as it relates to the human
              experience, wellbeing, behavior, and performance
         • the importance of evaluating the relevance and reliability of information and research
              impacting design solutions
         • a range of sources for information and research about color
         • how light and color in the interior environment impact health, safety, and wellbeing
         • the influence of furnishings, objects, materials, and finishes on human and
              environmental wellbeing
         Students will have the ability to:
         •    gather and apply human-centered evidence
         •    analyze and synthesize human perception and behavior patterns to inform design
              solutions
         •    effectively collaborate with multiple disciplines in developing design solutions


          Students will have opportunities for:
          • exposure to a variety of cultural norms
          • opportunities for developing multi-cultural awareness
          • exposure to a range of problem identification and problem solving methods
          • exposure to evolving communication technologies
Format
• Lectures by the instructor and guest speakers will cover the significant course material, which
     will be enhanced by required reading assignments.
• A two-part semester project will constitute the fundamental course work, in addition to several
     shorter assignments. The majority of assignments contribute to the completion of the semester
     project and considerable in-class time will be dedicated to project review and discussion. Please
     note, late submissions for any and all assignments and projects will NOT be graded. Students
     should arrange to submit work in advance if he or she anticipates being absent.
• Many assignments and projects will be accomplished in groups. Any individual not performing a
     commensurate share of the work may be eliminated from the group but is still responsible to
     satisfy all assignment/project requirements. Students may be asked to provide performance
     evaluations for their fellow group members, and the instructor reserves the right to give individual
     grades for teamwork.
• Quizzes will be given without notice to cover reading assignments, which should be completed
     prior to the class. Students may be required to post a question or answer questions related to
     the reading. These submissions on Canvas or in class, as well as participation in reading
     discussions online or during class, will count toward the student’s participation grade.
• No laptop use in class (unless instructed otherwise), no cell-phone use in class (please step
     outside to use your phone), and no (smelly) food in class.
• Guest speakers and possibly field trips will be integral to the course, and students will be
     expected to be courteous, punctual, and engaging.
• All course material (course description, syllabus, assignments, projects, readings, grades, etc.)
     will be available on Canvas.
Course Requirements and Texts
Universal Methods of Design: 100 Ways to Research Complex Problems, Develop Innovative Ideas,
and Design Effective Solutions by Bella Martin and Bruce Hanington
Weekly topical readings will be posted on Canvas.
We use Adobe software in this course. When accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you
will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not required to purchase Creative Cloud
services to sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to create a free Adobe ID. That can be
done here: https://accounts.adobe.com/.
Attendance Policy
Most of our class meetings will be devoted to discussions, exercises, and hands-on workshops, so
regular attendance and active participation are essential. You may miss two classes– for any
reason–without penalty. Each additional absence, regardless of the reason, will lower your course
grade by 5%, and four or more absences will likely result in a failing grade for the course. Because
our time in class is limited, promptness is important. Each instance of arriving late or leaving early will
count as 1/2 of an absence. If you are late for class, it is your responsibility to make sure you have
not been marked absent. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is
known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; asking
a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable. The student is responsible for completing
work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine
due dates.


Email
When writing the instructor an email, include “DFHB” in the subject line along with the topic of your
inquiry. Emails should address the instructor and be professional in manner. The instructor will
endeavor to reply in a timely manner or will address your question in the next class.
Classroom Etiquette
Etiquette is a code of conduct. It is a method for dealing with how people interact with one another,
which is based upon mutual respect and accepted norms of behavior. Below are tips for proper
classroom etiquette, which will set the tone for a professional atmosphere and foster good
workplace habits.
     -   Arrive to class on time.
     -   Mute your cell phone, and put it away.
     -   Close down your email and social media sites.
     -   Do not eat in class.
     -   Contribute to discussion when appropriate.
     -   Avoid side conversations and other distractions.
     -   Address the instructor and any guests professionally.
     -   Be attentive in class.
     -   Stay for the entire class.
     -   Bring what you need to be productive.
     -   Contact the instructor directly when you have to miss class.
     -   Be prepared for pin-ups and presentations.
Grading
The individual grades accumulated over the semester are averaged toward the final grade as
follows:
Participation (incl. reading posts and quizzes)       15%
Assignments                                           40%
Semester Project I                                    25%
Semester Project II                                   20%
Grade Descriptions
A/A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above
and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- : above average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues
ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is
complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.


F : fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation
with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must
be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling,
according to the School of Architecture policy.
Religious Observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student
whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall
be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused
within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their
instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or
a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.” Representing the work of others as your own, including plagiarism, is
taken very seriously at UT. You must cite your sources when you use the words or ideas of others;
otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure
of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University
Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
Personal Pronouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender
variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name,
unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). The instructor will
gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the
official roster and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise the instructor
of any changes early in the semester so appropriate updates may be made to their records.
Mental Health and Support Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are
options available for help:


      •   In-house CARE counselor (see below)
      •   For immediate support
               o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                   M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
               o CMHC Crisis Line:
                   24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
      •   Free services at CMHC:
               o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
               o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
               o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
               o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Care Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support
for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and
staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please
leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
          Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
          https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. Instructors
are committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but this is possible only
if you discuss your needs early. Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-
410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
The Sanger Learning Center
All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Learning Center’s classes and workshops,
private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70
courses in 15 different subject areas. More than 20,000 students use the services at the Sanger
Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance. For more information, please
visit http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center
http://uwc.utexas.edu
BEVOCAL
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power
to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
campus, go to: https://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal/.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can
be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and
share your concerns.


Food Pantry & Career Clothes Closet
Student Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of Students has launched UT Outpost (UA9
Building, 2609 University Ave; ring bell for service) to support students on our campus that is
equipped with a food pantry, and a career clothes closet to ensure every Longhorn has access to
professional clothes for job and internship interviews. Emergencies and financial hardships can
interfere with student success beyond the classroom, and this program will serve as an additional
resource for students. Learn more: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php
Title IX Reporting:
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
           1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
           2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
               or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
           3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies:
               https://titleix.utexas.edu/policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title
IX Coordinator. Your instructor is a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For
more information about reporting options and resources, visit https://titleix.utexas.edu or contact the
Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Emergency Evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
           evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
           requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building
           they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when
           entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
           first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
           instructors.
     • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
           Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
           Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
