BCH 339N: Systems Biology and Bioinformatics
SEMESTER: Fall 2020
WHEN: M, W 9.30 AM-11.00 AM
WHERE: https:/utexas.zoom.us/j/95070823997
DISCUSSION SECTION: M 13.00-14.00
WHERE: https:/utexas.zoom.us/j/99689265126
INSTRUCTOR:
Dr. Elif Sarinay Cenik, Assistant Professor, Department of Molecular Biosciences, lab
website:
https:/www.sarinayceniklab.org/
Office: PAT 241
Phone: 512-232-4468
E-mail: esarinayATutexas.edu
Office Hours: Tue 10AM-1145AM
TEACHING ASSISTANT:
Trevor Freeman
Address: PAT 237
Office Hours: TBD
E-mail: trevor.freemanATutexas.edu
What is this class about?
An introduction to bioinformatics and systems biology, emphasizing quantitative
analysis of high-throughput biological data. Topics will include alignment and analysis
of nucleic acid and protein sequences, biological pattern recognition, introduction to next
generation sequencing and analysis, data clustering, and introduction to applications of
machine learning in biology.
What will you learn?
- Demonstrate proficiency in programming as applied to bioinformatics
- Apply computational analyses to answer questions in biology
- Develop effective presentation skills to communicate quantitative analyses of
   biological data to a scientific audience
- Identify and assess available resources for bioinformatics data and analyses


- Pose biological questions that can be tested using quantitative methods.
What are the PREREQUISITES?
 CS 303E or equivalent, BCH 339F, SDS 328M (or 318) with a grade of at least C-. Some
familiarity with basic programming and quantitative reasoning skills are essential.
Please check the exercises in this github link <https:/github.com/pcn-
physics/esc_lab> [adapted from Datacamp, check introduction and intermediate R].
Please make sure you feel comfortable implementing all of the R exercises provided
here. Otherwise, I would strongly advise to finish the R introduction and intermediate
courses from Datacamp website before taking this course. Email me and I can add you
to get access to the full modules.
What other materials are required?
There is no required textbook. Reading material including primary research articles,
reviews, and excerpts from other texts will be provided.
For hands-on programming and analysis exercises in discussion sections, and for
completing assignments, a computer will be necessary.
COMMUNICATING WITH THE INSTRUCTOR:
The best means of communicating with me outside of class and office hours is by e-mail.
If you need a one-on-one meeting, you can email me to make a specific appointment. I
may occasionally use Canvas to make class announcements by e-mail. For this, I will use
the e-mail address that was on record in the registrar's office at the time you registered.
You have to make sure that this address is correct and that you check for announcements
daily.
CLASSROOM POLICY:
Any behavior that is distracting to me, yourself or your peers will not be tolerated,
including usage of electronic devices such as cell phones, MP3 players and video
games.
What will happen in class and discussion sections?
Class will be interactive lecture with question/answers, active learning exercises (think-
pair-share etc.), quiz questions, discussions of assigned research papers etc.


Discussion sections will be an opportunity to get help from the TA on assignments, get
feedback on project ideas and progress, and work on assignments.
Some discussion sections may include visits to labs or research facilities for hands-
on experience or demos of how bioinformatics data is collected and analyzed.
How can you succeed in this class?
   ● Attend all class meetings, discussion sections and learning activities. Arrive on
      time and remain until the end.
   ● Prepare for class by reading any material posted on Canvas ahead of time. Please
      commit to spending ~6 hours a week working outside of class and discussion.
   ● In class, actively participate in all activities, group work etc., refrain from internet
      use unrelated to class, ask and answer questions by raising your hand.
   ● Meet all deadlines for assignments and work in the class, and keep track of
      University deadlines like Q drops and so on.
   ● Contact the instructor/TA if you have any issues with attendance or doing your
      best in the class.
How will your performance be assessed?
   ● 50% based on problem sets and homework assignments. These will involve
      programming, analysis and problem solving. These must be submitted on
      Canvas. There will be a total of 7 assignments.
   ● 35% for a computational/data analysis research project, done as a team of 2
      students. This will be broken into three assignments. Each team will work on
      their project in stages, submit the results of their analysis as a short paper and
      present their findings in class at the end. Your grade will be heavily based on the
      final presentation. Improving presentation skills is a major goal of the course.
   ● 15% in-class quizzes. Most classes will have quiz questions. Each question will
      have equal weight. You can drop up to 10 quiz questions. There will be many
      questions that are open ended and most answers will get full credit.


    What else do you need to know about assignments and grading?
    ● All problem set assignments must be submitted by their deadlines. Late
       submission are not going to be accepted. However, we have bad days, bad
       weeks. In an effort to accommodate any unexpected, unfortunate personal crisis,
       I have built into our course a flexible grading policy. You may drop two of the
       problem sets/assignments.
    ● Except for assignments dealing with the team project, all assignments must be
       your individual and independent work. All submissions must always be
       individual and will be graded separately.
    ● Because of the allowed misses for the quiz, there will be no make- up given for
       them. The built-in grace points/absences are meant to cover "excused absences",
       namely situations when you have to miss class or discussion due to illness,
       professional interviews and the like.
Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings and essential information will be on the Canvas
website. Check this site regularly.
Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It
is your responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my
best to ensure that you receive the changes with as much advance notice as possible).
   Week 1     Introduction to course / R programming refresher
   Week 2     Sequence alignment, dynamic programming
   Week 3     Database search, BLAST
   Week 4     Gene finding algorithms, hidden Markov models
   Week 5     Presentation skills and Final Project Introduction
   Week 6     Introduction to next generation sequencing
   Week 7     Databases, gene expression profiling
   Week 8     Gene expression profiling, regulatory motif finding, epigenetics
   Week 9     Introduction to machine learning
   Week 10    Supervised and unsupervised learning
   Week 11    Project Presentation Practice


  Week 12     Advanced topics I: Quantitative genetics, phylogenomics
  Week 13     Advanced topics II: Single cell genomics, wearable technology
  Week 14     Advanced topics III: Genome engineering and functional genomics
  Week 15     Final Project Presentations
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because
we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning
or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop
strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage
you to reach out to the student resources available through UT.
Grading Policies
 As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success
in this course. If you miss a smaller assignment, your grade will not be impacted
significantly. Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is
available.
           Grade              Cutoff
           A                  90%
           B                  80%
           C                  70%
           D                  50%
           F                  < 50%
Academic Integrity
     Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
     disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
     dismissal from UT. You must read and be familiar with the expected standards of
     conduct for students. Each student in the course is expected to abide by the
     University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at


     Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
     integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or
     ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite
     your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
     disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
     understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which
     can be found at the following web address:
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
     Submissions may be checked against previous submissions for this and other
     classes or through Turnitin, and plagiarism in any form will not be tolerated. All
     materials used in this class, including lecture notes, assignments and projects are
     copyright protected works. You may not upload any of these materials to other
     websites, communicate them to others, or distribute them in any way. Seeking to
     obtain or possessing electronic or hard copies of assignments, problem sets and
     projects from previous semesters of this class is also a violation. All violations are
     reported to the Office of the Dean of Students and to professional schools.
     You cannot share any assignment, handout, or document related to this class.
     Sharing any class materials online in any form, including the homework and
     assignments you submitted, without my express approval is considered academic
     dishonesty. If something is found online which you have posted, you will be
     reported for academic dishonesty to SJS.
     TL;DR: Don't cheat! It is simply not worth it.
Absences
     If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing
     your team with the necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is
     crucial to keep in communication with your team members; you are responsible for letting
     both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a class.
Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious
holidays or extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class
due to observance of a religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in
advance. You will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be
responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for
details or arrangements.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to
get a run-down and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we
covered while you were gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours


or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific questions you have in advance so that
we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
·    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical
wellness.
·    You have a right to respect.
·    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
·    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
·    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
·    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
improve your learning environment.
·    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No
student shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
·    You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
communicating with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of
control or overwhelming.
·    You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always
respectful of others. Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of
the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’
experiences.
·    You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up
when someone is excluded.
· You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding
each other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to
individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual
orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the
instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name”
with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will
gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears
on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of any
changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.


University Policies
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop
before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester.
Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any
public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
 Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if
you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only
do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who
requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information,
visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising,
     avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax.
     This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is
often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or
     feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
     http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the
     Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All
     students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops,
     private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for
     more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
     visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).


Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns
have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns
have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how
you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to:
wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your
call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust
your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office
of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.
·      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
entering the building.
·     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.
·     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
·     Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency


Title IX Reporting
     Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination,
     sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence
     and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed
     to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its
     forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
             1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have
             experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible
     Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to
     report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
     Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
     writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or
     staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
     responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies
     without making an official report to the university, email
     advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
     resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
     titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office
of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
