                                                                ARC 327R/386M Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings
                                                                          University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
                                                                                                                  Spring 2020
Syllabus
Syllabus
Lecture:           M 7:00-10:00 pm SUT 2.112
Unique #: 00760, 01075
Instructor:        Dason Whitsett                           Dec  Jan  Feb  Mar   Apr   May   Jun   Jul  Aug  Sep   Oct   Nov
Office:            WMB 4.116a (enter through 4.122)
Office hours:      Monday 6:00-6:50
Email:             dwhitsett@utexas.edu
Description:
Solar Geometry and Energy Flow in Buildings examines the relationship between buildings and the energy
that flows around and through them. Developing a strong understanding of the principles that govern this
interaction is important for anyone involved with the built environment.
The class begins by looking at the source of all Earth’s renewable energy—the sun. Students learn about its
apparent motion, how its energy strikes and interacts with our buildings, and how we may exploit these
principles in our building practice. Students demonstrate their mastery of the topic by designing and
building a solar oven, then using it to cook something for the class to share.
From there, the class proceeds to an examination of the concept of human comfort and various models for
assessing whether an environment is “comfortable.” The final segment of the course focuses on the transfer
of heat, solar radiation, and moisture through the building envelope and how these flows affect comfort
and energy use. The relationship of these fundamentals to the methodology of the Passive House
certification system will be a theme throughout the semester.
Students analyze these phenomena through exercises and experiments that involve drawings, hand
calculations, physical models, and computer simulations. The exercises form a “tool box” of methods that
may be applied to future projects. The course provides a good foundation for students to understand and
apply principles of building performance, and for those who plan to move on to the study of whole-building
energy simulation.
Format:
There is a great deal of material within the scope of the course, which necessitates quite a bit of lecture time
to cover. Particularly during the first half of the course we will rely heavily on the book for detail on technical
topics, so the reading is very important. We will still devote a considerable portion of time to class discussion
and presentation by students. There is a significant opportunity for learning from the findings of other
students and the aim is to maintain the feel of a seminar as much as possible. A high degree of class
participation will be expected of students.
                                                          1


                                                               ARC 327R/386M Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings
                                                                       University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
                                                                                                               Spring 2020
Texts & Resources:
Required Materials
1. Fajkus, Matt, and Dason Whitsett. 2018. Architectural Science and the Sun: The Poetics and Pragmatics of
          Solar Design. 1 edition. New York: Routledge.
2.Pilkington Sun Angle Calculator from the Society of Building Science                                        Educators:
          http://www.sbse.org/resources/sac/index.htm (Available at University Co-op)
3. An inexpensive thermometer/hygrometer (temperature and humidity meter.) There are plenty of these
          available in the $15-25 range that should be sufficiently accurate for our needs.
4. EnergyPlus- Use in computer lab or download at: https://energyplus.net/(best run on a PC) [Don’t install
          until notified]
5. Climate Consultant- Download at: http://www.energy-design-tools.aud.ucla.edu/
6. Box- UT cloud storage solution.
Note: While I recommend installing this software on your own computer, if you prefer to work in the
computer lab, these tools will be available there.
Additional readings & handouts will be assigned during the semester and provided via Box.
Additional Recommended Resources:
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers. 2009. ASHRAE Handbook of
          Fundamentals. SI ed. Atlanta, Ga: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning
          Engineers. (both the SI and IP editions of this indispensable manual are available electronically via
          the UT Library by searching for ASHRAE under databases)
Brown, G. Z. 2001. Sun, Wind & Light: Architectural Design Strategies. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
Duffie, John A. 2006. Solar Engineering of Thermal Processes. 3rd ed. Hoboken, N.J: Wiley.
Givoni, Baruch. 1976. Man, Climate and Architecture. 2nd ed. London: Applied Science Publishers.
Grondzik, Walter, et al. 2010. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for Buildings. 11th ed. Hoboken, N.J: Wiley.
Olgyay, Aladar. 1957. Solar Control & Shading Devices. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Olgyay, Victor. 1963. Design with Climate: Bioclimatic Approach to Architectural Regionalism. Some Chapters
          Based on Cooperative Research with Aladar Olgyay. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.
Szokolay, Steven V. 2008. Introduction to Architectural Science: The Basis of Sustainable Design. 2nd ed.
          Boston, MA: Elsevier.
                                                        2


                                                               ARC 327R/386M Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings
                                                                       University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
                                                                                                               Spring 2020
A Note on Representation:
In many assignments, you will be asked to draw or sketch your solutions. Often, the usefulness of a drawing
depends on its accuracy. In some cases, hand sketching can be sufficiently accurate, especially with the use
of graph paper, a protractor, and a practiced hand. In others, a more precisely constructed drawing will be
necessary. Each student may be the judge of what approach to take in any given case, but the end product
should be sufficiently rigorous to demonstrate the accuracy of the solution for the particular case.
Comfort Measurements:
Each student should take at least three comfort observations each week using her
thermometer/hygrometer as well as making personal qualitative observations on comfort. Record the data
in the file “SGEF_Comfort Measurements.xlsx” which may be downloaded from the assignments section of
Box.
Homework
There will be homework exercises assigned nearly every week. These exercises are essential to develop a firm
grasp of the material, so students are encouraged to approach them with enthusiasm and an investigative
perspective. In the latter half of the course, experiments may be undertaken through computer simulation
before the topic material has been fully covered in class so that students can work to draw their own
conclusions from the results, and then compare notes with the rest of the class.
Homework is to be handed in via Box on Mondays.
Students who made a genuine and documented effort at solving each problem shall receive full credit.
Students who completed at least half will receive half credit, and students who completed less than half or
did not turn in the assignment will receive no credit. Late homework will not be accepted except in cases of
documented illness, other excused absence, or if prior arrangements have been made due to travel for
another university course.
Solutions will be posted after the due date and students shall correct their own homework in red and marked
“CORRECTED” at the top. If everything is correct, still mark it “CORRECTED.” Bundle all of your homework
assignments into one PDF packet to be submitted via Box at the end of the semester. Digital or scanned hand-
written work is acceptable. If all homework assignments with corrections are included, full credit will be given.
Homework grades will be determined as follows: the lowest grade for completed assignments will be thrown
out. No credit scores for homework assignments will not be thrown out. The rest of the grades, including the
grade for the final packet will be averaged to determine the final homework grade.
Homework guidelines:
     • Clearly label each homework assignment with your name, the Homework number and title at the
           top in large type.
     • Clearly label each problem/exercise with its number in large bold type or heavy pen.
     • Clearly circle or highlight your answers.
     • Show the work that led to your answer. I encourage you to use spreadsheets to do calculations, but
           set up the spreadsheet to clearly demonstrate what it is doing. This generally requires typing out
           the formula you are using in an adjacent cell. Doing so allows me to understand what you are doing,
           but more importantly, you will be able to understand it when you look back in a couple of years to
           implement the techniques we are developing.
     • You may work on homework with classmates, but your work should be your own.
     • Homework packets which do not follow these guidelines will receive sharp reductions in grade.
                                                         3


                                                                ARC 327R/386M Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings
                                                                        University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
                                                                                                                Spring 2020
Homework Discussions:
The purpose of the homework is to develop proficiency using the techniques covered in class, which generally
lead directly into the topics that follow. The instructor may select several students to explain their findings on
homework problems each week, so bring a hard copy of your homework to turn in and be prepared to discuss
it. Your readiness to discuss your work will affect your class participation grade.
Projects
There will be four projects assigned during the semester. See class calendar for due dates and grades section
for weighting.
For Project 1, students will construct sun-path diagrams for their hometown using three-dimensional
methods.
Project 2 will task students to design and test a solar oven.
Project 3 will present students with two options: A. Explore the design of shading devices incorporating
climate analysis and solar geometry techniques. B. Perform a solar site analysis of a given site, write a form-
based code to guarantee solar access, and construct the buildable envelope for the site based on your code.
Project 4, the final project, is an opportunity for students to further explore a question relating to the thermal
portion of the course. This project will incorporate the analysis of comfort observations each student has
made over the course of the semester.
Project Presentations:
It will not be possible for each student to present his/her work on each project. As a result, each student will
be assigned to present their work to the class for at least one of the four semester projects.
Late Projects:
All projects are due on the day assigned. Grades will be reduced one-half letter grade for each day a project
is late. Catching up is difficult once behind. The projects for this course will generally take time and thought,
so start early.
Work Submission:
Projects will be handed in via individual student’s Box folders.
                                                         4


                                                                ARC 327R/386M Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings
                                                                          University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
                                                                                                                  Spring 2020
Course Outline- Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings- Spring 2020
  Week       Topic                              Reading Due                  Assignment Due
  1     1/21 University first day of classes-
             No SGEF
  2     1/27 Class Intro
             Topics Intro
  3      2/3 Solar Geometry Basics              Arc Sci: Preface, Ch1, 2, 3, HW1
                                                App C
         2/5 Excel Workshop- time t.b.d.
  4     2/10 Solar Geometry & Radiation         Arc Sci: Ch 4, App D         HW2
  5     2/17 Sun & Form, Shadows                Arc Sci: Ch 5, 6 (short but  HW3
                                                important)
  6     2/24 Shadows & Solar Microclimate Arc Sci: Ch 7, App E               HW4
                                                                             P1
  7      3/2 Shading Design                     Arc Sci: Ch 8                HW5
  8      3/9 Fenestration                       Arc Sci: Ch 9, 10            HW6
  9     3/16 Spring Break- No Class
  10    3/23 Climate & Comfort                  Handout                      P2
             Climate & Comfort
  11    3/30 HW7, Solar Ovens 2019              Handout                      HW7
             Heat Transfer
  12     4/6 Heat Transfer                      Vital Signs-Thermal Mass     HW8
                                                & Handout
  13    4/13 Heat Transfer                      Handout                      HW 9
             Fenestration & Solar Gain
  14    4/20 P3 Student Prensentations          Handout                      P3
             Infiltration, Ventilation & Latent                              HW 10
             Heat Flow
  15    4/27 Passive Strategies                                              HW 11
  16     5/4 Wrap-Up                            Handout                      P4
             P4 Student Presentations
      t.b.d. Homework Packet Due                                             Homework Packet
                                                         5


                                                              ARC 327R/386M Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings
                                                                      University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
                                                                                                              Spring 2020
Attendance:
Attendance is mandatory and will bear upon the class participation grade. The course will be fast-paced and
catching up once behind will be difficult. Notify the instructor in advance of necessary absences or if you are
sick. Students with more than three unexcused absences will be dropped from the course.
Grading Scale:
A+       Exceptional work
A        Work goes beyond minimum of assignment in effort and insight
B+       Requirements of assignment satisfied accurately
B        Assignment completed with minor problems
B-       Assignment completed, but with significant problems
C/D      Assignment incomplete and/or has significant problems
F        Demonstrates lack of effort or inability to complete and comprehend material
No incompletes will be given without full documentation of extenuating circumstances as defined by
University policy.
Grade Weighting:
Class participation                 10
Homework                            25
P1                                  15
P2                                  20
P3                                  20
P4                                  10
Total                               100%
                                                        6


                                                                      ARC 327R/386M Solar Geometry & Energy Flow in Buildings
                                                                               University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
                                                                                                                       Spring 2020
University Policies
The Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity
and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Dishonesty
Academic dishonesty or scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying
academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such
as, but not limited to, submission of essentially the same written assignment for two classes without the prior
permission of the instructor), or the attempt to commit such an act.
Plagiarism includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any means
material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas, illustrations, structure,
computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered
for credit.
For more information on the University’s policies on academic dishonesty, please see:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/app/gi09.appc03.html
Students in Need of Special Accommodations:
At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations should notify the
instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most
appropriate accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
Absence for Religious Holy Days:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Emergencies:
Emergency evacuation policies from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
           -Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
           a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
           -Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
           nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
           - Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
           class.
           -In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
           -Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University
           of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
           -Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
           -Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
           www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                7
