    HISTORY 310/AFR310K/WGS301: INTRODUCTION TO MODERN AFRICA
                                     Instructor: Toyin Falola
                                        Office: GAR 2.142
                Office Hours: Tuesday & Thursday (Strictly by appointment)
                             E-mail: toyinfalola@austin.utexas.edu
                               Teaching Assistant: Abikal Borah
                                       Office: BEL 212 N
                              Office Hours: Thursday, 2:00-4:00
                                  E-mail: aborah@utexas.edu
             Class Venue: UTC 3.134, Tuesday & Thursday 12.30-2:00 PM
                         COURSE DESCRIPTION & OBJECTIVES
        This course introduces students to the modern history of Africa, beginning from the
nineteenth century to the present. The course starts with an overview of the significant
changes of the late nineteenth century, notably the partition of the continent. The
twentieth century forms the major concern, divided into two phases: the colonial and
post-colonial. In the first phase, the imposition of colonial rule, the changes of colonial
rule, and decolonization are the three principal themes. The second phase examines a
variety of issues dealing with independence, the management of modern states, and the
international situation. As most of these issues are new to students, books have been
carefully selected, and the lectures are organized in such a way that the students may
follow it easily. At regular intervals, films and documentaries will be used as illustrations.
At the end of the course, students will
i) be familiar with all the broad themes in the history of modern Africa;
ii) understand the nature of academic production with an emphasis on a conference;
iii) understand some issues in depth through an engagement with research monographs;
iv) think creatively and critically;
v) write well; and
vi) think comparatively by being able to relate Africa to their experiences and other parts
of the world.


BOOKS AND RESOURCES
* Reading all the assigned materials will reflect positively on the quality of projects and
examinations.
** Students often make the mistake of assuming that an introductory course means
minimum reading. NO! This class is defined as “introductory” only to mean that most
students have limited familiarity with Africa. In selecting the books, the idea is to attain
the maximum impact within a limited time, balancing the interests of depth with width,
narratives with concepts. Critical thinking is rewarded.
Although books are assigned reading, students interested in additional reading will be
supported with references and lead to journals.
1. Richard J. Reid, A History of Modern Africa, (Second edition), West Sussex, UK:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2012. ISBN 978-0-470-65898-7
2. Toyin Falola, ed., Africa: Contemporary Africa, Vol. 5, Durham: Carolina Academic
Press, 2002. ISBN 0 890892032
3. Kenneth Kalu, Olajumoke Yacob-Haliso and Toyin Falola, eds., Africa’s Big Men:
Predatory State-Society Relations in Africa (New York: Routledge, 2018), paper
edition, ISBN. 978-1-138-55934-9
All books can be purchased at the University Co-op. In case of difficulty, contact University
Co-op, Textbook Dept.
                               2244 Guadalupe St.
                               Austin, TX 78705
                               Phone: (512) 476-7211
Class Lecture and Reading Plan
       PART A: COLONIALISM AND THE FOUNDATION OF MODERNITY
DATE           Main Topic                    Readings                   Assignment/Activity
Jan 22         Introduction to Africa:       Africa 5, Chapter 2
               Understanding the Past        and 5; Modern
                                             Africa, Chapter 1.
Jan 24         Africa before colonialism Modern Africa,
                                             Chapters 2 & 3.
                                             2


Jan 29 Basil Davidson, The       Modern Africa         Film screening and
       Magnificent African       Chapter 4             class discussion.
       Cake
Jan 31 Colonial Conquest         Modern Africa,
                                 Chapters 8.
Feb 5  Reaction to Colonial      Modern Africa,
       Conquest                  Chapter 9.
Feb 7  Colonial Impact           Modern Africa,
                                 Chapter 10.
Feb 12 Basil Davidson, Bible     Modern Africa         Film screening and
       and the Gun               Chapter 11            class discussion.
Feb 14 Colonial Economy          Modern Africa
                                 Chapter 12
Feb 19 Colonial State and        Modern Africa
       Society, 1                Chapter 13
Feb 21 Colonial State and        Africa 5, Chapter 5 &
       Society, 2                7.
Feb 26 Anti Colonial Resistance  Modern Africa,
       and Rise of Nationalism   Chapter 15.
                PART B: Colonial Legacies and Nationalism
DATE   Main Topic                Readings              Assignment/Activity
Feb 28 Colonial Legacies         Africa 5 Chapter 1
Mar 5  Stealing Africa           Africa Chapter 35     Film screening and class
                                                       discussion.
Mar 7  The Cut: Exploring        Africa 5 Chapter 6    Film screening and
       FGM                                             class discussion.
                                                       (**Book Review due.)
                                 3


Mar 12      Post-colonial society:   Africa 5 Chapter 25.
            Family and Kinship
                PART C: Post-colonial Africa: Economy and Society
DATE        Main Topic               Readings                Assignment/Activity
Mar 14      Post-colonial society:   Africa 5, Chapter 27
            Religion                 & 28.
Mar 18-23   SPRING BREAK             SPRING BREAK            SPRING BREAK
Mar 26      Women                    Africa 5, chapter 21.
Mar 28      Conference Trade off
April 2     State and Societies      Africa 5, chapter 10.
April 4     Economic Development     Africa 5, Chapters 24   Conference report due.
****Africa Conference, March 29-30
                   PART D: Post-colonial Africa: Cultural Issues
DATE       Main Topic                Readings                Assignment/Activity
April 9    Cultures and Identity     Africa 5, chapter 30
                                     & 31.
April 11   Creativity and Popular    Africa 5, Chapter 33.
           Culture
                                      4


April 16 Modern and                 Africa 5, Chapter 32.
         Contemporary Art
             PART E: Politics and Economy of Post-colonial Africa
DATE      Main Topic               Readings                 Assignment/Activity
April 18  Politics and Society     Africa 5, Chapter 7, 12,
                                   & 14.
April 23  Africa in World Politics Africa 5, Chapter 16.
          1
April 25  Africa and World         Modern Africa Chapter
          politics 2               17.
April 30  Agriculture and Food     Africa 5, chapter 20.
May 2     Boko-Haram: Africa       Abimbola O. Adesoji,
          and Security Issues      “Between Maitatsine and
                                   Boko Haram: Islamic
                                   fundamentalism and the
                                   response of the Nigerian
                                   state.” Africa Today 57,
                                   no. 4 (2011): 99-119.
May 7     Contemporary Cultures Africa, Chapter 26 & 29.
          and Globalization
May 9     Final exam                                        ** Final exam will be
                                                            in class on May 9.
                                     5


Grading and Assignments
Final Grade Breakdown
                Assignment                Due Date                         Grade
Percentage (100%)
Class Attendance                                                                       10%
Periodic Geographical Quiz                                                             10%
Book Review                              March 7                                       20%
Conference Review/Presentation           April 4                                       25%
Final Exam                               May 9                                         35%
Note: In matters relating to grade, you must first meet with your TA before scheduling an
appointment to meet with your Instructor. Also, your TA is not expected to provide you
with lecture notes.
Overall semester averages will earn the following letter grades:
93-100: A       90-92: A-
87-89: B+       83-86: B       80-82: B-
77-79: C+       73-76: C       70-72: C-
67-69: D+       63-66: D       60-62: D-       0-59: F
Evaluation and Points: (No extra credit will be awarded, and the course is not
graded on curve) The weight is distributed to ensure success for all students, balancing
the various needs to participate, interact, engage, think critically, and write well. Not all
students seek an A or B grade, but those who do should expect to do the maximum
required. Always read before the class so that you can understand the lectures and ask
questions.
Class rules:
    1) All assignments must be submitted on due dates. 5 points per day are deducted
        thereafter.
    2) Except on medical ground or permission from the Dean’s office, there is no make-
        up examination.
                                             6


    3) There is no option for additional credit.
    4) Failure to read the books, which will be detected in projects and examinations,
        will be treated as lack of preparation.
    5) Attendance is necessary to make sense of the lectures. It is expected that lectures
        and class discussions will be reflected in all projects. The Instructor will not use
        office hours to repeat class lectures but to clarify points. Also, the Instructor and
        the TA will not give lecture notes to those who miss classes. Class lectures will
        not be posted on Canvas.
Book Review:
All students are required to review the following book.
Kenneth Kalu, Olajumoke Yacob-Haliso and Toyin Falola, eds., Africa’s Big Men:
        Predatory State-Society Relations in Africa.
The book Africa’s Big Men is divided in three parts. Students will write the review on the
introduction and at least one part of the book according to their choice. The book review
should be no less than 3 pages typed and double-spaced. The review should be
analytical, and not just a retelling of the narrative. The best ways to do this is by
synthesizing the narrative in your own mind and then critically examine things such as
the historical content, style, and the overall impression the book made on you. You will
probably want to assess how the book fits in with particular topics or themes we are
developing in the course. Feel free to express your own opinion, but do so clearly.
Organize and develop the main points you wish to make and re-emphasize them in a
conclusion. Proofread your review before submitting it. Late submission will be
penalized. Book review is due in class on March 7, 2019.
Conference Review/Conference Presentation:
All students must endeavor to attend the 2019 Africa Conference to be held from March
29-31, 2019. (Additional information will be announced in class).
For information and panels, visit the link below:
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/africa-conference/conference-schedule1/conference-
schedule.php
The conference is part of the attempt to provide students with new knowledge about
Africa. The conference participation assignment comes with two options:
                                              7


    1) Attend a minimum of two panels (not two presenters!) of your choice and the
        Conference Keynote and write a report on them, minimum of 5 pages. A panel
        consists of a set of presenters. Participation in the conference is part of the
        class and it is mandatory. There is no substitute assignment unless on
        medical grounds or mandatory official duties. During the presentations,
        students will be allowed to ask respective presenters questions on issues
        pertaining to the lecture. For the review, students will be expected to fulfill a
        two-fold task: first, summarize the lecture in no more than 2 page (roughly 500
        words); secondly, offer an analysis of the presentations in 2 page (roughly 500
        words); thirdly, give your opinion of the lecture in no less than 1 page (roughly
        300 words). Report will be due in class on April 4, 2019.
    2) Alternatively, students can utilize the Africa Conference as an opportunity to
        enhance their skills in public speaking and academic presentation. As part of this
        option, students will be asked to present a paper in the Africa Conference written
        by a scholar who is unable to attend the conference. If you present a paper then
        you will write the conference review based on the keynote and only one panel. In
        other words, you are exempted from writing about two panels. In this case, your
        paper should be 3 pages instead of 5. (If you want to take up this option, please
        discuss this with your TA ahead of time.)
Periodic geographical quiz:
The geographical literacy quiz is designed to enhance students’ familiarity with the
continent of Africa. It’s an online learning method, which students will take by following
the link on canvas. Additional instructions to take the test will be given during class.
Final Examination:
The examination consists of two essay questions. Students are expected to answer both
questions, writing at least three pages on each. Essay questions will be drawn from a pool
of questions submitted through Canvas. Students who integrate materials from textbooks,
lecture notes, and films will be rewarded.
Make-up policy: Make-ups will be granted only in the case of medical illness or
university-related conflict. Such conflicts will require signed documentation from the
Dean’s Office explaining the reason for absence.
Attendance policy:
The class attendance will be counted from the 24th of January 2019. It will be counted
based on the total of 27 classes. So for each absence, students will lose approximately
0.37 points from the final grade. Absences will be excused if a student provides
documentation of emergency health situation, death in family, job interviews, etc.
                                             8


However, without documentation no excuses will be granted.
University Regulations
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Any student found
guilty of scholastic dishonesty may receive an “F” in the course and be remanded to the
appropriate University of Texas authorities for disciplinary action. For more information,
view Student Judicial Services at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Use of Class Materials: No material presented in lecture may be directly or indirectly
published, posted to the Internet, or rewritten for publication or distribution in any
medium. Neither these materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer
except for personal and non-commercial use. All information derived from the internet
must be adequately cited.
Student Privacy: The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) require that
student privacy be preserved. Thus the posting of grades, even by the last four digits of
the social security number, is forbidden. All communication will remain between the
instructor and the student, and the instructor will not be able to share details of the
student’s performance with parents, spouses, or any others.
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon
request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For
more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone).
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence
at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is
acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas
Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit:
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students: E-mail is recognized as an
official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading
                                             9


your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You
should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum
twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating
your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of
the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of
the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one
you used when you entered the building.
If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department,
or the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions.
Q Drop Policy: Texas law limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six.
Senate Bill 1231 says: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of
higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another
institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
than that number.
                                             10
