                                                               Department of Arts and Entertainment Technologies
                                                                           School of Design and Creative Technologies
                                                               College of Fine Arts | The University of Texas at Austin
                                               Video Game Audio I
                                                 AET 323E/20790
                                                     Spring 2020
                                             Tue/Thur 9.30am - 11am
                                               Classroom: MRH 3.124
Instructor Name: Sam Lipman
Email: samuellipman@gmail.com
Office Hours: Thursday 8.30 - 9.30 am
Course Overview
This class will explore sound design, foley and interactive layers of today’s video game soundtracks. Students
will first learn to create engaging audio environments, cutting-edge musical tracks, and arresting sound effects
that today’s game studios demand. They will then learn to fully integrate their audio builds using FMOD, the
industry standard in today’s game studios.
Prerequisites
AET 321C and 341C
Learning Outcomes
In this course, students will:
     1.    Gain an overview of the Game Audio industry, with a view to the importance of social networking therein
     2.    Demonstrate competence in creating immersive sound environments for games
     3.    Demonstrate competence in composing theme songs for games
     4.    Demonstrate competence in creating sound effects and foley for games
     5.    Demonstrate competence in using FMOD, integrating game audio assets into a working game build
     6.    Demonstrate competence in presenting material to class
Course Materials
Headphones
Flash Drive, 8GB minimum
I will post readings as required
Overview of Schedule
Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be altered to
accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and workshop opportunities and lectures.
Any significant alterations to the schedule will be announced via Canvas.
Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas. All assignments (unless stated
otherwise) will be due at the start of the following class.


Schedule & Topics
 Wee Date         Topic                                                    Assignment
  k
  1 Jan 21 -      Go over syllabus, semester breakdown/Looking at the Game Read and get familiar with syllabus
      23          Audio Industry
  2 Jan 28 -      Networking within the game industry                      Reading/Watching 1 - Industry and
      30                                                                   Networking
  3 Feb 4 - 6     Getting familiar with DAWs                               Reading/Watching 2 - DAWs
  4   Feb 11 -    Environment Build                                        Reading/Watching 3 - Environment
      13                                                                   Build
  5   Feb 18 -                                                             Assignment 1 - Environment Audio
      20
  6   Feb 25 -    Music - Layers                                           Reading/Watching 4 - Digital Music
      27                                                                   Layering
  7   Mar 3 - 5                                                            Assignment 2 - Music Layers
  8   Mar 10 -    Music - Themes                                           Assignment 3 - Music Themes
      12
                                                    SPRING BREAK
  9   Mar 24 -    Dialog/Foley/FX
      26
  10  Mar 31 -                                                             Assignment 4 - Dialog/Foley/FX
      Apr 2
  11  Apr 7 - 9   Middleware FMOD Build
  12  Apr 14 -                                                             Assignment 5 - Middleware FMOD
      16                                                                   Build
  13  Apr 21 -
      23
  14  Apr 28 -    Final Project/Presentations
      30
  15  May 5 - 7                                                            Final Projects Due on Canvas, May 7th
                                                                           midnight
Grading Scale
1. In-class assignments (there will be 5)                    50%
2. Presentation                                              10%
3. Final Project                                             30%
4. Attendance                                                10%
Grades will be determined by your final total points
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76


C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
F = 0-59
Presentations
Each student will prepare a 5-minute presentation at the beginning of each class. They will show an excerpt of a
favorite game and explain to their peers what qualifies such excerpt. Students will be evaluated on both their
research efforts, and their presentation skills.
Exams
There will be no exams for this course. Grades will be derived from the grading scale laid out above.
Attendance
You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for in-class
assignments or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up. However, if a serious medical or
personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please inform me as soon as
possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without permission,
and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy. Three tardies equals an absence. Four
absences will lower your course grade by one letter grade. Additional absences may result in failure of the course.
https://catalog.utexas.edu/undergraduate/fine-arts/academic-policies-and-procedures/
Classroom Etiquette
Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the instructor.
     1)   Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the beginning of
          class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t
          hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an announced break, since often the
          second part of the class period is when we will engage in group activities.
     2)   Cell phones are to be set to silent, off desks, packed away in bags.
     3)   Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights, sounds, and
          smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music, polish
          your nails, doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.
Personal Nouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class
rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you
by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use she/he/
they/ze, etc). Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes
to my records.
Use of Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments are
copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may
result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without
the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an
act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things,
uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
students. For more information, go to: https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/
Management+of+Course+Materials%3A+Copyrights+and+Class+Recordings.


Campus Carry
The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as buildings and
spaces that are accessible to the public. The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees
an openly carried gun on campus should immediately call 911.
Concealed-carry permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms. It is the responsibility of concealed-carry
permit holders to carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus. “About their person”
means that a concealed-carry permit holder may carry a holstered handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the
backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing
position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if
jostled. A concealed-carry permit holder may not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or
on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area. For
more information go to: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students.
Academic Integrity
The University’s Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Students are expected to maintain absolute integrity and
a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you should
complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
     ●    acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
     ●    complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in
          preparing them;
     ●    follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic discipline; and
     ●    avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty as
including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
     ●    Cheating
     ●    Plagiarism
     ●    Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
     ●    Falsifying Academic Records
     ●    Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended
          deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
     ●    Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
          authorization to do so)
     ●    Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any
means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas, illustrations,
structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that material as one’s own academic
work being offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement.
For more information on Academic Integrity and avoiding Academic Dishonesty and Plagiarism, go to: http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
Copyright and Fair Use
Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers. Many of the uses
we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine of fair use. However, as
creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and
license your own and others’ works. A useful resource is Copyright Crash Course, available at https://
guides.lib.utexas.edu/copyright.
Student Support Services
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They include (but are not
limited to) the following:


      ●    Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range of services
           and resources to support students and alumni.
      ●    The Undergraduate Writing Center (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu. helps students with every phase of
           writing assignments for their courses.
      ●    The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills, time-management,
           and note-taking courses.
      ●    University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
           promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
      ●    officially enrolled in certain University programs.
      ●    The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with their
           personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Emergency Procedures
Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide students, faculty, and
staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security of the campus community. E-mails will
also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff of emergency situations and keep them updated on the
situation. Emergency officials also have the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly
to the cell phones of users subscribed to the service. Consider subscribing to this service at https://
utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/. For more information about emergency procedures, go to: https://
preparedness.utexas.edu/.
University Policies
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students. Students
are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-
related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or her
official e-mail address. Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with “User Unknown” is not an acceptable
excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a
spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor. For further
information, go to: http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
Religious Holidays
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other
required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and
shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a
reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least
fourteen days prior to the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day. For
more information, go to: https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/
attendance/.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so
that the necessary accommodations can be made promptly. For more information, contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone
512-471-6644).


Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT
Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms.
When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1.    Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2.    Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
           involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3.    Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about
reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
