           The University of Texas at Austin                                       Course Syllabus
           McCombs School of Business                                              Fall 2018
           Department of Accounting
                                                 ACC 329
                                 Cost/Managerial Accounting and Control
                         Unique Number: 02430, 02435 –– Classroom: UTC 3.110
Instructor:      Professor K. Rowland Atiase
Office Phone:    512-471-5841
Office Hours:    Tuesdays and Thursdays 2 – 3 pm in CBA 4M.248, and by appointment
E-Mail:          ratiase@mail.utexas.edu
TA:              Shelby Burgess
Office Hours: Wednesdays 10 a.m. – 11 a.m. in CBA 4.304A TA Space, and by appointment
E-Mail:          Shelby Burgess <shelbyburgess21@gmail.com>
TA:              Krisha Desai
Office Hours: Mondays & Wednesdays 11 a.m. – Noon in CBA 4.304A TA Space, and by appointment
E-Mail:          Krisha Desai <krisha.desai11@gmail.com>
The timing and location of office hours above are tentative. Always refer to Canvas for up-to-date details.
Required Texts:
    Datar, & Rajan (DR), Horngren’s Cost Accounting: A Managerial Emphasis, 16th Edition plus NEW
        MyAccountingLab with Pearson eText -- Access Card Package 1
    ACC 329 Course Packet: Cost and Management Accounting Readings, Handouts (HO’s), Cases and
        Solutions. Published by Forty Acres Press (Phone: 512-322-7009). Available for purchase
        beginning on TBD at the University Co-op, 2246 Guadalupe Street (Phone: 512-476-7211).
           Ajinkya, Atiase & Bamber (AAB), Issues in Accounting Education, Fall 1986, pp. 268-281. *
           The Ernst & Young Guide to Total Cost Management (E&Y Guide), Wiley & Sons, 1992,
            Chapters 7, 8 & 9. *
            * Included in the ACC 329 Course Packet.
    1   Individual Pearson MyAccountingLab (MAL) access is required but may be purchased
        separately online. You must use the 16th Edition of the DR Textbook for the written
        homework assignments as prior editions have different questions. As an example, below
        were the buying options from the University Co-op in a recent semester. The eText is more
        than sufficient.
      1. Loose Leaf with MyAccountingLab: $183.47 (Suggested Retail Price) ISBN: 9780134642468
      2. Printed Text with MyAccountingLab: $288.53 (Suggested Retail Price) ISBN: 9780134642444
      3. eText with MyAccountingLab: $127.33 (Suggested Retail Price) ISBN: 9780134475585


                                 Page 2, ACC 329, Fall 2018, Course Syllabus
Course Objectives:
         This course will cover cost accumulation concepts and techniques for Product and Service Costing,
Planning and Control, and Non-Routine Managerial Decisions. Modern management accountants are not
only concerned with how cost data is transformed into cost accounting information but more importantly how
to use cost accounting information to aid managerial goals. It is the case, however, that one cannot effectively
use cost information without a good understanding of how various sets of cost accounting information are
generated. Topics introduced in Introductory Managerial Accounting courses will be covered much more
rigorously in this course. In addition, the course will provide students with a good exposure to topics on
current and emerging concepts, practices and developments in Total Cost Management (TCM) including
Activity-Based Costing (ABC), Benchmarking and Best Practices (BBP), Customer Costing (CC), Business
Process Analysis (BPA), Business Process Improvement (BPI), Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis under
Absorption and Direct Costing, Relevant Costing, Strategic Cost Management (SCM), and Transfer Pricing
in Perfect and Imperfect Intermediate Product Markets.
         The course should develop the student's understanding, skill, and analytical ability in management
accounting to the level where he or she can function effectively (and efficiently) as a professional
management accountant in industry, public accounting, management consulting, government, or personal
business management.
Reading/Written (Home) Assignments & Outline of Class Notes:
         This course, though not difficult conceptually, will undoubtedly be demanding in time and effort. Thus
students may be well-advised to allocate adequate time to the study of the material. The only path to success
in this course is for the student to complete (or at least attempt) the reading and written home assignments
regularly and on time (i.e., before each class meeting). Note: Basic algebraic and quantitative skills are
assumed.
         Written homework (in pencil) is due at the beginning of each class session for which it is assigned.
Homework need not be perfect; if a reasonable attempt is made towards solving all problems, you will receive
perfect scores. Assigned problems are meant to guide class participation; time constraints will determine
whether they will (all) be solved in class. Active class participation is required. Homework will be collected
at random.
         Students are expected to read each new chapter of the DR textbook, make their own notes, and take
a New Chapter Pre-Class Quiz in preparation for class. The New Chapter Pre-Classes Quizzes will be taken
using Pearson MyAccountingLab (MAL) and are due by 10 a.m. every time we start a new chapter. The New
Chapter Pre-Class Quizzes will constitute 5% of the Overall Course Grade (Total Hard Points). Instructions
for signing up for MyAccountingLab are on the last page of the syllabus.
         The outline of class notes for each class will be posted on Canvas a few days before each class.
Each student should print and bring the outline of class notes for each class. Students’ own pre-class notes
and class notes taken in class based on class lecture are expected to complement each other. It should be
noted that class handouts/notes are for courtesy only -- it is not the Professor’s responsibility to provide
students with notes.


                                 Page 3, ACC 329, Fall 2018, Course Syllabus
Group Case Write-up and Presentation:
         You and your group will be responsible for a detailed analysis of a primary case. You should plan to
submit three copies of a maximum of a five-page, double-spaced typed solution, along with any exhibits and
presentation slides you deem appropriate. Your solution to the case must explain what you believe the
company's problems and challenges are, and then explain how your suggested course of action addresses
those problems. Your target audience is fellow managers who are familiar with basic business concepts, but
not with the details of a particular problem or solution techniques. Obviously, a set of computations or
schedules would not by themselves be sufficient to define the problem and explain a solution.
Secondary Case Write-ups:
         You and your group should also turn in three copies of a maximum of two-page double-spaced
executive summary (along with any exhibits you deem appropriate) of the other cases on the designated
dates. The executive summaries should discuss (1) the major issues, (2) your solution, (3) operational and/or
strategic questions you might pose to specific managers or to the firm.
Group Review Synthesis Write-up and Presentation:
         You and your group will present and submit three copies of two-page double-spaced typed review
and synthesis (along with exhibits and presentation slides) of one of the major areas of cost and managerial
accounting covered during the semester.
         I expect each student to contribute equally to every case and synthesis write-up and presentation.
         Minimum Attire for Group Presentations: Business Casual
Examinations, Group Case Write-ups and Presentations, Synthesis and Grading:
         There will be two mid-term exams and a comprehensive final exam. In addition, there may be
unannounced pop quizzes. A requirement of the course is that Exam I, Exam II & the Final Exam will be
given in the evening. Do note the exam dates and times now and arrange to keep yourself free at those
times.
         Individual grades will depend on the student's performance according to the following criteria:
                  Grading Item                                   Points
                  Midterm Exam I (Room TBD, 5:00–7:00 pm)           125
                  Midterm Exam II (Room TBD, 5:00–7:00 pm)          125
                  Final Exam       (TBD)                            150
                  Primary Case                                       50
                  Secondary Case                                     25
                  Review and Synthesis                               25
                  New Chapter Pre-Class Quizzes                      26
                      TOTAL POINTS                                  526
                  Quizzes, Homework & Class Participation           Soft Points*


                                   Page 4, ACC 329, Fall 2018, Course Syllabus
          *Soft points are typically used to upgrade students whose overall performance on hard points
(examinations, etc.) falls on a borderline (e.g., A/A-/B+/B). The definition of “borderline” is determined
differently each semester based on class performance. However, each student must earn at least 70 percent
of the points assigned to homework collected or risk an automatic reduction of his or her final course grade
by half a letter grade!
          In accordance with the Accounting Department Grade Policy/Guideline for Upper-Division BBA
Accounting Core courses and MPA Core courses, Final Course Grades (A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, C, etc.) will be
assigned to achieve a final class average GPA between 3.2 and 3.4, inclusive.
Privacy in Canvas:
          Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that I will use a merged
Canvas site for all sections of the course that I am teaching this semester. This will allow students in other
sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they
will not actually learn your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you
have any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 for help removing your name from
view of other students.
Students with Disabilities
          Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
          It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this
course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class
can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please
come to me at any time with any concerns.
Religious Holy Days
          By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
          The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in
the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-
Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By
enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the
application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any


                                  Page 5, ACC 329, Fall 2018, Course Syllabus
way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the
University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to
access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further
elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
          buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
          assembling outside.
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first
          week of class.
      In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
      Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 (or
          https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php).
Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.


                        Page 6, ACC 329, Fall 2018, Course Syllabus
Month   Date Day Reading Assignment                                  Written Assignment         MyAccountingLab
                                                                     (Due at the beginning      Pre-Class Quiz
                                                                     of class)                  (Due by 10 a.m.)
Aug.     30   Th Introduction, Course Policies; Ch. 1 –              1-1, 2, 3, 12, 13
                 Objectives of Cost & Management Accounting
Sept.     3   M  Labor Day Holiday
          4   T  Ch. 2 – Cost Terms & Purposes, Actual Costing       2-1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,   Chapter 2 Quiz
                                                                     12, 14, 37, 38, 39, 40
          6   Th Ch. 4 – Normal Costing                              4-1, 2, 9, 12, 13, 23, 25, Chapter 4 Quiz
                                                                     31, 37
         11   T  Ch. 4 – Normal Costing, cont’d                      4-24; Handout (HO) #1
                                                                     & HO #2
         13   Th Ch. 3 – Cost Volume Profit (CVP) Analysis                                      Chapter 3 Quiz
         14   F  Twelfth Class Day (last day to drop a class for a possible refund)
         18   T  Ch. 3 – Profit Volume (PV) Line                     3-40, 43, 49, 52; HO #3
         20   Th Ch. 9;                                              Variations to HO #3        Chapter 9 Quiz
                 HOs Appendix 1, Appendix 2, Appendix 3;                  (details TBA)
                 AAB paper -- Absorption versus Direct Costing 9-1, 4; HO #4
         25   T  Ch. 9; AAB paper – Difference in Net Income         HO #5 & HO #6
                 AC vs. DC; Cost Volume Profit Analysis under
                 Absorption Costing
         27   Th Ch. 11 – Relevant Costing                           11-1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 26, 28,  Chapter 11 Quiz
                                                                          34; HO #7
   Oct.   2   T  Ch. 11 – Non-Routine Decisions                      HO #8, HO #9, HO #10;
          4   Th Chs. 6 & 7 – Static & Flexible Budgets I –          6-2, 7, 8,11;
                 Responsibility Accounting, Direct Materials &       HO #11;
                 Direct Labor Standard Costs & Variances
          7   Su Optional Review Session, in GSB 2.126, please complete Sample Problems I
          9   T  Catch-up & Review; Ch. 11 In-Class Quiz
         10   W  Extended TA Office Hours 9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.—Details TBA
         10   W  Exam I, 5-7 pm
         11   Th No Class
         16   T  Total Strategic Cost Management                     7-1, 3, 4; Start working
                                                                     on Take Home Quiz for
                                                                     Ch 6 & 7
        18    Th Chs. 7 & 10 – Flexible Budgets & Cost               7-30, 31, HO #12; 7-41;
                 Behavior, cont’d / Berkshire Threaded               Take Home Quiz is due
                 Fasteners Case (do not start working on this
                                                                     10-29 (req. 1 only)
                 case until specifically instructed to do so)
         23   T  Ch. 8 – Flexible Budgets II –Variable & Fixed       8-29                       Chapter 8 Quiz
                 Overhead Budgets & Variances


                                Page 7, ACC 329, Fall 2018, Course Syllabus
          25     Th     Bridgeton Industries Case                          Submit via Canvas
          30      T     Ch. 8; Ch. 5 and E&Y Guide-Chs. 7 & 8; -           HO #13 & HO #14;            Chapter 5 Quiz
                        Business Process Analysis, Business Profit         5-29;
                        Improvement, Activity Based Costing, &             E&Y Guide Ch. 9;
                        Customer Costing
                                                                           HO #15 & HO #16
Nov.      1      Th     Ch. 14 – Sale and Production Variances             Study HO #17 & #18          Chapter 14 Quiz
                                                                               but do not solve
                                                                               them before class
          1      Th     Last day for an academic Q-drop
          6       T     Ch. 22 – Transfer Pricing: General Rule for        HO #17 & #18;               Chapter 22 Quiz
                        Optimal Transfer Price                             22-2, 4, 6, 11, 24, 25
          8      Th     Ch. 22 – Transfer Pricing: Imperfectly             HO #19 & HO #20
                        Competitive Intermediate Product Markets
          11     Su     Optional Review Session, in GSB 2.126, please complete Sample Problems II
          13      T     Catch-up and Review; Ch. 8 In-Class Quiz
          14     W      Extended TA Office Hours -9:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.—Details TBA
          14     W      Exam II, 5-7 pm
          15     Th     No Class
          20      T     Total Strategic Cost Management
          22     Th     Thanksgiving Holiday
          23      T     Destin Brass Case                                  Submit via Canvas
          29     Th     Total Strategic Cost Management, Cont’d
Dec.      4       T     Review & Synthesis Presentations                   Submit via Canvas
          4      Th     Last chance to see the Professor (by 3pm at
                        the latest) to request a One-Time Exception
                        drop
          5      W      Last day to request the Makeup Final or to cancel your request (via special form on Canvas)
          6      Th     Catch-up and Review                                Bonus HO (TBA)
     There is no reading preparation for the class days that are marked “Total Strategic Cost Management”
     Written assignments sometimes may not be collected on the day they are due. Please have all yet-to-be-
      collected homework ready at the next class session.
     You can also expect to be asked to re-do certain HO’s and turn them in the following class. Whenever there
      are changes in reading and written assignments, there will be announcements in class and/or via Canvas.
        Uniform Final Exam (to be confirmed) – Thursday, December 13, 2018, 7:00 to 10:00 p.m.
        Makeup Final Exam (to be confirmed) –Friday, December 14, 2018, 7:00 to 10:00 p.m.
        **Do not schedule travel in the finals period until exam times are confirmed in Nov. 2018**


     Cost/Managerial Accounting and Control: Case Preparation Master Checklist
   In the real world, accounting professionals are expected to set the standard for attention to detail.
   Our cases are not only academically meaningful but will act as a practice run with the highest level
   of professionalism. There are high expectations for standardization of logistics and formatting.
Where?          What?                                                                             Checked?
Class           (TBA) In one of the classes early on in the course, your group leader will
                draw a group number. Groups 1-4 have Bridgeton Industries as Primary
                Case and Groups 5-8 have Destin Brass as Primary Case. The other
                becomes the Secondary Case. These two cases are to be solved completely
                outside of class and there will be no prior discussion to help you get started.
                    * Exception: Wait for further instruction before starting the Berkshire case.
                     You can actually start preparing the Bridgeton case before the Berkshire.
Canvas          (TBA) There will be a mechanism for you to indicate which group you belong
                to. In the past, we have used a Google Spreadsheet linked to Canvas.
Cover Page      Case name; course name and semester; group member names
Cover Page      Indicate your class/section, e.g. “11:00 Section”
Cover Page      Group number: group nickname, e.g. “Group 3: Accountaholics”
Cover Page      Page numbering should not start on the cover page
Paper           Times New Roman font, size 11 or 12; 1-inch margins
Paper           Double-spaced (1.5 spacing does not constitute double-spacing)
Paper           The first paragraph should include a brief overview of the case facts as well
                as introduction to the issues you are to address, i.e. the questions that you
                intend to answer throughout the case. This is to provide a nice transition to
                the body of your paper and not to be a long-winded summary.
Paper           For each body paragraph, include a concise topic sentence that answers the
                question. Support in the form of analysis and explanations should follow your
                topic sentence.
Paper           If your group chooses to really drill down into a specific topic or branch off to
                other topics, you must still prioritize having adequate coverage of every one
                of the suggested questions and issues if you want to score high marks.
Paper           Sub-headings are acceptable, but you should still have transitions between
                paragraphs and between subsections of your paper.
Paper           Do not enumerate or bullet-point your answers, but instead include answers
                in a coherent sequence of paragraphs.
Paper           Provide adequate support for conclusions—do not simply conclude
                something without supporting it somehow (this applies even to the
                Secondary Case although there is less breadth expected in the
                explanations). Ask yourself: if you were the CEO of this firm would this
                conclusion make sense to you?
Paper           For the hard copies you need to submit in class, please print single-sided.


Paper          Max 5 pages for Primary Case, and max 2 pages for all other group
               assignments, so get to the point and do not repeat yourself unnecessarily.
Paper and      All pages after the cover page should be numbered in the lower-right hand
Appendices     corner, beginning with page number 1 on the page following the cover page.
Paper and      Any numbers that you come up with must be backed up by tables and
Appendices     exhibits in the appendices (not restricted by page count) and should be
               noted upon first reference in the body of the paper, e.g. “… (see Exhibit 1).”
Presentation   All text and numbers must be readable from the very back of the room.
Canvas         Submit the paper with cover page and appendices in one file (preferably pdf)
               and the presentation (preferably pptx) in another file. In addition, you can
               submit your Excel workbook (optional). Deadline is 15 minutes before your
               class start time. Bring your presentation to class on a USB drive as backup.
Rehearsal      You will use the Professor’s laptop to present so please make sure that your
               presentation is compatible with the McCombs Common Operating
               Environment (COE). If you must use your own device, please practice with
               the media console in the classroom well ahead of Presentation Day.
Primary        Your Primary Case presentation cannot go over 15 minutes, including setup.
Case and       Your Review & Synthesis presentation cannot go over 5 minutes, including
Synthesis      setup. All group members must partake in presenting.
Presentation   Groups will present in order (by group number) and the minimum attire is
Day            Business Casual. At least one group member should arrive early to turn in
               the printed copies and (if applicable) check that your PowerPoint has been
               loaded correctly. For your Secondary Case, three copies of your paper (with
               cover page and appendices) should each be stapled or bound and turned in
               to folders in the front of the classroom which will be marked Copy #1, Copy
               #2 and Copy #3. For your Primary Case and the Synthesis Project:
                     Copy #1 should have your paper (stapled or bound) separate from
                         your printed slides (stapled or bound). Turn in the paper at the
                         beginning of class into the folder marked Copy #1 and keep the
                         printed slides to give to Prof. Atiase right before you present.
                     Copy #2 should have your paper and slides stapled or bound
                         altogether, and turned into the folder marked Copy #2.
                     Copy #3 should be prepared like Copy #2 and turned into folder #3.
               Printed slides can be full-page or handout (any layout), but must be readable
          Questions about case formatting? Please seek clarification from your TA’s or Prof. Atiase.
          TA’s are not allowed to help groups with any substantive (non-logistical) questions.
          Please note that for Secondary Cases, it requires the same amount of effort to arrive at the
           correct answer as for a Primary Case. The only difference is that the Secondary write-up is
           more concise and there is no presentation requirement.
          Standardized logistics should not come at the cost of creativity and nuanced responses in
           the paper and during the presentation. Ingenuity, personality, and originality are expected.


                      Suggested Questions and Issues on the
                      Berkshire Threaded Fasteners Co. Case
1. How do the individual product line and total company’s Direct Costing Income
   Statements and Incomes compare with the Absorption Costing Income
   Statements and Incomes for the year ended December 31, 1973 and the six
   months ended June 30, 1974?
2. If the company had dropped the 300 series as of January 1, 1974, what effect
   would that action have had on the profit for the first six months of 1974?
3. In July 1974, should the company have reduced the price of the 100 series from
   $2.45 to $2.25?
4. Which is Berkshire’s most profitable product line?
5. What strategic suggestions do you have for Mr. Magers and Berkshire as a result
   of your overall analysis?
These questions and issues are things you may wish to consider. You may emphasize
other issues you think are important or adopt a different perspective that you think may
be appropriate to the case.
Group write-ups for primary and secondary cases are described in the course outline.
Each primary (secondary) case group should plan to submit three copies of a
maximum of five(two)-page double-spaced typed solution, along with any exhibits and
presentation slides that they deem appropriate. Each primary case group should also
plan on a maximum 15 minute overall presentation (including set-up time).


                      Suggested Questions and Issues on the
                             Bridgeton Industries Case
1. Explain the trend in the overhead allocation rates over the 1987 to 1990 period.
2. Are the product costs reported by the cost system appropriate for strategic non-
   routine decision making?
3. Assuming 1991 prices, sales volumes and materials costs are unchanged from
   1990, what is the likely 1991 budget (Hint: Use Direct costing)
   (a) with no changes in the product line?
   (b) if the manifold product line is dropped?
   How does the overhead allocation rate differ under the two alternatives?
4. Would you outsource manifolds in 1991?
5. What other strategic suggestions do you have for Bridgeton Industries?
These questions and issues are things you may wish to consider. You may emphasize
other issues you think are important or adopt a different perceptive that you think may
be more appropriate to the case.
Group write-ups for primary and secondary cases are described in the course outline.
Each primary (secondary) case group should plan to submit three copies of a
maximum of five(two)-page double-spaced typed solution, along with any exhibits and
presentation slides that they deem appropriate. Each primary case group should also
plan on a maximum 15 minute overall presentation (including set-up time).


                      Suggested Questions and Issues on the
                           Destin Brass Product Co. Case
1. What are the problems/issues facing Destin Brass?
2. How might the standard cost estimates being used be improved upon using
   activity based costing?
3. What are the implications of the differences between your improved cost estimate
   and the company’s standard cost?
4. Suppose that production and sales levels as well as other activities and costs are
   at the current standard level. How would net income differ under currently used
   standard costing system and the activity based costing system?
5. What strategic suggestions would you make to Destin Brass Co. as a result of
   your overall analysis?
These questions and issues are things you may wish to consider. You may emphasize
other issues you think are important or adopt a different perceptive that you think may
be more appropriate to the case.
Group write-ups for primary and secondary cases are described in the course outline.
Each primary (secondary) case group should plan to submit three copies of a
maximum of five(two)-page double-spaced typed solution, along with any exhibits and
presentation slides that they deem appropriate. Each primary case group should also
plan on a maximum 15 minute overall presentation (including set-up time).


  Group Review and Synthesis Presentation & Write-up Grading
                                   Guidelines
Your group synthesis topic is one of the following three major objectives of
Managerial/Cost Accounting –namely:
    1. Product (Service) Costing
    2. Planning and Control, and
    3. Non-Routine Managerial Decisions
Virtually all topics covered in this course fall under at least one of these three
major areas. Each group is responsible for the review and synthesis of one of
the above major areas of managerial accounting (i.e., your Primary Synthesis
Topic) covered during the semester. The review and synthesis may address
the following suggested questions and issues:
    1. What are the learning objectives of your synthesis topic? Define your
        synthesis topic and discuss the learning objectives of the synthesis
        topic.
    2. How have we achieved them? Describe in some detail.
                Issues 1 & 2 are worth approximately 55-60% of the grade.
    3. What knowledge have we gained in this course beyond ALL previous
        courses taken (Value Added)?
                 Issue 3 is worth 15-20%
    4. How do you expect the knowledge you gained in this course on your
        primary synthesis topic to help you in your potential future careers?
                 Issue 4 is worth approximately 15-20% of the grade.
    5. Any other comments they want to share.
                Issue 5 is worth approximately 5% of the grade.
These questions and issues are things you may wish to consider. You may
emphasize other issues you think are important or adopt a different perceptive
that you think may be more appropriate for your review and synthesis. Each
group should plan to submit three copies of two-page, double-spaced typed
review and synthesis (along with any exhibits and presentation slides that they
deem appropriate) and also plan on a 5 minute overall presentation.
Minimum Attire: Business Casual


Get Started
With Pearson’s MyLab & Mastering and Canvas
       Enter Your Canvas Course
1 Sign in to Canvas and enter your Canvas course.
2 Do one of the following:
        Select MyLab & Mastering in Course Navigation, and then select any course link on the Pearson page.
        Select any Pearson link from any module.
3 Go to Get Access to Your Pearson Course Content.
       Get Access to Your Pearson Course Content
1 Accept the End-User License Agreement and Privacy Policy.
   If you previously linked your Canvas and Pearson accounts, you go directly to the Pearson payment page. Skip to
   step 3.
2 To link your Canvas and Pearson accounts, do one of the following:
        If you already have a Pearson account, enter your username and password.
         Tip: To look up your Pearson account, select Forgot your username or password?
        If you do not have a Pearson account, select Create and follow the prompts to create a new account.
3 To get access to your Pearson course, do one of the following:
        Select Access Code, enter your access code, and select Finish.
        Under Use a Credit Card or PayPal, select the button with the applicable price and enter your payment
         information.
        Get temporary access without payment for 14 days. (You can pay for full access when temporary access
         expires or when you’re ready. )
4 When the registration is complete, the You’re Done page appears and you get a confirmation email. You can close
   the You’re Done page and return to your Canvas course. From now on, when you select any of the MyLab &
   Mastering links in your Canvas course, your MyLab & Mastering course immediately opens in a new tab.
Note: In the future, it is recommended you enter your MyLab & Mastering course through Canvas.
Need Help?
See Help for MyLab & Mastering with Canvas.
Go to our YouTube channel where students and instructors can find getting started videos.
Contact Pearson 24/7 Technical Support. To provide them with your details in an export file, enter your Canvas
course and go to MyLab & Mastering>Diagnostics. (If you don’t have access to the Diagnostics page, please
contact your instructor for this information.)
