                  AHC 330 / CTI 375: Great Works in the History of Medicine
                                              Fall 2019
                                     MWF 11:00 am -12:00 pm
                                              WAG 420
Instructor: Dr. Todd Curtis
Email: todd.curtis@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 200A
Office Hours: 12:00-1:30 MW or by
appointment
Course Description
In keeping with spirit of Mortimer Adler’s Great Books of the Western World and Charles
William Eliot’s Harvard Universal Classics, this course will thematically examine signature
texts in the history of medicine. There are numerous reasons for using the great books approach
to teaching the history of medicine. In addition to providing professional inspiration, a sense of
continuity with the past, and an awareness of medicine’s unique role in society, this approach
can foster a healthy sense of skepticism about the content and durability of medical dogma
allowing students to think more critically about the principles and practices of medicine. The
great books in the history of medicine provide numerous examples of why one should be
prepared to question long-standing views for the sake of progress. Furthermore, the history of
medicine can be a “kindly, useful mentor” which not only provides a forum for meaningful
exchanges between physicians and historians, but also allows both groups a means to link
historical knowledge to contemporary issues in order to reform medicine and bring about change
in public policy. Because the focus of our study will be towards applying medical history to
contemporary issues in medicine, the course will be of great use to pre-med students and to
students interested in international and public health.
Goals of this Course:           1) You will learn how to research and write about medical history.
                                2) You will learn how to apply the “lessons of history” to
                                contemporary questions and ethical dilemmas in medicine.
                                3) You will gain competency in structural, interpretive, and critical
                                readings of medical texts.
Thomas Jefferson Center for the Study of Core Texts and Ideas
As CTI 375, this course is part of the Thomas Jefferson Center’s Study of Core Texts and Ideas.
“The aim of the Thomas Jefferson Center is to realize Jefferson's vision of educating citizens and
leaders to understand the meaning of liberty and to exercise it wisely. We share Jefferson's
conviction that one of the best ways to attain a liberal education--an education suited for a free
individual in a free society--is through a serious study of the great books. In our courses, students


will engage in a direct, respectful, but probing and critical study of major creative and theoretical
works that have shaped human thought and history. They will enter into debates about human
nature, ethics, and the meaning of life. They will learn skills of critical reasoning, close reading,
and clear, cogent writing. They will join a community of scholars drawn from many departments
and many schools of thought, united by a passion for fundamental questions, a spirit of friendly
debate, and a willingness to engage in critical self-scrutiny.”
Ethics Flag
This course carries the Ethics flag. Ethics courses are designed to equip you with skills that are
necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and
the process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations.
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing
Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board.
The Writing Flag faculty committee also provides statements on Plagiarism and Academic
Integrity and Plagiarism Detection Software:
Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is considered
plagiarism, a serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe penalties. Copying
someone else’s work, buying a paper and submitting it as your own, copying and pasting text
(even with changes), or borrowing images from an online source, are some examples of
plagiarism. Even if you plagiarize accidentally, you can be held responsible and penalized.
Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional. When you
are unsure about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor (who is already an expert
in the discipline) what is appropriate in the context of your assignment. Consultants at The
University Writing Center can also help you determine whether you are citing sources
correctly—and they have helpful guides online for using direct quotations and paraphrasing.
Reviewing those skills will help you feel confident that you are handling sources professionally
in your writing.


You can read the University’s definition of plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty in
Sec. 11–402 of the Student Conduct Code. For more information, visit the Dean of Students’
site.
Required Textbook
       Required textbook Jacalyn Duffin, History of Medicine: A Scandalously Short
       Introduction, 2010.
       All other required readings will be made available on Canvas.
Assessment
       80% Writing Assignments
              30% 2 Short Papers (approx. 800-1,500 words excluding quotations/bibliography)
                      1 Biographical History (10%)
                      1 Doctor’s Dilemma (20%)
                              *Ideally, these essays should be related to your approved research
                              topic. The due dates and grading criteria for these papers will be
                              posted on Canvas.
              50% Research Paper and Presentation (approx. 2,500-3,000 words excluding
              quotations/bibliography)
                              *Your papers will be written on an approved topic. The due dates
                              and grading criteria for the research paper and presentation will be
                              posted on Canvas.
       20% Class Participation
              You are expected to attend all classes, complete the assigned readings before each
              class, and participate in class discussion. There will be in-class writing
              assignments that will be factored into your participation grade. There will be
              no make-ups for those who have missed an in-class assignment.
       My grading scale is as follows:
       A      90% and above
       B+     87-89%


      B       84-86%
      B-      80-83%
      C+      77-79%
      C       74-76%
      C-      70-73%
      D+      67-69%
      D       64-66%
      D-      60-63%
      F       59% and below
      For those taking the course Pass/Fail, a passing grade is 60% or above.
Attendance
      Attendance is required. You will be permitted 4 absences over the course of the semester.
      After 4 absences, one point will be deducted from your overall grade for each class
      missed.
      Example: If your total grade at the end of the semester is a 90 and you’ve missed 5
      classes, then your final grade will be an 89.
      The only exceptions will be for religious holidays, medical reasons (with a letter from
      Student Health Services or a private physician), or for family emergencies (only when
      certified by the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ ). If you need to
      miss a class for the observance of a religious holiday, you must notify me at least 14 days
      in advance so we can make alternative arrangements.
Computer Access
      Class material including the syllabus, readings, grades as well as other information and
      announcements will be posted on CANVAS. To access this site, students must have an
      uteid and password. Additionally, it is the student’s responsibility to ensure that the email
      address which UT has on file is a valid address which is checked regularly. N.B. Certain
      email providers automatically mark any bulk email as spam.
      If over the course of the semester the syllabus needs to be modified or adjusted, an
      announcement will be sent out via CANVAS with an updated assignment schedule.
Students with Disabilities
      If you are a student with a disability, as soon as possible please provide me with a letter
      of accommodation from the Services for Students with Disabilities. The University of


      Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
      qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students
      with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice), 512-410-6644 (video phone), and on their
      website: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
University of Texas Honor Code
      The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
      leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
      expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
      toward peers and community.
Academic Dishonesty Policy
      I take academic dishonesty very seriously. Any student found cheating will be referred
      to Student Judicial Services with my recommendation that he or she receive a
      failing grade (F) for the whole course. As defined by the university, cheating is
      anything that attempts to circumvent the process of teaching, learning, and assessment. It
      may include, but is not limited to, copying off another person's quizzes, exams, or
      homework; or getting someone else to do your work for you. It also includes the use of
      unauthorized material/devices while taking a test. If you are unsure about the exact
      definition you should consult the General information catalogue, Appendix, Section 11-
      802. http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi06-
      07/app/appc11.html#Subchapter11-802
Email Abuse
      Use of CANVAS’s and TOP HAT’s course communication/discussion should be for
      course-related messages only; please see UT Austin Acceptable Use Policy. Messages
      such as selling football tickets and posting party invites are not considered course-
      related. Violations of the UT Austin Acceptable Use Policy will be vigorously pursued.
      Violators may face disciplinary action including, but not limited to verbal warnings,
      negative impact on grades, or loss of email privileges. For more information on reporting
      emails that you believe violate the policy, please visit the UT Austin Acceptable Use
      Policy website. https://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/aup/index.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
      If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
      Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
      behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
      Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance


         Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
         5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
         Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
         outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of
         the following policies regarding evacuation:
                § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
                    Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you
                    entered the building.
                § If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first
                    week of class.
                § In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class
                    instructors.
        Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
        the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Tentative Reading Assignments:
By tentative, I mean the readings may be changed to accommodate for the needs of the class. You will be
notified of any changes via the announcements on Canvas. The Canvas readings will be posted on the
Friday the week before they are assigned. The readings will be a part of our class discussion so you will
need to do the assigned readings before coming to class.
WEEK 1
         8/28    Welcome and Introduction
         8/30     Owsei Temkin, On the Reading of Medical Classics
 WEEK 2
         9/2     LABOR DAY – No Class
         9/4     Philip Teigen, A Kind, Useful Mentor: Applying the History of Medicine to Public
                 Policy; Allan Brandt, AIDS in Historical Perspective: Four Lesson form the
                 History of Sexually Transmitted Diseases.
         9/6     Duffin, Introduction: Heroes and Villains in the History of Medicine; Sleuthing
                 Science: How to Research a Question in Medical History


WEEK 3
    9/9    Duffin, History Education, Licensing, Payment, Hippocrates, The Oath
    9/11   Syntopical Readings (Hippocrates, The Oath; Oath of Asaf Judaeus; Oath of
           Maimonides; Revised Declaration of Geneva; modern version of the ‘Hippocratic
           Oath’
    9/13   Selection from Phillips and Dawson, Doctor’s Dilemmas: Medical Ethics and
           Contemporary Science; International Code of Medical Ethics of the WMA
WEEK 4
    9/16    Duffin, History of Anatomy; Andreas Vesalius’ On the Fabric of the Human
           Body and other works
    9/18
    9/20
WEEK 5
     9/23  Duffin, History of Physiology; William Harvey, On the Motion of the Heart and
           Blood in Animals
     9/25
    9/27
WEEK 6
    9/30   Duffin, History of Pathology; Rudolf Virchow, Cellular Pathology
    10/2
    10/4
WEEK 7
    10/7    Duffin, History of Pharmacology; Selections from Paracelsus’ Volumen Medicinae
            Paramirum and other works
    10/9
    10/11
WEEK 8
     10/14  Duffin, History of Epidemics; Edward Jenner, An Inquiry into the Causes and
            Effects of the Variolae Vaccine
     10/16
     10/18
WEEK 9
     10/21  Duffin, History of Psychology; Robert Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy
     10/23
     10/25


WEEK 10
    10/28 Duffin, Technology and Disease; R. T. H. Laennec, A Treatise on the Diseases of
           the Chest and on Mediate Auscultation
     10/30
     11/1
WEEK 11
     11/4  Duffin, History of Surgery; Joseph Lister, On Antiseptic Principles
     11/6
     11/8
WEEK 12
     11/11 Duffin, Gynecology/Obstetrics; Soranus, On Gynecology
     11/13
     11/15
WEEK 13
     11/18 Duffin, Public and International Health; Florence Nightingale Notes on Nursing
           for the Laboring Classes, Cassandra
     11/20
     11/22
WEEK 14
    11/26 Workshop on Research Papers and Presentations
    11/28 THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS
    11/30 THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS
WEEK 15
    12/2   Presentations of Research Papers
    12/4   Presentations of Research Papers
    12/6   Presentations of Research Papers
WEEK 16
    12/9   Wrapping Up
