UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS                                             SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
Advanced Seminar                                                       ARC 327R, ARC386M
Battle Hall 101                                                         Thursday, 3:30-6:30
Professor Kevin Alter                                                          Spring 2020
                                 Two Hundred Words
This is an advanced seminar course exploring a range of current architectural
investigations, as manifest in specific built work and texts. It begins with a set of
contemporary buildings and texts, and aims at generating a critical dialogue within
the class.
The course intends to develop analytical and critical skills via discussion and concise
writing venues: short trenchant responses to the specific buildings and texts. The
class will examine one building each week. Students will come to class prepared
with a response of 200 words and 1 critical image. Writing is expected to be a
response to the material put forth, not explanations of any given building or text.
These responses are intended to generate conversation in class, and participation in
this critical dialogue is expected. A final presentation will take place on the last class
of the semester with an exhibition of posters generated by each member of the class.
In this final exercise, each student will provide a text of 1000 words and a pertinent
image that expands on each individual’s interest. Intended as a provocation rather
than a response, it is expected that this final exercise will require more effort than
the previous weeks’ writings.
The objective of this course is not only to expose students to a relevant body of
writing and built work, but to also develop skills in relating critical investigations to
their physical embodiment. The intention of the course is to afford the framework by
which students might begin to position their own architectural ambitions.
Particular attention will be paid to the realm of material manifestation as a critical
juncture in the formulation of architecture. In the concern for the materials of
building and the manners of construction the architect commits speculation to action:
attempts to convert intention into palpable reality. It is here that architecture is most
fully and deliberately engaged with the world and here that architecture initiates the
world's response in turn. It seems clear, however, from even casual observation that
while this subject matter may be vital it is oftentimes treated as a marginal concern.
This course begins with the assumption that this denial of Architecture's material
potential seriously undermines architecture's value in society and raises fundamental
questions about the legitimacy of our profession more generally. Students will
explore these concerns through their responses and class dialogue.


UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS                                           SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
Advanced Seminar                                                      ARC 350R, ARC386M
Battle Hall 101                                                       Thursdays, 3:30-6:30
Professor Kevin Alter                                                          Spring 2020
                                Two Hundred Words
Contact information
Kevin Alter            office: BAT 104
                       e-mail: alter@utexas.edu
                       mobile: 512-797-6903
Course Grading
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than
grading in other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable
elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived
from a broader, more subjective set of issues. Grades will be based on class attendance,
participation and assigned projects. The criteria for establishing a grade is as follows,
and plus/minus grades will be assigned:
A Outstanding work
Assignments are complete at all levels and surpass the expectations for Advanced
Seminar work. Participation in critical dialogue in class is consistent, pertinent and
engages the larger discussions.
B Good work
Assignments complete at all levels and student is a regular participant in class dialogue /
conversation.
C Average work
Not all assignments are complete and/or well done. Not a significant part of the class
discussion.
D Not very good work
Not all assignments are complete and/or well done and some of the requested
components of the assignments are missing. Class participation is inadequate
F Unacceptable work


Note that this grade will be assigned when a student has missed an extended amount of
class-time (more than three classes) without notifying the instructor or the School of
Architecture.
X Excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
completing the work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this symbol. It may
only be used after consultation with the instructor or the Associate Dean, and with an
agreement as to a new completion date. Studio work has to be completed before the
second week of the next design semester in which a student wishes to enroll, according to
school policy.
Attendance
Punctual and regular attendance is essential. Students with three unexcused absences
during the term, or two consecutive unexcused absences, may not receive a passing grade.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, student must notify faculty of pending absences at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a
specific physical need. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement Services
for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259. Specialized services are also found at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Ethics
Please note that the UT Honor Code and Student Discipline and Conduct policies can be
found at http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/ and
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix
-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/
