                                              AET 319 Intro to Digital
                                                  Drawing AET 319
                                                          20609
                                           iterative DIY creative processes
                                                      Spring 2019
                                                       DFA 4.126
                                                      M W 12:30-2:00
                                    “Drawing as a Window to Another World”
 Instructor:                 Dax Norman
                             daxnorman@utexas.edu
                             Daxnorman.com
 Office Hours:               Mondays and Tuesdays : 11am-1215 pm in the Foundry,
                             or by appointment
 I. Rationale:
 This course explores various methods of digital drawing, painting, and collage in photoshop, taking creative ideas into
 a variety of completed digital artworks for use in a creative portfolio.
 This course will integrate digital art and design practices with creative problem solving.
 Explores distribution of art content on social media through an exploration, research, and building of personal artistic
 style and aesthetic.
   We will be in constant production and iteration on cumulative digital drawing projects, via the design of a
32-page comic book. There will be an ongoing discourse about digital art aesthetic, as well as distribution
and entrepreneurial potential for artists looking to build essential skills for developing a career in digital art.
 II. Course Aims and Objectives:
 Aims
 This course explores processes which take ideas from thought to tangible form in a digital space. This course
 empowers students to create anything that they can possibly think of via digital drawing approaches and
 techniques.
 Specific Learning Objectives:
 By the end of this course, students will:
           •   Creating digital Brushes from Scratch
           •   Create drawings that display a unique understanding to the parts and the whole of any design
           •   Use digital drawing tools to confidently create designs that include attention to core artistic principles
               used for desired effect
           •   Display in drawings a thorough understanding of line, detail, texture, space, color, gesture, time and
               atmosphere
           •   Explore digital art content creation through multiple approaches, such as collage, line drawing, speed
               painting, and character design
           •   Apply clear Aesthetic choices to drawings for creative expression
                                                             1


         •    Understand the state of Digital Art Distribution through social media networks
         •    Creating a cohesive series of work, which includes progression as a core component
         •    Create a personal art blog to be used as both a portfolio and for class discussion and critique
         •    Explore the integration of physical and digital process via sketchbooking
         •    Design their own 32 Page Comic Book from scratch
III. Format and Procedures:
This course will meet twice a week. During the first meeting, there will be a lecture that will include demonstration
along with discussion. On the second class meeting of the week, there will be group learning project with
discussion. This may take the form of an in class activity, critique or other collaboration which should include
feedback. Even on days where a project is not due, students should be prepared with ready to show project progress.
The in-class projects will review and practice the material covered from the week’s first class meeting. Active
                                                              2


participation in weekly in-class group projects and discussions will be a major component of the professionalism
and participation component of student grades for the course that will comprise 20% of the final grade.
IV. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
   Date                     Main Topic(s)                          Work to do at home                Evaluation
                                                                 to be completed before class
                                                                   create blog and make first
                                                                   post of class work, get text
   1/23       Course introduction                                    book “Understanding
                                                                  Comics,” by Scott McCleod
   1/28,       Intro to drawing tools in                     Finish Exquisite Corpse
   1/30        photoshop. Begin discussion                   Drawing from Class.
               of collaboration and digital
               content creation.
  2/4,2/6      Making and drawing with Custom Brushes. Make 50 custom brushes.
               Using symmetry and Gestalt                    Focus on abstraction
   2/11,       Digital Aesthetics and Social Media.         HW focus:
   2/13        Discussion of form and content.               Line Weight and Line Variety
                                                            Focus on perspective
   2/18,       Collage and Remix                            HW Focus: texture                    Presentation of
   2/20                                                                                          work/ Portfolio
                                                                                                 Check 01.
   2/25,       Speed Painting                                Line of Action, Gesture,
   2/27                                                      Exaggeration
   3/04,       Chiaroscuro…                                  Focus on Light and Dark,
   3/06         Additive/ Subtractive techniques.            Heavy Contrast … Depth and
                                                             Form
   3/11,       Post Impressionism, Pop Art, Comix.           Focus on minimal Color Palette      Presentation of
    3/13       Posters.                                      designed for effect                 work/ Portfolio
                                                                                                 Check 02
   3/18,       Spring Break                                  No Class
    3/20
   3/25        MONSTERS and CREATURES                        Character design
    3/27
   4/01        Creating in Time:                             Comic strip/ Meme Design
    4/03       2 Panel Drawings
   4/08,       3 Panel Sequences                             Focus on Narrative                 Presentation of work/
    4/10                                                                                        Portfolio Check 03
   4/15,       Introduction of Final Course Project
    4/17       Parameters
                                                           3


   4/22,   Share Final Project WIP with class,   Continue work on Final Project.
   4/24    Get feedback
   4/29,   Final Project strategies. Creating    Finish Final Project.
   5/01    Deliverables
5/06, 5/08 Final Project Presentations/ Course   Finish final projects, be prepared Final Projects Due
           Wrap-up                               to present and discuss work with
                                                 class
                                               4


Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to your requests for their feedback)
During this course I will be asking you to give me feedback on your learning in informal as well as formal ways,
including through anonymous surveys about how my teaching strategies are helping or hindering your learning. It’s
very important for me to know your reaction to what we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these
surveys, ensuring that together we can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
V. My Assumptions
It is my belief that with hard work and a little bit of patience, anyone can be good at digital art. The learning curve is
slower for some than others, but do not be discouraged and you will get to where you want to be. With the projects
we do in this course, I advise students to make something that they can get really excited about. Think about
making short-term goals for your progress, and try to learn a new skill each day. The digital art process is very
iterative, in that projects build upon one another, and many steps are repeated ad infinitum. With a firm plan in
place, it will be easy to create a road map for success.
VI. Course Requirements:
          1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                     (a) Expected classroom behavior: take notes, ask many questions, and attend class for the entire
                          duration. Make a solid effort on each project outside of class, so that you may have many
                          questions to contribute to the discussion.
                     (b) Cell phone use, including texting, is unallowable. Keep cell phones stored durin g the duration
                          of class
                     Religious Holy Days
                     By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
                     the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
                     assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
                     complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
          2. Course Readings/Materials:
          3. (a) Recommended Textbooks: Understanding Comics, by Scott McCloud. ISBN: 978-
                0060976255
                     (a) Supplies needed: Laptop computer capable of running adobe Photoshop.
                     (b) A sketchbook. Size variable. To be used to record ideas and begin digital art process.
                     (c) Other supplies: Jump Drive for external storage and dat a backup. A mouse for your laptop, as
                     the software will be much slower to draw without one.
                     (d) URL for course website:
                          Animationdrawl.tumblr.com
          4. Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
                      (a) Finished Assignments should be posted to canvas in the requested format before 9:00 AM on
                             the Due Date
                      (b) Late assignments will be lose 10 points for the first day late, 20 points if 2 days late, 40
                             points off if 3 days late, and so on, with point subtraction doubling for each day of lateness
                      (c) Preliminary information on papers or projects, with due dates, shall be posted to canvas on
                             the date of assignment
                                                                5


                 (d) Any changes in the syllabus, such as project due dates, will be announced in class as well as
                 on canvas.
          5. Use of Canvas in class
               In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected
               access at http://canvas.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
               online, to post grades, and to submit assignments. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS
               Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
  VII. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
 Your final grade is comprised of the following:
 Initial Comic Book Design Abstract: 10%
 Custom Brush Collection 10%
 Blog Maintenence: 10%
 Portfolio Collection 01: 10%
 Portfolio Collection 02:               10%
 Portfolio Collection 03:                 10%
 Finished Class Collaborations: 10%
 Final Project Deliverable: 10%
 Final Presentation of Work with Artist Statement: 10%
 Attendance: 10%
   Letter Grade        Percentage
A                      93%-100%
                                                          6


A-                          90%-92%
B+                          87%-89%
B                           83%-86%
B-                          80%-82%
C+                          77%-79%
C                           73%-76%
C-                          70%-72%
D+                          67%-69%
D                           60%-66%
F                           0%-59%
  IX. Academic Integrity
  University of Texas Honor Code
  The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
  opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
  honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
  X. Other University Notices and Policies
   Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
      • All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
           student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e -mail address. Students
           are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
           communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time -critical. It is recommended that e-
           mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and i nstructions
                                                              7


         for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details
of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition or
diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.)
                                                            8


     ▪▪   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
          instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
          etc.).
     ▪▪   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
          required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
          transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     ▪▪   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
          reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
          http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
 discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
 among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
 Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512 -232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
   undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
   dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than
   that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
 Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm
 is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
          ▪▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
               exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
          ▪▪ If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
          ▪▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                     ❖❖ ❖❖    ❖❖      ❖❖
                                                            9
