French 317C -        Summer 2019 LYON
Instructor: Beatriz Schleppe
email: bea@austin.utexas.edu
Office hours: 9h00 (right before
class)
Course description:
Enhancing French Skills is an advanced intermediate course that continues the development of
your communication abilities in French by practicing the four basic skills of speaking, listening,
writing and reading. In this course, you will expand your knowledge of the French language and
culture through the daily use of authentic documents, such as songs, cultural readings,
interviews, videos, and websites. This course fulfills the prerequisite requirements for French
320E and 324L. Prerequisite: French 611C with a grade of at least C.
Required materials:
    •   Canvas site
    •   Course packet (in-class activity manual) available at GSB 3.316
    •   Course Website: Enhancing French Skills : http://sites.la.utexas.edu/enhancing-french-
        skills/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
Grading:
 Assignments and evaluations (35%
 overall)
                                            5%
 ·    Tex assignments
                                            5%
 ·    Oral assessments
                                            10%
 ·    Homework assignments
                                            15%
 ·    Quizzes
 Exams 1-5 (10% each)                       50%
 Final Oral Exam                                   15%
 TOTAL                                      100%


The Lower-Division Grading Scale for French is the following:
                       89-87 B+           79-77 C+             69-67 D+
 97-93 A
                       86-83 B            76-73 C              66-63 D
 92-90 A-
                       82-80 B-           72-70 C-             62-60 D-
                                                              Less than 60 F
You must receive a grade of a C or higher (73% or higher) in order to continue on to FR
320E. A grade of a C- is not sufficient to continue on to FR 320E.
Assignments and evaluations:
Regular attendance, daily preparation and persistent, active participation in class are essential to
your success in learning French. This includes being ON TIME for class. Your teacher will
assign specific exercises to be written out and turned in. You may also expect regular pop
quizzes to test preparation. No late homework will be accepted. If you are unable to be in class,
you are allowed to email your assignment to your instructor prior to the beginning of the class
hour that day and turn in a printed copy the following class period. Otherwise, your assignment
will be considered late and you will receive a zero.
You are allowed a total of 2 absences without penalty during the semester. All absences count,
even if documentation is presented. A penalty of 2% of your final course grade will be
deducted for each absence after 2 in the semester (up to a 10% maximum deduction), no
exceptions.
You can also expect regular quizzes to test preparation. These quizzes are typically administered
immediately after the bell has rung, and last approximately 5 minutes. If you arrive late to class,
you will miss the quiz. There are absolutely NO make-ups for missed quizzes. You will receive
a zero for a missed quiz.
Online oral assessments (submitted via Canvas) will take place following Thèmes1, 2, 3, and 4.
Your instructor will provide you with more details. The oral assessments will very closely
reflect the daily in-class activities.
 Exams:
FIVE chapter exams will be given in 317. These will contain a variety of listening, reading, and
writing exercises. Please note exam dates indicated on the syllabus, as there are no make-ups.
Missing an exam will result in a zero.
 Final Oral Exam:
You will have a conversation with another student. Guidelines will be provided.


Classroom Expectations:
Students are expected to assist in maintaining a classroom environment that is conducive to
learning. In order to assure that all students have the opportunity to gain from time spent in
class, unless otherwise approved by the instructor, students are prohibited from engaging in any
form of distraction. Inappropriate behavior (cellular phones, eating or drinking, tardiness,
making offensive remarks, talking out of turn, rolling of eyes, overt displays of frustration,
sleeping, inattentiveness, harassment or bullying of the instructor or other students, etc.) shall
result, minimally, in a request to leave class. Repeated inappropriate or disruptive behavior will
be reported to the Dean of Students and will very quickly escalate into a judicial matter.
Disabilities:
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office
of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 or 471-4641, or go to
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
Code of conduct: The dean may initiate disciplinary proceedings under subchapter 11-300
against a student who conducts himself or herself in a manner that impedes, interferes with, or
disrupts any University teaching, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, learning,
or other authorized activity. For more information and a complete list of Student Standards of
Conduct, please consult http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi08-09/app/gi08.appc03.html -
subchapter-11-300-initiation-of- disciplinary-proceedings (Links to an external site.)Links to an
external site..
Scholastic dishonesty:
Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a zero. Scholastic dishonesty
includes any kind of cheating. In language classes, this includes the use of online translators. Be
aware that scholastic dishonesty can have far-reaching consequences, and can result in
suspension or expulsion from the University. For more information, contact the Student Judicial
Services at 471- 2841, or go http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php (Links to an
external site.)Links to an external site.
Religious holidays:
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence
as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence. If these procedures are followed, students will not be penalized. Students
are only excused for the actual holiday, and not surrounding days. For example, if a holiday falls
on a Thursday, the student will be excused for Thursday’s absence, but not for an absence on the
Friday following the holiday.
