LA s110WB: LIBERAL ARTS INTERNSHIP COURSE
SECOND-TERM SUMMER 2019 SYLLABUS
Instructors
   Instructor:               Robert Vega • Liberal Arts Career Services, FAC 18
   Class Assistant:          Amira Sounny-Slitine • Liberal Arts Career Services, FAC 18 • amira@austin.utexas.edu
   Office Hours:             Please call 512.471.7900 to schedule an office hours appointment
Course Information
   The purpose of this undergraduate course is to establish the academic foundations of the Liberal Arts students’ internship.
   Students will integrate knowledge derived from their academic studies with the experiences gained from real-world work
   settings. This class will support these work experiences through personal reflection and professional development.
Course Application Process
   Application Deadline: Monday, July 15, 2019 at 12:00 PM
   See the full details and access the application at: http://goo.gl/ghBRV4
Internship Completion Requirement
   In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the internship before the end
   date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week, you will automatically fail the internship
   course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you will not automatically fail this course; we will work with
   you in such cases.
Assignment Schedule
     Date     Assignment                 Details
     7/15     Course Material            Internship hours are counted from this date through the last class day.
              Review                     No Assignment Due, Review Only: Internship Information Packet & Course Syllabus,
                                         available in Canvas Course Documents & Syllabus sections.
     7/16     Journal 1                  Part I: Considering the very short internship period, what are your three main
                                         internship goals for the next few weeks? Explain why you have chosen each goal and
                                         how you hope to accomplish each. Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
     7/23     Journal 2                  Part I: How will you use your academic experiences (coursework, projects) to help you
                                         succeed in the internship? How does your major directly or indirectly relate to this
                                         internship? Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
     7/30     Journal 3                  Part I: Describe a specific issue of significance to your internship site (ie stock market at
                                         an i-bank, news piece in media, policy issue at the Capitol). Explain the significance,
                                         what it means to your office, how it is being managed and what you think about this
                                         issue. Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
      8/6     Journal 4                  Part I: In a future interview, a recruiter asks you about the skills you bring to the table.
                                         Name your strongest three and explain how your current internship has aided in the
                                         development of these skills. Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
     8/13     Final Paper and            Evaluation links and Final Paper details in Canvas Assignments section.
              Supervisor & Student
              Evaluations Due
       LA s110wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer-Second 2019                          21-Feb-19                          Page 1 of 2


Assignment Deadlines
   Assignments are due by 11:59 pm on the due date. All deliverables will be considered late if not properly submitted by 11:59 pm
   on the due date. Late submissions will be accepted with point deductions. Assignments submitted by 5:00 pm one day after the
   deadline will be accepted at 75% point value. Assignments received after that time but before 8:30 am on the Friday following
   the due date will be accepted at 50% point value. Submissions received after the specified late submission date will not be
   accepted. For example: assignments submitted on Tuesday by 11:59pm 100%, Wednesday by 5pm 75%, Friday by 8:30am 50%,
   and after Friday at 8:30am assignments are not accepted (0%).
Assignment Descriptions & Submission Information (Details in Canvas)
   Journals: Please include both parts in one document so that you are only uploading one document to Canvas
       PART I: Please write on the journal topics provided in the schedule above. Journals should be reflective, comprehensive, well
       thought out and well composed. Each journal should be at least 1-page and no more than 1.5-pages in length (12 point text,
       1” margins, double-spaced). Upload parts 1 & 2 in one document.
       PART II: Please write a brief description of your epiphany or observation of the week and its current relevance. Your epiphany
       can be directly or indirectly related to your internship, personal/professional goals, career objective or daily schedule. There is
       no minimum length for Part II.
   Evaluations: You will submit a final self and site evaluation of the internship. Your supervisor will complete a final evaluation of
   your performance in the internship. Evaluations are the only assignments not uploaded to Canvas, instead evaluations will be
   completed as web forms online (links available in Canvas). Please note: it is your responsibility to give your supervisor the
   evaluation web form link well in advance of the deadline.
   Final Paper: The final paper has two parts, please include both parts in one document.
       PART I: Write a one-page (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) description of your internship and your internship site to
       be shared with other liberal arts students. The goal of this assignment is to help other students learn about the company or
       organization as a potential internship site by describing your role and responsibilities. This should be a “Day in the Life”
       description with a summary of an intern’s typical day (time, responsibility, etc.).
       PART II: Write a two-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) in which you address the points listed below. The
       goal of this section is to write a reflective and comprehensive summary of your experience, this section will be confidential –
       not to be shared with anyone other than the instructor.
            1.      Summarize your internship activities and the knowledge you have learned.
            2.      Reflect on your experience: what have you learned about the work environment as well as yourself.
            3.      Did this experience help you decide what to do next and did it give you the tools to do so. If not, why not?
Grading
   Journals ............................................................. 40%
   Evaluations ........................................................ 10%   GRADING SCALE      PASS: 75 – 100
   Final Paper ........................................................ 50%                      FAIL: 0 – 74.9
   You must earn a 75 or greater to pass this course; overall grades of 74.9 or below will receive a fail grade for this course.
   Grading Note: In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the internship
   before the end date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week, you will automatically
   fail the internship course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you will not automatically fail this course;
   we will work with you in such cases.
Course Credit
   This course offers in-residency, lower-division liberal arts elective credit and grading is on a pass/fail basis only (no letter grade).
   A passing grade does not count towards your GPA; however, a failing grade does count towards your in-residence GPA.
Course Information & Downloads
   Course information and downloads are available in Canvas: https://courses.utexas.edu/
       LA s110wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer-Second 2019                        21-Feb-19                         Page 2 of 2
