 AET 3141D Course Syllabus
                                  Digital Musicianship
                                             AET 341D
“My kind of composing is more like the work of a gardener. The gardener takes his seeds and scatters
them, knowing what he is planting but not quite what will grow where and when - and he won't necessarily
be able to reproduce it again afterwards either.” – Brian Eno
                                           Fall 2019, DFA 4.126
                                           TTH, 3:30 pm – 5 pm
 Instructor:              Jack W. Stamps, DMA
 Office Hours:            T BA
 Email:                   jstamps@austin.utexas.edu
 I.     Rationale:
 This course was created out of a need to teach basic musicianship skills as they relate
 to making popular music in a digital audio workstation. An essential understanding of the
 language of music is key to making better musical choices. Understanding the basics of
 compound meter helps to inform a better hip-hop composition. The application of the
 basics of melody helps in the composition of a more memorable game music experience.
 The digital musician must learn the fundamental rules of music and musicianship before
 he or she plans on breaking them, or expanding them to better express themselves as
 composers.
 II.     Course Aims and Objectives:
 By the end of this course, students will:
     •  Understand the principles of rhythm and meter.
     •  Understand the principles scales and harmony.
     •  Understand the principles of melody.
     •  Understand the principles of harmonic progression.
     •  Think critically about how, why and where music technologies are deployed within a
        theoretical context.
                                                      1


AET 3141D Course Syllabus
   •   To compose music in a series of genres, ranging from game music to songwriting to film
       music and more.
   •   Apply the basics of musicianship in the analysis of popular music styles.
III.     Assessment Model:
         Daily Attendance: 10%
                 Daily attendance is essential to the successful completion of the course. Please do
                 everything you can to attend all classes.
         Weekly Class Quizzes 25%
                 Quizzes are administered through Canvas and will usually be assigned on
                 Wednesdays for completion by the following Monday.
         Text-based Theory Assignments: 35%
                 The online text comes with lots of suggested assignments. I will be pulling
                 assignments from these the aggregate of which will equal 35%.
         Final Composition: 30%
                 Absolutely no late submissions will be accepted .
         Letter Grade Policy:
         To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage.
         Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not
         recognize the grade of A+. Thus, the conversion from percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
         A = 94 – 100
         A- = 90 – 93.999…
         B+ = 87 – 89.999…
         B = 84 – 86.999…
         B- = 80 – 83.999…
         C+ = 77 – 79.999…
         C = 74 – 76.999…
         C- = 70 – 73.999…
         D+ = 67 – 69.999…
         D = 64 – 66.999…
         D- = 60 – 63.999…
         F = 0 – 59.999…
IV.    Academic Integrity
Cheating and Plagiarism
By enrolling in this course, you agree to abide by the student Honor Code and Academic Integrity policies
as outlined by the Office of the Dean of Students here. Infractions of this policy will be severely penalized.
We have uncovered evidence of students cheating on quizzes or caught plagiarism on creative projects
red-handed in the past. In such cases, failing the course, suspension from school, or even expulsion are
all penalties that may be applied at the discretion of the Office of the Dean of Students. Academic
Dishonesty may ruin your grade, academic career, and can stain your reputation for decades to come.
                                                       2


AET 3141D Course Syllabus
Academic Dishonesty
“Academic dishonesty” or “scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism,
collusion, falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair
academic advantage to the student or the attempt to commit such an act. In AET 319, this includes but is
not limited to:
        1) Submitting all or part of someone else’s work as your own, without properly crediting
            your sources (this especially applies to creative projects)
        2) Sharing answers to quizzes or assignments with other students
        3) Using forbidden aids like internet searches on quizzes or theory assignments
V.       Course Schedule
  Unit        Date               Class Session                          Assignments and Comments
              8/29       Introduction, Syllabus        Read Introduction and Chapter 1: “Pitch”
             Week 2      Labor Day Holiday: NO
                         CLASS
    I.                           Pitch & Rhythm
             Week 2      Staff, notes, piano roll,     Chapter 1 (Pitch Quiz 1)
             Week 3      middle C
                         Clefs, Alphabet, lines &
             Week 3      spaces, ledger lines          Chapter 1 (Pitch Quiz 2) & Theory Assignment
                         Sharps and flats, Intervals:  Chapter 2
             Week 4      semi and whole tones
                         Measures and Beats, Time
                         signatures
             Week 4      Simple and Compound           Chapter 2 (Rhythm Quiz 1)
             Week 5      Meter
             Week 5                                    Chapter 2
                         Tempo, Notes and Rest         Chapter 2 (Rhythm Quiz 2) & Theory Assignment
                         Values
                         Practice: Rhythm Basics
   II.                         Advanced Rhythm
             Week 6      Polyphonic Rhythm, Basic      Chapter 3
             Week 6      Drum Patterns
                         Syncopation & Compound        Chapter 3 (Advanced Rhythm Quiz 1)
                         Meter
             Week 7      Ties & Extended Notes         Chapter 3
             Week 7      Triplets and Tuplets          Chapter 3 (Advanced Rhythm Quiz 2) & Theory Assignment
                         Practice: Rhythm Basics
   III.                  Scales and Harmony Basics
             Week 8      Key, Major Scales, chord      Chapter 4
                         types                         Chapter 4 (Major Scales Quiz)
             Week 8      Major Harmony                 Chapter 5
             Week 9      Key, Minor Scales, chord      Chapter 5 (Minor Scales Quiz)
                         types                         Chapter 5
             Week 9      Minor Harmony                 Chapter 4 & 5 (Theory Assignment)
            Week 10      Minor Harmony II
            Week 10      Mid-Term Analysis
 IV.                         The Basics of Melody
            Week 11      Arpeggiation and              Chapter 6
            Week 11      Intonation                    Chapter 6 (Melody Quiz)
                         Text Setting and Contour
   V.                       Harmonic Progression
            Week 12      Basics of Harmonic            Chapter 7
         Week 12 Week    Progression                   Chapter 7 (Harmony Quiz)
               13        Inversions, Form              Chapter 7 (Melody and Harmonic Progression Quiz)
                         Form, Melody and
                         Harmonic Progression
                                                      3


AET 3141D Course Syllabus
           11/28         NO CLASS: Thanksgiving
  VI.                    Genre-Based Composition
                         Theory
          Week 14        Game Music               Chapter 8 (Game Music) (quiz)
                         Song Form                Chapter 9 (Song Form) (quiz)
          Week 15        EDM, etc                 Chapter 10 (EDM, other forms) (quiz)
                         Film and TV Music        Chapter 11 (Film and TV Music) (quiz)
                                                  Open Lab times: TBA
                                                  Final Composition Due: December 13, 1pm
                                                 4


AET 3141D Course Syllabus
VII. Course Requirements
         1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                  (a) Attendance—and attentiveness—is essential and required. Attendance is facilitated
                      through the LAITS broadcast stream in Canvas and assessed by Instapoll and
                      discussions.
                  (b) If one must miss a class session and desires to ask for an excused absence, it is
                      the student’s responsibility to let the TA team know by email in advance of the
                      absence. We do not guarantee an excused absence will be granted if you notify us
                      only after missing a class session. It is the student’s responsibility to catch up with
                      material or class activities missed due to the absence—the TA team will not
                      necessarily remind the student of what needs to be made up from the class
                      session missed.
                  (c) Instapolls and Attendance can be excused, but other in-class activities—Quizzes and
                      Topical Discussions—must be made up or they will receive zeroes. There is a narrow
                      window of time after each missed in-class activity within which make-up submissions
                      will be accepted, so contact the TA Team ASAP after the missed class session (or
                      preferably, before) to receive instruction on how to make up the assignment.
                  Religious Holy Days
                  By UT Austin policy, you must notify the TA Team of your pending absence at least
                  fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
                  a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
                  religious holy day, we will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
                  within a reasonable time after the absence. With advance notice, we are happy to
                  accommodate religious holy days.
         2. Required Course Materials:
                  Required Textbook: Digital Musicianship; A Theory and Practice of Popular Music, by Dr.
                  Jack W. Stamps. Kendall Hunt Publishing (Dubuque, IA: 2018):
                  https://he.kendallhunt.com/product/pixels-samples-lumens-illusion-foundations-art-
                  and-entertainment-technologies
                  The textbook is online only and contains many supplemental materials including links
                  to videos, websites, music tracks, and more. Being able to access these online
                  supplemental materials will be essential to success in the course. Buying a used
                  textbook may result in having an access code that has already been used once and is
                  thus invalid.
VIII. Other University Notices and Policies
 Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
 All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
 policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his
 or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular
 basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that
 certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked
 daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions
 for updating your e-mail address are available at
 http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not
                                                       5


AET 3141D Course Syllabus
ask questions related to a student’s condition or diagnosis when receiving an official
accommodation letter.)
    •   If you require accommodations on completing assignments and quizzes/exams, please bring your
        accommodation letter from SSD to Dr. Stamps during office hours as early in the semester as
        possible. We will be happy to provide accommodations as specified in the accommodation letter
        from SSD.
    •   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
        (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper
        alternative text conversion, etc.).
    •   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for
        field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on
        the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
    •   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
        (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
 Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
 provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
 Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
 Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
   permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course
   a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
   shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
                                                     6
