Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
                          Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
                                     ALD 379 – Spring Long Semester 2020
Aileen Bumphus, PhD.
Clinical Assistant Professor, Educational Leadership and Policy
College of Education
Associate Vice President, Longhorn Center for The Academic Excellence
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
Telephone: (512) 471-1205
E-mail: abumphus@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Thursdays, 11am-12noon
Javier Wallace
Graduate Research Assistant – Longhorn Center for Academic Excellence
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
Telephone: (512) 471-1205
E-mail: jwallace@utexas.edu
Office Hours: TBD
Class Contact
For any questions related to the class, please e-mail Dr. Aileen Bumphus
Course Description
ALD 379: Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership is a discussion-based seminar designed to develop
student leaders who are ready to engage in and initiate social change. This Maymester course will provide a
specific emphasis on global leadership issues in the context of socially responsible and ethical leadership. This
class provides both the theoretical knowledge and the experiential skills for students to arrive at a personal
definition of leadership, understand group values and dynamics, interact with cross-cultural communication
styles, hone their interpersonal dynamism, and embody a code of ethics that promotes public good.
Ethics and Leadership courses are designed to equip students with skills that are necessary for making ethical
decisions in both their personal and professional lives. Students should therefore expect a substantial portion of
their grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the process of applying ethical reasoning to
real-life situations.
Course Learning Outcomes:
This is a course that combines knowledge and application. As we examine theories and the results of research about
leadership, we will ask repeatedly, “How can I use this?” Working and studying in small groups, we will find
practical answers to this question. The goal is to achieve the following outcomes by the end of the course:
Students will be able to:
     1. Articulate a broad understanding of various leadership and followership theories, and the relationship
          between the two in a free society.
     2. Demonstrate a comprehensive understanding of the ethical dimensions and dilemmas of leaders/ followers.
     3. Apply multiple leadership concepts and frameworks to various leadership-followership situations across
          different personal and organizational cultures and contexts.
     4. Demonstrate an in-depth understanding of leadership in a global and cultural context through a culturally
          immersed internship experience
     5. Exhibit an understanding of the impact of individual identities, and social differences on leadership.
     6. Display a critical, nuanced understanding of service, social entrepreneurship, and social change.
     7. Clarify and constructively describe their strengths and weaknesses as a leader and as a follower, their
                                                          1 of 7


Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
         emotional intelligence profile and personal approach to leadership/ followership, and their personal growth
         as a leader/follower.
    8. Identify and exemplify the various proficiencies, expertise, knowledge, and tools gained in class to be an
         adept and skillful leader or follower (as needed) across different contexts/ processes.
    9. Prove their competence in the subject matter as they collaborate with peers; and participate in, and lead
         small group discussions, collaborative project-based activities, and in class presentations.
    10. Show evidence of their ability to think critically; reason; analyze and synthesize complex and diverse
         concepts; and imagine, build, and create new possibilities for socially responsible and ethical leadership.
    11. Communicate effectively to present the subject matter they learn, their academic arguments, personal
         perspectives, and individual insights and ideas, clearly and persuasively, both orally, and in writing.
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
Class Expectations
1) Have your syllabus and reading materials readily available in class each day.
2) Actively listen to your colleagues during class.
3) Respect your peers and their opinions.
4) Contribute fully to the class environment, which includes staying actively engaged in class discussions with
    questions or ideas, coming to class on time, and completing your assignments in a timely manner.
5) Come to class prepared for discussion by having completed the reading assignments for that class period.
Attendance
1) Students are expected to demonstrate responsibility and dependability by attending all classes on time, missing
    class only if absolutely unavoidable. If you must miss a class meeting, please request permission or notify all
    instructors via email in advance. After three (3) unexcused absences, your final grade will be dropped by a
    letter grade. Subsequent unexcused absences will result in further reduction of your final grade. Please see the
    chart below.
2) In order for you to gain the most from the course, you are expected to contribute fully. Beyond learning the
    content on your own, you will be learning through in-class discussions, research assignments, small group
    activities and reflections, and peer-interactions that involve peer-to-peer teaching and learning. There is simply
    no way for you to compensate for having missed class instruction and shared experiences, but in order to help,
    instructors are available up to ONE WEEK after a missed class to review missed material by making an
    appointment.
ACTION                                RESULT
One class missed                      No effect on grade
Two classes missed                    5 points deducted from final course grade
Three or more classes missed          10 points deducted from final course grade
Required Textbooks and Online Assessment
There are two required textbooks for this class.
1) Rath, T. (2007). Strengths finder 2.0. New York: Gallup Press. (Provided)
          •    Assignment:
                   o Read pages 1-31 and take the Strengths Finder 2.0 assessment.
                   o You will need to upload your personal comprehensive Strengths Discovery and Action—
                                                            2 of 7


Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
                       Planning Guide into Canvas.
          •    Subsequent Assignments:
                   o Complete readings prior to class meetings.
3) Bradberry, T., Greaves, J., & Lencioni, P. (2009). Emotional intelligence 2.0. California: TalentSmart. (Provided)
          • Assignment:
                   o Read Foreword and pages 1-12 and take the Emotional Intelligence 2.0 assessment.
                   o You will need to upload your EI Appraisal Results Report into Canvas.
          • Subsequent Assignments:
                   o Complete readings prior to class meetings.
Summary of assignments
ASSIGNMENTS                                          LEARNING OUTCOMES                RELATIVE         DUE DATE
                                                     RELATED TO ASSIGNMENT             VALUE
1. Critical Reflections Blogs – 10 Nos.                     [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,1   20 points            Weekly
                                                            0]
2. Strengths Discovery and Action Planning                  {1,5,8,10,11]          10 points
Guide
3. Emotional Intelligence Appraisal, Strategies             [2,3,5,7,8,9]          10 points
and Lessons
4. Your Leadership Theory Paper – Final                     [1,2,3,6]              10 points
5. Class Participation – Discussions &                      [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,1   25 points
Presentations                                               0]
6. Final Spring Course Portfolio on Leadership              [1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,1   25 points
                                                            0]
Blogs
Your blogs are all about your personal perspective. For this course, please focus on your development as a socially
responsible and ethical student leader. Publishing your blog is optional. For those students wishing to publish/post
their blogs, please let us know and we will provide you assistance in getting your blog online through our Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement’s website domain.
All blog assignments must be uploaded in Canvas. Include a header that has the same elements that are outlined in
saving your files below (Last Name         ALD379      Blog #      Title      Date).
All papers should follow the guidelines listed below:
     1. Times/or Times New Roman, 12-point font, One inch margins, and Double-spaced
     2. Use APA format listed in the syllabus to reference sources used in your paper. NOTE: You must use
         references when quoting or adapting materials from others. This includes in-text citations as well as a
         reference page at the end of the paper.
     3. Save files as Last Name of Student_ALD 379_Assignment Name_Date as YY.MM.DD
     4. Students are expected to reference course readings and discussions assignments in this class.
     5. All written assignments must be uploaded to Canvas by 5.00pm on the Fridays that they are due, unless
         otherwise specified. E-mailed papers will not be accepted.
For more information on the papers for this course, please check canvas under assignments.
Policy on Proper Citation
A consistent problem with academic dishonesty centers on proper citation. Most students fail to cite sources
altogether, while others take authors’ words verbatim and do not quote them properly. Additionally, students
paraphrase authors’ words without citation. This could put you in serious academic trouble. Please be aware that
                                                         3 of 7


Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
plagiarism can merit a referral to Student Judicial Services (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs). Please look at
SJS’s Web site for definitions of plagiarism and paraphrasing. Because you have been informed about academic
integrity through this class and in this syllabus, your instructors will refer cases of academic dishonesty to Student
Judicial Services.
In the Department of Education, the primary citation style is APA and links to support sites are listed below.
     1. APA format: http://owl.english.purdue.edu/handouts/research/r_apa.html
     2. APA electronic references: http://www.apastyle.org/elecref.html
Late Assignment Policy
Late assignments will be accepted within ONE WEEK of the due date with an automatic 10% reduction of the final
assignment grade for each class meeting that passes before submission. (1 Full Week would mean an automatic
20% grade reduction.) After that point, assignments will not be accepted and students will not be given credit for
the assignment.
Assignment Re-write Policy
Students who receive 59% or lower on any paper assignment will have the opportunity to re-write their
assignment. Students rewriting assignments have ONE WEEK from the date the assignment was returned in class
to submit the re-written paper. It is highly recommended that the student utilize the University Writing Center
(UWC) to consult in the revision and re-writing process. The Longhorn Center for Academic Excellence has UWC
writing consultants that you can access easily. The final grade will be an average of the original paper grade and
the re-write grade. If the student does not meet with an instructor and submit a re-written paper, the original
paper grade will be the final grade.
Grading scale and procedures
The below scale will be used in the calculation of the Final Grade.
                             A        100-94                   C        76-74
                             A-       93-90                    C-       73-70
                             B+       89-87                    D+       69-67
                             B        86-84                    D        66-64
                             B-       83-80                    D-       63-60
                             C+       79-77                    F        59 or below
Use of Canvas
For all course assignments and updates to our course, you will need to sign-in to Canvas. Each week, you will be
responsible for posting several Critical Thoughts Blogs throughout the semester on canvas for your instructors to
review and evaluate. Additionally, you will need to login every week to stay abreast of weekly assignments
through. http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     • You have a right to respect.
     • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
     • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
         excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
                                                           4 of 7


Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
     •   You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching
         team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. Your
         experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
         energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
         standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
      Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
      with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
      nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your
      request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in
      the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
                                                    University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible
for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate university rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the university, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. All work
must be done on an individual basis unless explicitly stated by the instructor and in the assignment description. Any
unauthorized work will be considered academic dishonesty and will be referred to Student Judicial Services. Visit
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ for more information about Student Judicial Services.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while
you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There is
also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share
with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I
am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss
your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If
                                                             5 of 7


Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video
phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70
courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-
471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center:               http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries:                                  http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Information Technology Services:            http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services:                 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right –
it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
  •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
      nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
  •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
  •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
      unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
      Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
  •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
Electronic Devices
Due to the interactive nature of the class and the importance for all students to be engaged in dialogue and
activities, all electronic devices should be turned off during class. If you anticipate a situation that would require
you to use an electronic device, please contact the instructors prior to the beginning of class so that appropriate
arrangements may be made.
                                                     Course Schedule
                                                            6 of 7


Socially Responsible and Ethical Student Leadership
Note: Sessions will be scheduled around Internship times and other study abroad experiences. During the initial
weeks of the Abroad Experience, there will be multiple sessions per week to prepare students with content for the
class before their internship experiences. Excursions and other trips during the experience abroad will be added
upon approval and revision of the syllabus.
                                  SPRING SEMESTER SCHEDULE: Subject to Adjustments
SESSION & DATES          TOPICS AND ASSIGNMENTS FOR THE WEEK                           ASSIGNMENTS
    Session 1               Introductions, Review Syllabus                                Assignment: Required Blog 1
    (1-27-20)
    Session 2                     Study Abroad Office               Assignment: Read pgs. 1-31 of Strengths Finder 2.0
     (2-3-20)                   Pre-Departure Session 1                       *Complete assessment and upload Profile
    Session 3           Social Responsibility in Large and Small                        Assignment 1: Required Blog 2
    (2-10-20)                         Organizations                  Assignment 2: Complete reading Strengths Finder
    Session 4       Overview of Leadership Theories, Concepts and                         Assignment: Required Blog 3
    (2-17-20)                         Frameworks
    Session 5                 Strengths-Based Leadership                                  Assignment: Required Blog 4
    (2-24-20)
    Session 6                       Values and Ethics                                  Assignment 1: Required Blog 5
     (3-2-20)         Moral and Ethical Dimensions of Leadership               Assignment 2: Internship Sites Requests
                                Preparación de Español
    Session 7           Global Sustainable Development Goals                              Assignment: Required Blog 6
     (3-9-20)                   Preparación de Español
    Session 8                     Study Abroad Office                     Assignment: Read Foreword and pgs. 1-12 Of
    (3-23-20)                   Pre-Departure Session 2                                         Emotional Intelligence
                                Preparación de Español                     * Complete assessment and upload EI Profile
    Session 9                Implicit Leadership Theories                              Assignment 1: Required Blog 7
    (3-30-20)                   Preparación de Español                      Assignment 2: Complete reading Emotional
                                                                                                           Intelligence
   Session 10                     Study Abroad Office
     (4-6-20)                   Pre-Departure Session 3
                          Celebración de la Idioma Español
   Session 11                    Emotional Intelligence                                   Assignment: Required Blog 8
    (4-13-20)
   Session 12           Emotional Intelligence and Leadership                             Assignment: Required Blog 9
    (4-20-20)
   Session 13                      Servant Leadership                                    Assignment: Required Blog 10
    (4-27-20)
   Session 14                      Class Presentations                  Assignment: Personal Leadership Theory Paper
     (5-4-20)
                                                             7 of 7
