                                         AFR 330F (30080)
                                 Writing for Black Performance
                                              Fall 2019
                                       Professor Thompson
                                         Flags: Writing, CD
Course Description
Structured as a writing workshop, this course introduces students to playwriting through
the prism of African American theatre and performance. We will read plays that engage with
subjects such as the black family, black history, black identity, and black sexuality. Students
will write theatrical pieces as well as critical reflections about black life and/or (the
performance of) black identity in the US. As we explore dramatic and comedic writing, we
will consider the magic of theater and learn ways to use words to shape action on the stage.
The main objectives of this course are: finding or refining your voice, learning how to write a
play or performance text, and presenting it to an audience. You will learn about different
theatrical formats (with an emphasis on African-American performance and theatrical styles)
as well as character development, dialogue, conflict and setting. In acknowledgement of
some of the difficulties writers face, we will also consider topics such as inspiration,
technique and discipline. Throughout the term students will engage in a variety of in-class
writing exercises and workshop their writing with the help of classmates. In other words, we
will spend the term reading black plays, discussing black plays, and writing black plays–and if
we are fortunate, maybe even seeing a show or two. The course will culminate in readings of
selected scenes from your plays before an invited audience of peers.
Required Materials
    1. Colman Domingo, A Boy and His Soul
    2. Lorraine Hansberry, A Raisin in the Sun
    3. Dominique Morisseau, Pipeline
    4. Ntozake Shange, For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow
        was Enuf
    5. Richard Toscan, Playwriting Seminars 2.0: A Handbook on the Art and Craft of Dramatic
        Writing with an Introduction to Screenwriting
    6. August Wilson, Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom
    7. George Wolfe, The Colored Museum
    8. Journal or composition book , 80+ pages that are bound not spiral
All books can be purchased at the university bookstore. All other texts indicated with an
asterisk (*) on the syllabus are posted on the course Canvas page.


Course Policies & Requirements
Participation
Students are expected to complete all reading before class and participate fully in
discussions and activities such as in-class exercises, readings and group projects. Remember
to bring paper or a notebook or another writing apparatus to each class because we will
often do in class writing exercises and peer-editing/critique. Also, always bring assigned
books to class because we will regularly read excerpts aloud and analyze select passages.
Please be advised that prompt and regular attendance is expected.
On a final note, presentations, performances and readings are not just an academic exercise
for the presenters. As classmates, fellow writers and audience members you have a
responsibility to act as attentive and engaged listeners. In some instances, your peer
evaluation of a presentation or performance will be incorporated into your final grade so
your active participation is not just encouraged, but required.
Monologue
You will write a dramatic or comedic monologue (1-2 pages max). Your monologue should
include a description of the setting and a character sketch (a brief description of your
character’s gender, age, race, and other distinguishing characteristics). A successful
monologue will reveal something about the character speaking as well as illuminate some
aspect of the play’s major conflicts. Each student will perform her/his/their monologue or an
excerpt in class (1-2 minutes).
Artistic Statement
Provide a (2-3 page) thoughtful and detailed statement about what matters to you as an
artist. It should begin with a brief critical analysis of August Wilson’s essay, “The Ground on
Which I Stand” and then explain your vision as a writer. Consider this an exercise that calls
on you to explain your influences, priorities and objectives. This can be written as a letter to
a producer, director or be a journal entry; the format is not as important as the spirit of the
document. This statement should serve as a guide for your writing throughout your career.
Black Art Matters Review
Each student must attend a play (preferably a black artistic performance) that is not part of
a scheduled class visit, and then write a 2-3 page critical review. The review should
summarize or describe the performance, discuss the writers aims, and provide a sustained
analysis of the ways that the piece challenges and/or maintains conventional notions of
blackness. You should also note what you learned about playwriting by attending the show.
Reviews can be submitted online throughout the semester but the final deadline for all
reviews is November 13.
Play
                                                   2


Each student will write and revise a play for submission at the end of the term. The final text
should be between 20-30 pages. Make sure you use proper play formatting, a 12-point font
(Times New Roman or equivalent), and include a title and your name. Please submit the play
via Canvas as with all written work this semester. The style of play is open; it could be a one-
act, full-length, two 10-minute plays, a series of 1 minute plays, a choreopoem, or even a
musical. I encourage you to consult with me as well as your classmates at any stage in your
writing process. You are free to pick the subject matter and form of the play (one person
show, comedy, tragedy, one act, full-length drama). This assignment includes writing a
synopsis as well as drafts for in-class workshops and discussion.
Staged Reading
You will direct and/or perform a short (2-3 minute) scene or excerpt from your play to
present to the class at the end of the term. This is your final opportunity to let your creative
spirit soar! Besides writing the script, you are in charge of casting, rehearsal, and the overall
presentation of your work to the audience. You may do a staged reading or put the play “on
its feet.” You may cast anyone you wish in roles, but I encourage everyone to help their
classmates present their work. Please feel free to invite friends, family and colleagues to join
the audience and view your work. Location and time of the performances are TBA.
Notice:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Final grades will be calculated as follows:
Monologue (1-2 pages):                                       15%
Artistic Statement (2-5 pages):                              20%
Play (20-30 pages):                                          25%
Staged Reading/Performance (5 minutes):                      15%
Black Art Matters Review (1-2 pages):                        15%
Participation (attendance, workshops, readings, etc.):       10%
                                                  3


Course Schedule
          Mining Memory, Asserting the Self: Solo Performance & the Monologue
August 28
Introduction: Writing for Black Performance
Suzan-Lori Parks, “An Equation for Black People on Stage.”*
Suzan-Lori Parks, “New Black Math.”*
September 4
Colman Domingo, A Boy and His Soul
Toni Morrison, “The Site of Memory.”*
Richard Toscan, Playwriting Seminars 2.0, “Part One-Content: What’s in a Play,” p. 25-91.
September 11
Lindsay Price, “What is a Monologue?”*
Richard Toscan, Playwriting Seminars 2.0, “Monologues: They’re Mini-Plays,” p. 165-167.
September 18
Lorraine Hansberry, A Raisin in the Sun
How to Take Notes on Your Play
Writing Workshop: Meet with your writing partner to share monologue
Richard Toscan, Playwriting Seminars 2.0 “Structure: Parts of a Play,” p. 94-158.
Due: Monologue rough draft
September 25
Monologue Readings
Due: Monologue final draft
                    Finding Your Voice: The Ground on Which You Stand
October 2
August Wilson, Ma Rainey’s Black Bottom
October 9
August Wilson, “The Ground on Which I Stand.”*
Dominique Morisseau, “Playwright’s Rules of Engagement.”*
                                              4


Writing Workshop: Artistic Statement
Due: Artistic Statement rough draft
October 16
Dominique Morisseau, Pipeline
Due: Artistic Statement
October 23
Playwriting Seminars 2.0, “Working,” p.177-215.
Due: Final project first draft, submit online and print a copy to exchange with writing
partner(s)
In-class writing workshop
                             Innovative Narratives in Black Theatre
October 30
Ntozake Shange, For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide
Richard Toscan, Playwriting Seminars 2.0, 168-174.
Playwriting Seminars 2.0, “Format: Play Scripts,” p. 217-234.
Writing Workshop: Exchange final project second (revised) draft with your writing partner
(play or performance piece)
November 6
Art and inspiration guided tours of the Charles White exhibits at UT Austin’s Blanton
Museum and the Christian-Green Galleries. More info about the tours are forthcoming.
Due: Revised draft of final project (submit online)
November 13
George Wolfe, The Colored Museum
Writing & Performance Workshop: Revisions, Casting & Rehearsal
Due: Black Art Matters Review
                      Writing for Black Performance the Next Generation:
                                       New Play Readings
                                                5


November 20
Richard Toscan, Playwriting Seminars 2.0, “The Business of Playwriting,” 236-272.
Readings/Performances of final project (1-13)
Critiques
November 27
Thanksgiving Break Classes suspended
December 4
Readings/Performances
Critiques
Last name starts with (14-25)
Course evaluation
Conclusion
Due: Final draft of play
                                              6
