                                                                                                     Page 1 of 8
             UGS302: Contemporary American Foreign Policy Problems
                                               Summer 2019
                                                 Unique: 89050
                                            15 July – 16 August 2019
                                               M-F 10:00 – 11:30
                                                    RLP 0.120
                                              Dr. Michael Mosser
                                     E-mail: mosserm@austin.utexas.edu
                             COURSE OVERVIEW AND STRUCTURE
Description:
Regardless of major or degree plan, today's students live in a world where foreign policy challenges affect
not merely policymakers but everyday citizens as well. This course brings "real-world" foreign policy
challenges out of the headlines and into the classroom. It gives students hands-on experience
comprehending and analyzing these problems, and forces them to think seriously about the world beyond
Austin.
This course will explore six major foreign policy issues vital to American diplomacy, as identified by the
United States Department of State. Four of these issues will be “traditional” security challenges, while two
will be “non-traditional” or “human” security challenges. "Traditional security" challenges include: the
security situation on the Korean peninsula; increased tensions with Russia in Europe and cyberspace;
economic and military tension with China in the South China Sea; and the ongoing Syrian civil war.
“Human” security challenges include global food security and trafficking in persons. Following a model used
to great effect by planning teams in the US government, this course will be structured around a team-based
learning/doing concept. During the first class session, students will be divided into equally distributed teams
based on one of the six topic areas. Teams will task organize among themselves to create a comprehensive
assessment of their specific foreign policy issue. Teams will consist of the following “specialists:”
• Political analyst
• Economic analyst
• Socio-cultural analyst
All teams will embed their analysis in traditional “DIME” (Diplomatic, Information, Military, Economic) and
PMESII-PT (Political, Military, Economic, Social, Information, Infrastructure, Physical Environment and Time)
frameworks to show the broadest range of options available to US foreign policymakers.
This course touches on the disciplines of political science (government), international relations and global
studies (IRG), geography (especially political geography), and sociology/anthropology. Over the course of
the summer session, students will have the opportunity to converse with and learn from faculty associated
with the Intelligence Studies Project (ISP), the Robert S. Strauss Center for International Security, and the
Clements Center for National Security. Many of these faculty are former professionals in government and
international service, and who collectively have a wealth of experience to share with students interested in
pursuing careers in the American government, think tanks, or international organizations.


                                                                                                      Page 2 of 8
Textbook:
     •   Sean Kay, Global Security in the Twenty-First Century: The Quest for Power and the Search for Peace (3rd
         edition). Available at the UT Coop
Assignments:
* Writing
This class involves a series of writing-intensive tasks, culminating in an oral presentation to the class and
invited guests at the end of the semester (see “Oral Presentation” below for more information). Writing
tasks will include five short (1-2 page) memos with respect to the particular area of focus on the team,
done over the course of the semester. The main writing task will be the revision and compilation of those
short drafts into a formal, detailed 10-page analytical report. This report will encompass research findings
and recommendations and will be collated with other team members' reports into a comprehensive
research policy memo to be presented to the class.
Students will both a series of individual short written memos, on their specific area of focus within their
team, first in draft form and then (after revision) in final form for a grade. Together, these memos (rough
draft + revised draft) will total around 20 pages of written material.
The main writing assignment for each student will be to write a formal policy memo on that student's area
of focus that will be compiled into a group report, totaling ~30 pages. There will be six reports in total,
comprising the six foreign policy problem areas outlined above. Students will write approximately 20-25
pages each over the course of the semester.
         Writing Feedback:
         Students will peer-review the draft memos, receiving feedback in that manner as well as from the
         instructor. Students will also provide feedback on the final compiled reports, though formal
         assessment will be done by the instructor. Revisions will be done after every draft memo, while the
         final memo will not be revised by the students.
         Grade Percentage from Writing:
         Two-thirds of the final course grade will come from the written work (draft/revised short memos
         and final policy memo). One-third of the final course grade will come from the presentation of the
         policy memos to the class.
* Oral Presentation
Oral presentations are a central component of this course. Teams will present their findings as briefings to
the instructor on a regular basis. At the end of the semester, teams will present their findings to both the
instructor and peers as part of formal presentations. These presentations will be time-limited to 20 minutes
to allow for question and answers but also to force students to be parsimonious in what they choose to
include in their analysis.
* Discussion
This course will be conducted in a seminar-style format, with ample live discussion and in-class group
analysis exercises facilitated by the instructor. In addition, the Canvas page will provide students the


                                                                                                    Page 3 of 8
opportunity to engage in out-of-class interaction via the discussion forum, as well as collaboration via
Google Docs (accessed via Canvas).
* Information Literacy
All students in the course will meet with PCL librarians to discuss ways to conduct research using US
Government documents. Though the end product of this course are intelligence-style briefings, they will be
formatted to better fit academic research requirements of clear thesis statements, logical flow of evidence
and argument, and strong forward-looking conclusions based on evidence presented.
* “Gems” of the University
As a way of applying concepts learned in the seminar to "real world" events, students will embark on a visit
to the LBJ Library and Museum to explore documents related to the planning and conduct of Vietnam War
operations. If possible, students will engage in a scenario whereby they will role-play decision-makers at a
critical stage of the war (e.g., the Tet Offensive).
* University Lecture Series (ULS) or other lectures
If there are any lectures held over the summer, students will attend University Lecture Series presentations
and will upload to Canvas a one-page summary of the lecture attended. Students who cannot attend in
person will "attend" virtually and will be subject to the same summary-writing requirements. These
summaries will be evaluated for comprehension of material presented by the speaker, and for clarity of
writing by the student.
Important Information
Plagiarism / academic misconduct:
Don’t do it. Minimum penalties for cheating are zeros on quizzes or exams where the cheating takes place,
and a grade of F on a paper that has been plagiarized. Questions about what constitutes academic
misconduct should be brought to my attention.
University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Any student found guilty of
scholastic dishonesty may receive an “F” in the course and be remanded to the appropriate University of
Texas authorities for disciplinary action. For more information, view Student Judicial Services at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Student Privacy:
The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) requires that student privacy be preserved. Thus
the posting of grades, even by the last four digits of the social security number, is forbidden. All
communication will remain between the instructor and the student, and the instructor will not be able to
share details of the student’s performance with parents, spouses, or any others.


                                                                                              Page 4 of 8
                                    COURSE CALENDAR
                           INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE
Monday 15 July
Topic:
   • What are foreign policy “problems?”
Readings:
   • Stephen Walt, “My Top 10 Foreign-Policy Wish List for 2019”
                  UNDERSTANDING FOREIGN POLICY ANALYSIS:
                               THEORETICAL CONSTRUCTS
Tuesday 16 July
Topic:
   • The rational actor model
Readings:
   • Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce. 2010. “Foreign Policy Analysis and Rational Choice Models,” Oxford
       Research Encyclopedia of International Studies
   • Alden, Chris. 2017. “Critiques of the Rational Actor Model and Foreign Policy Decision Making,”
       Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics
Wednesday 17 July
Topic:
   • The organizational process model
Readings:
   • Allison, G.T. (1971) Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. Boston: Little, Brown.
           o Chapter 3: Model II: Organizational Behavior
           o Chapter 4: The Cuban Missile Crisis: A Second Cut
Thursday 18 July
Topic:
   • The bureaucratic politics model
Readings:
   • Jones, Christopher (2010) “Bureaucratic Politics and Organizational Process Models”
   • Allison, G.T. (1971) Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis. Boston: Little, Brown.
           o Chapter 5: Model III: Governmental Politics
           o Chapter 6: the Cuban Missile Crisis: A Third Cut


                                                                                          Page 5 of 8
Friday 19 July
    •   GUEST SPEAKER: Julie Kavanagh, Department of State Diplomat in Residence, LBJ School of Public
        Affairs
TOOLS OF NATIONAL SECURITY DECISION-MAKING: THE DIME APPROACH
                                    and PMESII VARIABLES
Monday 22 July
Topic:
    • What do we mean by “DIME?”
Readings:
    • “DIME Elements of National Power” video by COL Michelle Ryan, Director, National Security
        Policy Program
Tuesday 23 July
Topic:
    • What are the problems with the DIME approach?
Readings:
    • “DIME, not DiME: Time to Align the Instruments of US Informational Power”
    • “All Elements of National Power: Moving Toward a New Interagency Balance for US Global
        Engagement” The Atlantic Council, 2014
Wednesday 24 July
Topic:
    • What is a PMESII-PT analysis? Why is it useful for analysis?
Readings:
    • FM 2-19.4 “Brigade Combat Team Intelligence Operations,” 25 NOVEMBER 2008
             o Selections TBD
            “REAL-WORLD” SECURITY CHALLENGES: “HARD” SECURITY
Thursday 25 July
Topic:
    • What do we mean by “hard” (or “traditional”) security?
Readings:
    • Kay, “The Quest for Power,” Global Security in the Twenty-First Century, Ch 2


                                                                                                Page 6 of 8
Friday 26 July
Topic:
    • The idea of grand strategy
    • GUEST SPEAKER: Dr. Dan Cox, School of Advanced Military Studies, Ft. Leavenworth, KS
Readings:
    • Kay, “Great Powers and Grand Strategy,” Global Security in the Twenty-First Century, Ch 4
Monday 29 July
Topic:
    • The security situation on the Korean peninsula (introduction)
Readings:
    • Kay, “The Korean Peninsula,” pp. 152-160
    • Council on Foreign Relations, “US Policy Toward the Korean Peninsula”
Tuesday 30 July
Topic:
    • The security situation on the Korean peninsula (contemporary situation)
Readings:
    • Dongsoo Kim, “A Systematic Analysis of the Early Trump Foreign Policy: Implications for Northeast
        Asia and the Korean Peninsula,” The Korean Journal of Security Affairs, 23-1 (June 2018) pp. 4-20
    • Jervis, Robert, and Mira Rapp-Hooper. "Perception and Misperception on the Korean Peninsula:
        How Unwanted Wars Begin." Foreign Affairs 97 (2018): 103.
    • Exercise: PMESII analysis of North Korea
Wednesday 31 July
Topic:
    • The Russian challenge to American foreign policy (intro and contemporary)
Readings:
    • Brzezinski, Zbigniew. "Major Foreign Policy Challenges for the Next US President." International
        Affairs (Royal Institute of International Affairs 1944-) 85, no. 1 (2009): 53-60.
        http://www.jstor.org/stable/27694919.
    • Thomas Graham and Mattew Rojansky, “America’s Russia Policy Has Failed: Here are seven things
        the next U.S. president should do to put Washington back in the driver’s seat.” Foreign Policy (13
        October 2016)
    • Michael Mandelbaum, “The New Containment: Handling Russia, China, and Iran,” Foreign Affairs
        (March/April 2019)
    • Exercise: PMESII-PT analysis of Russia
Thursday 1 August
Topic:
    • The Chinese challenge to American foreign policy (introduction)


                                                                                              Page 7 of 8
Readings:
    • Naná de Graaf and Bastiaan van Apeldoorn, “US–China relations and the liberal world order:
        contending elites, colliding visions?” International Affairs 94:1 (2018), pp. 113-131
Friday 2 August
Topic:
    • The Chinese challenge to American foreign policy (contemporary situation)
Readings:
    • “US-China relations” – BBC
    • Exercise: PMESII-PT analysis of China
Monday 5 August
Topic:
    • The Syrian challenge to American foreign policy
Readings:
    • Sadat and Jones, “U.S. Foreign Policy Toward Syria: Balancing Ideology and National Interests,”
        Middle East Policy Volume XVI Number 2 (Summer 2009)
    • Exercise: PMESII-PT analysis of Syria
          “REAL-WORLD” SECURITY CHALLENGES: “HUMAN” SECURITY
Tuesday 6 August
Topic:
    • What is human security?
    • Global food security as an American foreign policy challenge (intro)
Readings:
    • Kaldor, Human Security
            o Selections TBD
    • Godfray et al., 2010. “Food Security: The Challenge of Feeing Nine Billion People,” Science 327, 12
        February 2010.
Wednesday 7 August
Topic:
    • Global food security as an American foreign policy challenge (conclusion)
Readings:
    • Global Food Security Act (2016)
    • “About FAS” Foreign Agricultural Service, USDA


                                                                                            Page 8 of 8
Thursday 8 August
Topic:
    • Human trafficking as an American foreign policy challenge
Readings:
    • Congressional Research Service, “Human Trafficking and Foreign Policy: An Introduction,” 7
        January 2019
    • US Congress, “Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000”
            o Sections TBD
    • US Department of State, “Trafficking in Persons Report 2018”
            o Sections TBD
Friday 9 August
Topic:
    • SPECIAL EVENT: LBJ LIBRARY VIETNAM SIMULATION
Readings:
    • Memorandum- July 20, 1965
    • Excerpt from Jack Valenti, A Very Human President (selection TBD by LBJ Library staff).
    • “Who is at the table?” (handout)
    • Biography of the role you will take on during the National Security Council Meeting
                              WHERE DO WE GO FROM HERE?
Monday 12 August
Topic:
    •    “Thinking beyond the strategic:” The overlooked aspects in analysis
Tuesday 13 August
Topic:
    • Preparing for policy memo presentations
Wednesday 14 August
    •   Topic: Policy memo presentation
Thursday 15 August
    •   Topic: Policy memo discussion
