                                                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                                          Department of Slavic and Eurasian Studies
                                                             http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/slavic
                                                                                       Summer 2019
First-Year Russian Online 1
RUS 406
Course Syllabus
Course Canvas Site: First-Year Russian Online 1
Language Lab: W 12:00 - 12:50 PM (CST)
Instructor: Heather Rice, Ph.D.
Phone: 512-232-6913
E-mail: hrrice@utexas.edu
Office hours: Monday 12:00 PM, Thursday 12:00 PM (via Zoom)
Textbook and Course:
The textbook for this course is built directly into the course’s Canvas site. You will NOT need to
purchase additional textbooks. There are many recommended and useful outside sources that
can be found both online and in print.
Some recommended print materials that may be useful during and after this course are:
    ●  Russian/English Dictionary, such as Katzner, or Oxford.
    ●  Beyer, Thomas R. 501 Russian Verbs, (Barron’s Educational Series, Incorporated,
       2007).
    ●  Cruise, Edwina. English Grammar for Students of Russian, (Ann Arbor, MI: Olivia and
       Hill Press, 1993).
    ●  Garza, Thomas. Fundamentals of Russian Verbal Conjugation for Teachers and
       Students, (Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt and ACTR Publications), 1993.
    ●  Gerhart, G., The Russian’s World, Orlando: Houghton Mifflin, 1994.
    ●  Katzner, Kenneth, ed. English Russian/Russian English Dictionary, (New York: Wiley
       Publishers, 1994).
Some recommended online sources to be used in the course are:
    ●  Multitran - An online Dictionary - An online dictionary


     ●   Phonetic Keyboard - You MUST be able to type in Russian for this class. A phonetic
         keyboard is recommended.
              ○ Phonetic Keyboard for Mac
              ○ Phonetic Keyboard for Windows
     ●   Викисловарь - A great reference site for grammatical and prosodic (sound) information
         about Russian words.
General Information:
Course Content:
This course is designed to introduce you to Russian language and culture. The aim of the
course is to help you develop functional proficiency in fours skills: reading, writing, listening and
speaking in Russian. In order to develop these skills, you work with material on a daily basis.
We will cover 7 units, each of which gradually builds on the other.
Each unit will consist of 4 content modules, with the exception of unit 1, which will consist of 8.
You will be given an assessment for each unit in the form of an exam module. Exam modules
immediately follow the completion of a unit’s final content module. Content modules comprises
the bulk of the instructional material for this course.
Because language study is cumulative, you have to practice every day, taking care to complete
all daily assignments and activities and to learn the accompanying vocabulary.
Attendance & Participation:
Daily: The majority of the course will be conducted online in Canvas. On a daily basis, you
will be allowed to work on material at a time that suits you.
Language Lab Wednesdays: Attendance is MANDATORY for all Language Lab meetings held
on Wednesdays. Meetings will take place in a virtual classroom, using Zoom. You can access
the Zoom meeting room through the course homepage in Canvas.
Additional meetings will be offered. Please refer to instructor communication for times and
dates.
Please note that tardiness is discouraged as it is very disruptive to others in the class. Leaving
early is likewise not appreciated. We know technical difficulties can arise from time to time, of
course, but please plan accordingly. Do not show up late and do not plan to leave early. If you
miss more than 10 minutes of lab, you will not receive attendance credit for that day.
     ●   Participation IS also required in Language Lab. You are expected to participate in lab
         for the duration of lab, practicing Russian language forms and engaging in assigned


     activities with your classmates as directed. Five minutes of participation will NOT count
     as participation.
     Having read that, keep in mind you have signed up to learn Russian. This requires LOTS
     of practice. Language Lab is where we, as a whole class, will be able to do it. The key
     to success (in all of the skills) is PRACTICE. Do not be afraid to be a little silly, to
     make mistakes, and simply to be brave and TRY.
  ●  Absences from Language Lab will not be excused except for religious reasons and
     personal emergencies.
Course Requirements
  ●  Modules in Canvas:
     The majority of this course will take place in Canvas. You are expected to do work on a
     daily basis, according to the academic calendar. Any time class is in session, then you
     should consider our class to also be in session, even though we are not physically
     meeting in a classroom.
         ●    Daily practice is essential. You should expect to spend approximately 3-4 hours
              per module to be successful in this course.
         ●    You have daily assignments and activities in Canvas given in the form of
              ‘modules’. Each ‘module’ contains assignments and activities for which you are
              responsible. Any graded assignments or quizzes will usually be DUE by
              midnight on the date specified in the assignment. When in doubt, check an
              assignment’s due date. This is also visible from your dashboard. Canvas will alert
              you when an assignment is due.
  ●  Instructional Materials:
     Although you do not have a printed textbook, each module contains various types of
     (non-graded) instructional material, for which you are entirely responsible. Go through
     EACH and EVERY item in your daily modules.
  ●  Graded Materials:
         ○    Assignments themselves can include downloading pdf forms to fill out and
              return, recording and uploading video or audio, and other work you cannot do
              directly on Canvas.


       ○  Quizzes in Canvas are equivalent to typical workbook exercises. You are
          typically given 2-3 chances to do them. They are also often automatically scored.
       ○  Discussions may be text only, audio, or video (instructions will be given on a
          case-by-case basis). You are expected to contribute to all graded discussions
          according.
● Homework submission:
  Homework is anything in a non-test module that has a grade associated with it. It will be
  labeled in Canvas as belonging to the category ‘Homework’ and will come in the form of
  quizzes, assignments, and discussions.
  Homework will be due on a daily basis.
  Homework will be graded and returned to you electronically. You should review any
  feedback and make any corrections. This can help you learn grammar and spelling rules
  faster than you might, otherwise.
       ●  Late Policy:
          Late homework will be accepted for reduced credit (depending on how late it is)
          up until the unit exam. Anything submitted after the unit exam, will not be
          accepted for a grade. Plan accordingly. Do your best NOT to submit late work.
          You do NOT want to fall behind.
● Language Lab (Wednesdays in Zoom):
  The purpose of the Language Lab is to practice what you have been learning in the
  Canvas modules. Attendance and participation are required!. You should plan to
  come to class ready to engage in various kinds of speaking activities. This is a place you
  will be able to work on things, ask questions, and practice with other students who are
  taking this course. Use your time together wisely.
  We will be using a program called Zoom for our language lab. You will be able to
  access the Zoom room from the course homepage in Canvas.
  Note: in Zoom you are expected to share your video and audio so we can
  communicate with each other most effectively. At times you will also be able to share
  your screen, upload files, and draw on a whiteboard. This is all to facilitate the learning
  of Russian.
  You will mostly be working in ‘breakout rooms’ - in small groups of 3-4 students to
  practice Russian, and we will also meet in larger groups at times.


          Some lab tips:
              ● Come to ‘lab’ dressed as you would for a traditional face-to-face class. If
                  your web-cam is on, and it should be, we can see you. Dress
                  appropriately.
              ● USE HEADPHONES if you are going to be in a noisy / shared
                  environment. Be respectful of your classmates and instructor. You will be
                  asked to leave or be removed from the meeting if your end is noisy /
                  distracting.
              ● Use Gallery View (recommended) to see everyone in your group at once.
              ● Use the Chat function as needed.
              ● Send a private message to your instructors when needed.
              ● Ask for help when needed.
              ● Help your classmates when needed.
              ● Work together.
              ● Speak Russian as much as you possibly can! DON’T EVER WORRY
                  ABOUT MAKING MISTAKES. IT’S THE ONLY WAY TO LEARN!
  NOTE: Our lab meetings will be recorded. This is to track attendance and it will help us
  understand how students are handling the material. We will review our videos as needed
  for these reasons only - to track your attendance and for instructional purposes. The
  videos will be used for and contained within our class only and will not be published or
  used outside of class.
  Conduct:
  Conduct yourself as you would if you were in a traditional face-to-face classroom. Be
  respectful to all, including yourself. Belligerent or disruptive behavior is never
  acceptable.
● Technical Requirements:
       ○ Strong & reliable internet connection
              ■ The course content relies heavily on video. Your connection should allow
                  you to stream video easily and participate in online video calls and
                  conferences, such as we’ll be doing in Language Lab and student
                  ‘Conferences’.
       ○ Reliable headphones
              ■ Make sure you have a reliable, working set of headphones. You should
                  use these any time you communicate with more than one other student
                  via video chat, including Language Lab and student ‘Conferences’
       ○ Working web-cam
              ■ We will be using video during Language Lab, ’Discussions’, student Zoom
                  meetings, and some ‘Quizzes’.
       ○ Scan/Print ability
              ■ You may be asked to download, print, and scan/upload files at times


       Major technical problems need be resolved within the first week of class, any
       issues relating to Zoom participation and your internet connection. Plan
       accordingly.
       Minor tech problems that might happen on a daily basis need to be resolved as
       quickly as possible. If you miss more than 10 minutes of any lab, you will be
       counted absent for the day. Your presence benefits not just you but your entire
       class.
   ●   Communication
       Your instructor will respond to email communication as quickly as possible, although you
       should allow at least 24 hours for a response.
       It is CRUCIAL that you, as the student, ask questions about the material and bring up
       ANYTHING that is unclear as you work through your assignments. Your instructors are
       here to help you, and your questions will only make the class better for everyone. Never
       hesitate to ask for help or additional information or materials.
Grade breakdown:
Testing 40%
   ●   unit tests (6 x 5%)
   ●   final exam (10%)
       A unit exam will be given every two weeks. Each unit exam is worth 5% of your final
       grade. The final exam will be given on the last day of classes and is worth 10% of your
       final grade.
Homework 35%
   ●   Quizzes
   ●   Assignments
   ●   Conferences
   ●   Discussions
Participation / Attendance - 20%
       As described above, attendance and participation are necessary for language learning.
       Showing up is half the battle, but you must also participate.
Presentation / Research / Portfolio - 5%
       On occasion, you will be given small research assignments and will be asked to present
       either in Russian or in English to the rest of the class either in Lab or on video. These
       projects will comprise 5% of your final grade.


94 – 100 = A
90 – 93 = A-
88 – 89 = B+
84 – 87 = B
80 – 83 = B-
78 – 79 = C+
74 – 77 = C
70 – 73 = C-
68 – 69 = D+
64 – 67 = D
60 – 63 = D-
59 and below = F
Test Dates:
Unit tests are scheduled to be published and due by midnight on the following dates. If a date
change occurs, you will be notified in advance to be given sufficient time to prepare and adjust
your schedule:
     1.  Unit 1 Test - Friday, June 21
     2.  Unit 2 Test - Monday, July 1
     3.  Unit 3 Test - Thursday, July 11
     4.  Unit 4 Test - Monday, July 22
     5.  Unit 5 Test - Monday, July 29
     6.  Unit 6 Test - Wednesday, August 7
     7.  Unit 7 Test (Final Exam*) - Friday, August 16
*The unit 7 test will count as the class’ final exam. The content of the exam will focus on unit 7
content, but because each lesson builds off the previous, the final exam will presume
knowledge of all previously covered course material. The final exam will also be slightly longer
in length than other unit exams.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness. You
have a right to respect. You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly. You have a right to
freedom of opinion and expression. You have a right to privacy and confidentiality. You have a
right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
environment. You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No
student shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way. With these rights come
responsibilities: You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
communicating with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
overwhelming. You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always


respectful of others. •Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the
energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences. You
are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
excluded. You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding
each other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas
Honor Code
The University of Texas Honor Codes reads: “The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness and respect toward peers and community.” Students are expected to adhere to
these principles throughout the course, in dealing with the instructors, fellow students, and in
completing all assignments for the course. Your instructors will do the same.
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if
you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a previous class), you
must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web
address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Google Translate, Reverso Context (and other translators):
Online translators are a GREAT tool you should learn to use intelligently. I use them all the time
to check myself. They should NOT be used in place of your own work and skill. If you don’t
know how to say something, translators may or may not come up with what it is you want to say.
When you use a translator to do your work for you, you are not learning anything about Russian
language. It is also usually quite obvious when a translator has been used. You should NOT use
them to do your work for you. You may not use them on any part of an exam. If you are
suspected of having used a translator (machine or otherwise), you will be confronted with the
task of having to explain in detail the language you have submitted as your work and you may
receive a zero for the assignment or test in question. Don’t do use translators. Do your own
work.
Q Drop Policy


If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster,
and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in
case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to
creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss
your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of
these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle.
You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important
part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather
than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult
life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.


For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES
A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center:
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a
culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right–it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. The
following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/. Occupants of buildings on The
University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Link to
information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and


working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in
our community, the university can: 1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or
escalating. 2.Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation. 3.Investigate and discipline violations
of the university’s relevant policies. Faculty members and certain staff members are considered
“Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to
report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must
report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be
sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for
support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
