ARC 386K / Fall 2018 / Martin Hättasch
Theory of Architecture I
Instructor
Martin Hättasch / WMB 6.128 / m.haettasch@utexas.edu
Office hours: Mon/Wed 11:00am-12:00pm
Introduction
As architects we are faced with a dual reality that forces us to constantly negotiate between the realm of the physical
object on the one, and the world of ideas on the other hand. As designers, we seek to give form to our ideas, while
as critical thinkers we interrogate our built environment and extract from it the ideas that shaped it. In many cases,
when architects have put their pens to paper, the implication was that each line could potentially contain the beginnings
of a universal system to order the(ir) world. From the sum of visions of what architecture ought to be has emerged a
multi-faceted, often controversial picture that makes it impossible to find a singular answer to the simple question:
“What is architecture?” today. Just as traditions of construction have been passed on and evolved, architects have
taken up the ideas of their predecessors and adapted, critiqued and rejected them. This body of ideas - in treatises,
manifestoes and built projects - has created a disciplinary discourse across the history of architecture. The goal of this
class is to provide an introduction to some of the debates that have occupied and continue to occupy architects’ minds
and practices. You will encounter multiple and contradictory positions that have emerged in response to often similar
questions. Focusing on the connection between the world of ideas and the world of forms, we will operate on both
ends of the spectrum: Through original and secondary texts we will study fundamental positions that have emerged
in architectural discourse. On the other hand you will be introduced to canonical buildings and practices as physical
manifestoes of these positions. Some terms and conversations you encounter in this class you will encounter many
more times throughout your studies and likely your career. As you proceed through your education, you will
increasingly be able (and expected to) make connections between your own studio production and the conversations
of the discipline. This feedback between what we do and how we think about our activity allows us to be specific
about the issues we want to address through our designs and gives us a basis for evaluation of our own work.
Course Objectives:
     -    Introduce crucial debates and trajectories in recent architectural discourse
     -    Familiarize students with a selection of canonical projects
     -    Develop students’ ability to critically evaluate precedents with regards to discursive trajectories
     -    Develop students’ ability to critically analyze precedents (graphic analysis)
     -    Develop students’ ability to critically evaluate precedents (writing)
     -    Give students the opportunity to use acquired knowledge and skills to develop their own positions with
          regards to the issues introduced in class
STRUCTURE
Seminar Sessions
Unless otherwise specified, the class will meet on Tuesdays 2.00pm – 5.00pm. Sessions are held in a seminar format
that will include presentations by students (see: course work) or the instructor, discussions about readings and
buildings presented in class, or group work or ‘desk crit’ periods.
Each weekly session will focus on a discursive issue framed by two terms. These terms introduce a particular set of
ideas, practices, and debates with relevance to contemporary architectural discourse and production. Each session’s
pairing of words delineates a discursive relationship rather than fixed entity; sometimes a pairing describes two


dialectically opposed positions, at other times the evolution of a concept, or an open-ended relationship between two
categories. Class topics will not be introduced as a canonical lineage or chronological evolution, but rather as contested
issues allowing for a multitude of positions. This structure aims to present discursive trajectories as ongoing and open-
ended processes relevant to design culture today. Ultimately, the goal of this seminar is to enable students to not only
acquire knowledge about canonical debates and precedents, but to use this knowledge as a basis to develop their own
positions with regards to their studio and design work.
Seminar Topics
09/04              Introduction - Introduction - Class Organization
09/11              Practice / Project - Architecture as a Discipline – Architecture as a Profession
09/18              Representation / Method - The Diagram as Evolving Tool between Idea and Form
09/25              Form / Content - Form and its (Dis-)Contents
10/02              Histories / Futures (Part 1 – Futures) - Uses of the Past vs. Visions for the Future
                   Student Presentations: Paper Ideas
10/09              Histories / Futures (Part 2 – Histories) - Uses of the Past vs. Visions for the Future
                   Student Presentations: Paper Ideas
10/16              Monument / Fabric - The Expansion of The Metropolis vs. The Discreteness of Architecture
                   Paper Outline due
10/23              Congestion / Island - The Metropolitan Condition between Congestion and Disjunction
10/30              Workshop / Desk Crits: Graphic Research & Precedent Analysis
11/06              Local / Global - Architecture with and Against a Globalized World
11/13              Autonomy / Contingency - The Search for Architecture’s Agency
11/20              Student Presentations: Graphic Research
11/27              Student Presentations: Graphic Research
12/04              Tectonics / Technology - Architecture between the Digital and Material World
                   Final Paper due
 [12/10            (Monday) Last class day]
Readings
Readings will be assigned in preparation for each week’s seminar. These readings form an integral part of the class,
they are not meant to be overly simplistic ‘beginners’ texts, but present you with substantive pieces of architectural
discourse. The readings will include texts from primary sources – manifestoes written by architects, important
canonical treatises – as well as secondary texts to help you place the primary sources in their respective contexts.
Readings should be taken seriously and not completed at the last minute. While you will find that you might not
necessarily understand every nuance of every text, you should be able to identify the large ideas put forward by the


author. Read every text twice – a first time to get a general sense of what the author is talking about, and what the
general parameters are, then a second time to identify certain arguments, or an author’s position on a topic.
Students are expected to be familiar with the readings for the class session under which they are listed in the calendar,
i.e. for which they are assigned. Readings must be printed out and brought with you for each class session for which
they are assigned. You must bring your annotated readings to the discussion session in order to be able to facilitate a
concise and rewarding discussion.
The readings will be available at least one week before the respective class session on CANVAS.
Each week, two groups of students will be responsible to take on the role of respondents (see: course work) and
present a reading responses to one of the assigned readings to the class, and subsequently open and (partly) moderate
a debate on the reading.
Note:
Please note that the readings posted a week prior to each session may vary slightly from the readings specified in the syllabus. Please
refer to the readings uploaded on ‘canvas’ in the respective folders for your reading assignments.
Precedents
A number of specific projects and buildings (usually two, although the number may vary for some sessions) will be
introduced each week relating to the texts and topic of the session. A group of two students will be responsible to
give a brief introductory presentation to the projects in questions (see: course work). At times, class discussion will
start by examining the precedents and move towards readings, at other times we will begin to discuss readings before
moving to the specific examples of buildings.
COURSE WORK
Group work (two students)
At the beginning of the semester students will self-organize into groups of two.
Each group (1,2,3, … etc.) will be responsible for two in-class presentations per semester (see calendar). Each
presentation consists of two parts, one Reading Response / Debate Opener and one Precedent Presentation. Usually
each text/precedent pairing will reflect on a particular position towards the topic in question. With two group
presentations per session, each session will thus introduce the class to two distinct positions regarding a discursive
topic. While each group does not necessarily have to agree with the position/project presented, they will temporarily
act as the proponents of this position and convey its essence to the class, before critically responding to it and opening
up an in-class discussion. It is up to the students to organize the division of work among themselves. In the case that
one student is responsible for the Precedent Presentation, and the other for the Reading Response, it is expected,
that these roles will be reversed for the second presentation in the semester.
      1.   Reading Response / Debate Opener
           The main goal of the reading response is to enable a lively discussion and debate in class. The format
           should move from the synthesis of the core concepts of a text to a subjective and critical assessment of its
           contents and/or context. The presentation should include at least the following:
                o    A summary of the core concepts
                o    A critique of the readings by raising related issues or questions, reframing a certain concept with
                     regards to a new context, or making connections to other issues discussed in class
                o    The facilitation of a class debate centered around one or more questions determined by the
                     respondents


     2.   Precedent Presentation
          Each week, assigned groups will be responsible to introduce a precedent (project or building) to the class
          that has some kind of relationship to their Reading Response. The projects are listed in the class schedule
          along with the readings. Students should familiarize themselves with the basic documentation of their
          assigned precedent and have a thorough understanding of its context and inner workings (one of the
          favorite questions in class will be to ask the presenting group to walk us through the plans!). It will be the
          task of the presenting group to provide a short visual narrative in form of a digital presentation for the entire
          class. This presentation should include (but is not limited to):
               o     A curated (!) compilation of documentation materials (drawings, images, diagrams) for each project
               o     A description (using relevant drawings) of how the project addresses program, site and context
               o     Relevant biographical information on the architect / practice
               o     Relevant background information regarding the history of the project
Each Reading Response/Precedent Presentation set should be about 30 min. (15/15), followed by a debate of 30
min.
The order in which students present their reading response and precedent may vary per seminar session – at times we may discuss
both precedents first, at other times both readings and sometimes each precedent/reading pairing as a unit.
Individual Work
The main assignment for the semester will be an essay of around 2,500 - 3,000 words. The essay is expected to be
developed as a well-reasoned and researched argument regarding a topic related to class. Students should provide
original and critical content, while rigorously using relevant texts from the seminar and graphic precedent studies to
support their argument. As an “architectural” argument, the use of original graphic materials, diagrams, and
precedent analysis will be a crucial part of the final project. The essay must address one of the word pairings
discussed in class, and may use, but is not limited to the precedents discussed in class. To facilitate the
development of an argument, the project will be developed in three stages over the course of the semester (each
stage will be a constituent part of the final grade (see: grading outline)
     3.   Paper Outline
          Students will write a short outline framing a tentative argument, a set of two precedents they are planning
          to utilize, and a short description of how they are planning to develop their argument.
     4.   Precedent Study / Graphic Research (Presentation)
          Class presentation and submission of the “graphic research” portion of the argument. A well-researched,
          well-drawn, and well-presented study of a set of precedents should begin to support an argument with
          regards to one of the seminar topics. (Please note that the argument you are making in your final essay is
          not a ‘one-way-street’ – it is well possible, even desirable that your initially outlined argument may change
          once you have started to look at the architectural evidence.)
     5.   Final Project
          A final submission of a final project combining a written and a graphic part. The projects should be creatively
          conceived, rigorously researched, and beautifully presented.


EVALUATION
Student Performance Criteria
A.2       Design Thinking Skills
A.6       Use of Precedents
Grading Outline
You will receive a final letter grade. Incompletes will only be granted in cases of verifiable medical or other reasons
that the school accepts as such. It is your responsibility to bring any circumstances that might prevent you from
successfully passing the class to the instructor’s attention immediately. The final grade will be calculated as follows:
Critical Reading skills                                                        15%
     -    Class discussion / Participation
Oral presentation (x2)                                                         20%
     -    Reading Response / Debate Opener
     -    Precedent Presentation
Paper Outline                                                                  5%
Graphic Research Presentation (precedent study)                                20%
Final project (writing & graphic representation)                               40%
Description of letter grades:
A         Exceptional or outstanding work. Performance exceeding the requirements of the assignment. Student displays
          initiative and forethought
B         Good work. Performance above the norm, accurate and complete, fulfills all requirements of the assignment
C         Average work. Minimum performance, satisfies most requirements of the assignment
D         Weak work. Inadequate level of performance, does not satisfy the requirements of the assignment
F         Unacceptable or incomplete work.
Late Assignments
The instructor will not accept any late work, unless justified by a legitimate excuse (see below). No provisions will be
made for make-up work of any kind. No extensions will be given to complete work at a later time unless the instructor
has agreed to this before the deadline.
Attendance
Attendance to the class is mandatory. Failure to attend classes due to illness of other legitimate causes may be
excused. If you think that your absence is excusable, you need to inform the instructor as soon as possible and provide
proper documentation. Excuses for class absences for medical reasons will be given only if such absences are advised
by a health care provider, in writing, based on clinical findings and prescribed treatment recommendations. Excuse
notes solely confirming a visit to a Health Care Provider will not be counted.
Academic Integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student
Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct


Care Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges
or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling
emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer
students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is unavailable
by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to obtain a letter that documents the disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-
4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course
at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Letters of recommendation
I will be happy to write letters of recommendation for students receiving a final grade “A-“or above.
Bibliography (recommended texts and resources)
Note that none of these books are required for purchase, but may present you with a good starting point for further
research and/or start building an architectural library.
Compilations:
      -   Joan Ockman (with the collaboration of Edward Eigen): Architecture Culture 1943-1968: A Documentary
          Anthology, New York: Rizzoli, 1993
      -   K. Michael Hays (ed.): Architecture Theory Since 1968, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998
      -   Krysta Sykes (ed.): Constructing a New Agenda: Architectural Theory, 1993-2009, New York: Princeton
          Architectural Press, 2010
      -   Adrian Forty: Words and Buildings: A Vocabulary of Modern Architecture, London: Thames and Hudson,
          2000
      -   Kate Nesbitt (ed.): Theorizing a New Agenda for Architecture: An Anthology of Architectural Theory 1965-
          1995, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996
      -   Harry Francis Mallgrave and Christina Contandriopoulos (eds.): Architectural Theory, volume II: An
          Anthology from 1871-2005, Oxford: Blackwell, 2008
      -   Ulrich Conrads: Programs and manifestoes on 20th-century architecture, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971
      -   Rafael Moneo: Theoretical Anxieties and Design Strategies in the Work of Eight Contemporary Architects,
          Cambridge, MA: MIT Press / Barcelona, Actar, 2004
Some Canonical books worth purchasing as a starting point for an architectural library:
      -   Rem Koolhaas: S,M,L,XL, Monacelli Press, 1995
      -   Rem Koolhaas: Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan, New York: The Monacelli
          Press, 1978
      -   Aldo Rossi: L'architettura della città (1966), translated as The Architecture of the City by Diane Ghirardo and
          Joan Ockman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982


- Robert Venturi: Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (1966). New York: The Museum of Modern
  Art, 2nd revised edition, 1977
- Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learning from Las Vegas, Cambridge, MA: MIT
  Press, 1972
- Le Corbusier: Towards a New Architecture (“Vers Une Architecture”), translated from the thirteenth french
  edition and with and introduction by Frederick Etchells, New York, Dover Publications, 1986
- Pier Vittorio Aureli: The Possibility of an Absolute Architecture, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2011


Schedule / Calendar:
(please note that this schedule may be subject to change. Changes will be coordinated in advance with the student
groups responsible for project introductions and reading responses for the session in question.)
09/04              Introduction
                   Introduction - Class Organization
09/11              Practice / Project
                   Architecture as a Discipline – Architecture as a Profession
                   Required Readings:
                           Stan Allen, “Introduction: Practice vs. Project,” in Practice: Architecture, Technique and
                            Representation (2000), pp. xiii-xxv.
                           Michael Speaks: “Intelligence after Theory, in Perspecta, Vol. 38, Architecture after All
                            (2006), pp. 101-106
                   Complementary Texts:
                           Aldo Rossi: “Architecture for Museums”
                           Summerson: “The Case for a Theory of 'Modern' Architecture”
                           Ákos Moravánszky, “Architectural Theory: A Construction Site”
09/18              Representation / Method
                   The Diagram as Evolving Tool between Idea and Form
                   Required Readings:
                           Toyo Ito, “Diagram Architecture,” El Croquis 77: Kazuyo Sejima, pp. 18-24
                           Peter Eisenman: “Diagram: An Original Scene of Writing,” in Any Magazine n. 23, 1998
                   Student Presentations:
                            Group 1:
                            Reading Response:           Peter Eisenman: “Diagram: An Original Scene of Writing”
                            Project Introduction:       Peter Eisenman: House II / House VI (+ other early houses)
                            Group 2:
                            Reading Response:           Toyo Ito, “Diagram Architecture,”
                            Project Introduction:       Sanaa: Toledo Glass Pavilion
                   Complimentary Projects/Practices:
                           UN Studio / Ben van Berkel, Caroline Bos
                           OMA (Seattle Public Library)
                           MVRDV
                   Complementary Texts:
                           Anthony Vidler, “Diagrams of Diagrams: Architectural Abstraction and Modern
                            Representation,” Representations 72 (Autumn 2000): 1-20
                           Ben Van Berkel and Caroline Bos, “Diagrams: Interactive Instruments in Operation,” in
                            Any Magazine n. 23, 1998
                           Stan Allen, “Diagrams Matter,” in Any Magazine n. 23, 1998
                           Robert Somol, “The Diagrams of Matter,” in Any Magazine n. 23, 1998
                           Garcia, Mark, "Histories and Theories of the Diagram of Architecture", AD Reader Series,
                            2009
                           Anthony Vidler: “What is a diagram anyway?”
                           Robert Somol, “Dummy Text, or the Diagrammatic Basis of Contemporary Architecture,”
                            in Peter Eisenman, Diagram Diaries (New York: Universe, 1999): 6-25


09/25 Form / Content
      Form and its (Dis-)Contents
      Required Readings
              Louis H.Sullivan: “The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered,”in Lippincott's
               Magazine, March 1896.
              Sanford Kwinter: “Who is Afraid of Formalism?”, in Far from Equilibrium, pp. 144-149
      Student Presentations:
               Group 3:
               Reading Response:            “The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered”
               Project Introduction:        Louis H. Sullivan: Guarantee Building, Wainwright Building
                                            + other early skyscrapers)
               Group 4:
               Reading Response:            Sanford Kwinter: “Who is Afraid of Formalism?,
               Project Introduction:        Frank Gehry: Disney Concert Hall or Louis Vuitton Foundation
      Complimentary Projects/Practices:
              Bernard Tschumi (Parc de La Villette)
              Peter Eisenman: Houses
      Complementary texts:
              Adrian Forty: “Function”, in Words and Buildings: A Vocabulary of Modern Architecture,
               London: Thames and Hudson, 2000
              Pier Vittorio Aureli: “Architecture and Content -Who is afraid of the Form-Object?” in Log
               No. 3, (New York, Anyone Corporation, Fall 2004), pp.29-36
              Colin Rowe: “The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa, Palladio and Le Corbusier compared”, in
               AR, March 1947, pp. 101-104
              Peter Eisenman: “Post-Functionalism”, in Oppositions 6, Fall 1976
              Bernard Tschumi: Architecture and Disjunction (excerpts)
10/02 Histories / Futures (Part 1 – Futures)
      Uses of the Past vs. Visions for the Future
      Required Readings:
              Le Corbusier: Vers une Architecture (excerpts)
      Student Presentations:
               Group 5:
               Reading Response:            Le Corbusier: Vers une Architecture (excerpts)
               Project Introduction:        Le Corbusier: Villa Savoye
      Complementary texts:
              Reyner Banham, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age [1960] (Cambridge, MA:
               The MIT Press, 1980): 9-12; 220-246; 320-330
      Assignments:       Students in Groups 1-4:
                         Bring 5 images to class that start to frame a certain practice / project / theme
                         that you are interested in writing your final paper about. We will discuss these
                         images and generate feedback from the class to help you specify your ambition.


10/09 Histories / Futures (Part 2 – Histories)
      Uses of the Past vs. Visions for the Future
      Required Readings:
              Robert Venturi: Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (1966). New York: The
               Museum of Modern Art, 2nd revised edition, 1977: 16-69
      Student Presentations:
               Group 6:
               Reading Response:            Robert Venturi: Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture
               Project Introduction:        Robert Venturi: Vanna Venturi House
      Complementary texts:
              Manfredo Tafuri: Teoria e storia dell'architettura (1968), translated as Theories and History
               of Architecture, London: Granada, 1980: 227-237
              Manfredo Tafuri: ‘Introduction’, Theories and History of Architecture, transl. by Giorgi
               Verrechia (Icon Harpe, 1981)
              Fil Hearn: “The uses of the past”, in Ideas that Shaped Buildings
              Hilde Heynen, “The need for Utopian thinking in Architecture,” in Hunch 6/7, pp. 241–
               243.
      Assignments:       Students in Groups 5-8:
                         Bring 5 images to class that start to frame a certain practice / project / theme
                         that you are interested in writing your final paper about. We will discuss these
                         images and generate feedback from the class to help you specify your ambition.
10/16 Monument / Fabric
      The Expansion of The Metropolis vs. The Discreteness of Architecture
      Required Readings:
              Siegfried Giedion; Jose-Luis Sert; Fernand Leger: “Nine Points on Monumentality,” in
               Joan Ockman: Architecture Culture 1943 – 1968 (Rizzoli, NY), pp. 27-30
              Siegfried Giedion: “The Need for a New Monumentality” in Paul Zucker (ed.) New
               Architecture and City Planning, (Philosophical Library, New York, 1944), pp.545 – 568
              Alison Smithson (ed.): “Team 10 Primer 1953-1962”, in Architectural Design, no.12,
               December, special issue, pp. 559-600; with contributions by J. Bakema, G. Candilis, J.
               Coderch, A. van Eyck, R. Erskine, G. Grung, A. and P. Smithson, J. Soltan, J. Voelcker and
               S. Woods
      Student Presentations:
               Group 7:
               Reading Response:            Giedion, Sert, Leger: “Nine Points on Monumentality
               Project Introduction:        Le Corbusier (et al.): UN Headquarters or Town Center St. Die
               Group 8:
               Reading Response:            Smithson: “Team 10 Primer 1953-1962”
               Project Introduction:        Candilis Josic Woods: Free University Berlin
      Complimentary Projects/Practices:
              Aldo van Eyck: Amsterdam Orphanage
              Alison & Peter Smithson: Hauptstadt Berlin competition
      Complementary texts:
              Alexander D’Hooghe: “A Theory of the New Monumentality: From Crisis to Project,” in
               VOLUME, 2006, no 9, pp.151-157
              Alexander D’Hooghe: “Empty Space”, “Platform”, “Shattering and Regrouping,” in The
               Liberal Monument, Urban design and the late Modern Project, (Princeton Architectural
               Press, NY), pp.36-43


              Eric Mumford: “From the ‘Heart of the City’ to the End of CIAM,” in The CIAM Discourse
               on Urbanism, 1928-1960. (Cambridge: MIT Press, c2000). pp. 201-215
              Alison Smithson (ed.): “The Beginning of Team 10” in Team 10 Meetings (New York:
               Rizzoli, 1991), pp.8-15
              Siegfried Giedion: “In Search for a New Monumentality: A Symposium”, in AR 104 (Sept.
               1948), pp. 117 – 128
              J.B. Bakema: “Relations between Man and Things”, in: CIAM 8: The Heart of the City:
               Towards the Humanisation of Urban Life (New York: Pellegrini and Cudahy Publishers,
               1952), pp.67-
              Alison and Peter Smithson: “Problems Regarded as Central to Architecture in the Present
               Situation” in Documents of Modern Architecture: CIAM ‘59 in Otterlo, Jürgen Joedicke (ed.),
               (New York: Universe Books Inc., 1961). pp. 68-71.
      Assignments:       Paper outline due
10/23 Congestion / Island
      The Metropolitan Condition between Congestion and Disjunction
      Required Readings:
              Rem Koolhaas, excerpts from: Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for
               Manhattan (1978). New York: The Monacelli Press, 1994
      Student Presentations:
               Group 1:
               Reading Response:             Rem Koolhaas, excerpts from: Delirious New York (excerpt 1)
               Project Introduction:         Rem Koolhaas / OMA, t.b.a.
               Group 2:
               Reading Response:             Rem Koolhaas, excerpts from: Delirious New York (excerpt 2)
               Project Introduction:         Rem Koolhaas / OMA, t.b.a.
      Complementary texts:
              Rem Koolhaas: “Bigness: or the Problem of Large”, in S,M,L,XL (New York: The
               Monacelli Press, 1995)
              OASE #94: OMA. The First Decade
              Lara Schrijver: “The Archipelago City: Piecing Together Collectivities,” in OASE, nº71,
               (2006), pp.18-36
10/30 Workshop / Desk Crits: Graphic Research & Precedent Analysis
                         Students are asked to bring in-progress work on their precedent analysis to
                         class. In desk crit format, you will receive feedback on the work you have
                         produced towards a coherent graphic argument in support of your final paper.
11/06 Local / Global
      Architecture with and Against a Globalized World
      Required Readings:
              Kenneth Frampton: "Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an Architecture of
               Resistance." in Hal Foster (ed.): The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on Postmodern Culture,
               Seattle, WA: Bay Press, 1983.
              Rem Koolhaas: “Junkspace,” in Content, Taschen, Cologne, 2004
          Student Presentations:
               Group 3:
               Reading Response:             Frampton, "Towards a Critical Regionalism”
               Project Introduction:         Alvar Aalto: Saynatsalo Town Hall or


              Group 4:
              Reading Response:             Rem Koolhaas: “Junkspace”
              Project Introduction:         BIG: Danish Pavilion, Shanghai Expo
      Complementary texts:
             Liane Lefaivre and Alexander Tzonis. "Why Critical Regionalism Today?" In Architecture +
              Urbanism, May 1990
             Alan Colquhoun, "The concept of regionalism," in Postcolonial space(s) G.B. Nalbantoglu
              and W. Chong Tai (eds.) (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1997), 13-24.
             Ulrich Beck, “Risk Society’s “Cosmopolitan Moment,” in New Geographies 1, (2009), 24-
              34.
             Rem Koolhaas, “Globalization,” S,M,L,XL (New York: The Monacelli Press, 1995), pp.
              363–369.
11/13 Autonomy / Contingency
      The Search for Architecture’s Agency
      Required Readings:
             Rossi, Aldo, “The Structure of Urban Artifacts,” in The Architecture of the City
              (New York: Opposition Books, 1994), pp. 29-61
             Reyner Banham: “A Clip-On Architecture,” in Design Quarterly, No 63. (1965), pp.2-30
      Student Presentations:
              Group 5:
              Reading Response:             Rossi, “The Structure of Urban Artifacts”
              Project Introduction:         Rossi: San Cataldo Cemetary or Il Palazzo hotel
              Group 6:
              Reading Response:             Banham: “A Clip-On Architecture”
              Project Introduction:         Kenzo Tange: Tokyo Bay
      Complimentary Projects/Practices:
             Dogma: Stop City
             Aldo Rossi: Centro Direzionale, Turin
             Philippe Rahm
             James Corner (Field Operations)
      Complementary texts:
             Joseph Godlewski: “The Absurd Alibi”, The Plan Journal Vol. 0, 2016
             Rafael Moneo: “Aldo Rossi”, in Theoretical Anxieties and Design Strategies
             Rafael Moneo: “OnTypology,” in Oppositions 13 (Summer 1978), pp. 23-45
             Anthony Vidler:“The Idea Of Type The Transformation of an Academic Idea 1750-1830,”
              (1977), in K. Michael Hays (ed.), The Oppositions Reader
             Adrian Forty: ‘Type’, in Words and Buildings: A Vocabulary of Modern Architecture
              (London: Thames & Hudson, 2000), pp. 304-11
             Hadas Steiner: “Within the Big Structure” in Megastructure Reloaded (Berlin, Hatje
              Cantz, 2008), pp.136-152
             Pier Vittorio Aureli: “Rossi: The Concept of the Locus as a Political Category of the City,”
              in The project of autonomy : politics and architecture within and against capitalism
              (New York : Temple Hoyne Buell Center for the Study of American Architecture:
              Princeton Architectural Press, 2008), pp. 53-69
             Reyner Banham: ”A Home is Not A House,”in Art in America, 1965, volume 2, p. 70-79
             ACSA Fall Conference 2015: “Between the Autonomous & Contingent Object”,
              Conference Proceedings & selected papers
11/20 Student Presentations: Paper presentation /Graphic Research due
11/27 Student Presentations: Paper presentation /Graphic Research due


12/04  Tectonics / Technology
       Architecture between the Digital and Material World
       Required Readings:
               Kenneth Frampton: “Reflections on the Scope of the Tectonic,”in Studies in tectonic
                culture: the poetics of construction in nineteenth and twentieth century architecture
                (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 1995)
               Antoine Picon: “Architecture and the virtual - towards a new materiality,”in PRAXIS no.6,
                2006 pp. 114-121
       Student Presentations:
                Group 7:
                Reading Response:           Frampton: “Reflections on the Scope of the Tectonic”
                Project Introduction:       Renzo Piano: Menil Collection
                Group 8:
                Reading Response:           Picon: “Architecture and the virtual”
                Project Introduction:       FOA: Yokohama Port Terminal
       Complimentary Projects/Practices:
               Greg Lynn
               Reiser Umemoto
       Complementary texts:
               Robin Evans: “Translations from Drawing to Building”(1986)
       Assignments: final project due
[12/11 (Monday) Last class day]
