ARI 338 / ARI 388 / ARC 386M – Designing for Human Behavior
Instructor:               Charu Juneja, Lecturer
Office Hours / Location:  By appointment / WMB 4.116A
Class Meeting Times:      T 12:30-3:30pm
Location:                 PAR 105 (unless noted otherwise)
T.A.:                     Georges Fares
Email / Phone:            georgesfares@utexas.edu / 512.574.9194
Office Hours / Location: By appointment / TBD
Fall 2018 Syllabus
Catalog Description
Issues of mood, privacy, perception, proxemics, and preferences applied to the design of interiors.
Three lecture hours a week for one semester.
Prerequisite
Upper division standing.
Course Objectives
This course will provide and student work will demonstrate the following:
Understanding and awareness of:
- The contributions of interior design to contemporary society
- The complex relationship between human behavior and the built environment
- Human factors and how to appropriately apply theories of human behavior
- Universal design concepts and how to appropriately apply them
- Design needs and how they may vary for different socioeconomic populations
- Social and cultural norms and how they may vary from the user to the designer and are relevant
     to design decisions
- Human life cycles and ranges in physical ability and how these may affect user needs
Opportunities to:
- Explore the built environment and design problems from various points of view
- Develop knowledge of other cultures
- Learn about a range of research and problem-solving methods that are available to designers
- Develop critical listening skills
- Promote better communication, learning to express ideas clearly in oral and written form
- Examine various market sectors and client types
Format
- Lectures will cover the significant course material, which will be enhanced by the required
     reading assignments and guest speakers.
- A two-part semester project will constitute the fundamental course work, in addition to several
     shorter assignments. The majority of assignments contribute to the completion of the semester
     project and considerable in-class time will be dedicated to project review and discussion. Please
     note, late submissions for any and all assignments and projects will NOT be graded. Students
     should arrange to submit work in advance if he or she anticipates being absent.
- Assignments and projects will be accomplished in groups when indicated by the description.
     Students may be asked to provide performance evaluations for their fellow group members, and


     the instructor reserves the right to reorganize teams if needed and/or give individual grades for
     teamwork.
-    Quizzes may be given without notice to cover reading assignments, which should be completed
     prior to the presentation of the material in lecture. Each student will be required to post a
     question related to the reading. The submission of the question on Canvas and participation in
     the reading discussion during class will account for attendance and participation on that day.
-    No laptop use in class (unless instructed otherwise), no cell-phone use in class, and no food in
     class (unless provided for the entire class). Beverages allowed.
-    Guest speakers and possibly field trips will be integral to the course, and students will be
     expected to be courteous, punctual, and engaging.
-    All course material (course description, syllabus, assignments, projects, readings, grades, etc.)
     will be available on Canvas.
Course Requirements and Texts
Universal Methods of Design: 100 Ways to Research Complex Problems, Develop Innovative Ideas,
and Design Effective Solutions by Bella Martin and Bruce Hanington
Weekly topical readings will be posted on Canvas.
Attendance Policy
Most of our class meetings will be devoted to discussions, exercises, and hands-on workshops, so
regular attendance and active participation are essential. You may miss two classes– for any reason–
without penalty. Each additional absence, regardless of the reason, will lower your course grade by
5%, and four or more absences will likely result in a failing grade for the course. Because our time in
class is limited, promptness is important. Each instance of arriving late or leaving early will count as
1/2 of an absence. If you are late for class, it is your responsibility to make sure you have not been
marked absent. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in
advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; asking a
classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable. The student is responsible for completing work
missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due
dates.
Religious Observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student
whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be
allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within
a reasonable time after the absence.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Email
When writing the instructor an email, include “DFHB” in the subject line along with the topic of your
inquiry. Emails should address the instructor and be professional in manner. The instructor will
endeavor to reply in a timely manner or will address your question in the next class.
Classroom Etiquette
Etiquette is a code of conduct. It is a method for dealing with how people interact with one another,
which is based upon mutual respect and accepted norms of behavior. Below are tips for proper
classroom etiquette, which will set the tone for a professional atmosphere and foster good workplace


habits.
     -   Arrive to class on time.
     -   Mute your cell phone, and put it away.
     -   Close down your email and social media sites.
     -   Do not eat in class.
     -   Contribute to discussion when appropriate.
     -   Avoid side conversations and other distractions.
     -   Address the instructor and any guests professionally.
     -   Be attentive in class.
     -   Stay for the entire class.
     -   Bring what you need to be productive.
     -   Contact the instructor directly when you have to miss class.
     -   Be prepared for pin-ups and presentations.
Grading
The individual grades accumulated over the semester are averaged toward the final grade as follows:
Participation (incl. reading posts and quizzes)       15%
Assignments                                           40%
Semester Project I                                    25%
Semester Project II                                   20%
Grade Descriptions
A/A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above
and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- : above average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues
ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is
complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F : fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this
grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation
with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be
completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according
to the School of Architecture policy.


Academic Integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic
integrity will be strictly enforced.
Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and
procedures on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
CARE Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support
for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Laura Dannenmaier (LCSW) is the CARE Program Director and is the assigned CARE counselor for
the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students
may directly reach out to her.
Laura Dannenmaier | BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents
the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of
Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter
should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Security, Safety, and the Studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful
attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should
be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and
your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and
do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studiomates accountable for the security of
your shared space.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can
be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share
your concerns.
Emergency Evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:


- Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
  evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
  requires exiting and assembling outside.
- Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building
  they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when
  entering the building.
- Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
  first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
  instructors.
- Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
  Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
  Services offices.
- Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
  found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
