AET 103 – Colloquium III Unique: 20845
Milestones in Digital Media Technologies
Thursday @ 5pm-6pm             CLA 0.102
Professor Bruce Pennycook
Chair, The Department of Arts and Entertainment Technologies
Office: DFA 4.108
Email: bpennycook@austin.utexas.edu
There are three required Colloquia courses in the Bachelor of Science in Arts and Entertainment
Technologies degree. Each class is 1 hour per week for 1 credit. All AET majors must attend.
Synopsis
This colloquium will span the early years of computation to the present focusing on key
moments in computation history, digitization, control systems and concepts of machine
learning and generative art. All materials will be available in Canvas.
Attendance is mandatory and attendance will be taken at the start of every class.
For each class missed I will deduct 1 grade point from the final grade.
Weekly Syllabus
                                                                                Quiz
  Class       Date Topic                                                        Value
     1     30-Aug    What is an algorithm? What does "computable" mean?
     2       6-Sep   Mechanical Machines, Clockworks and Charles Babbage
     3     13-Sep    Early Electronic Computers - Relays, Valves and Bugs          15
     4     20-Sep    ENIAC and the war machines - digital computing
     5     27-Sep    Early Electronic Media - Film, Audio
     6       4-Oct   Digital Audio - Bell Labs, digital telephony, mp3 etc
     7      11-Oct   Digital Imaging - image sensors and light                     15
     8      18-Oct   Time Based Digital Media
     9      25-Oct   MID-TERM TEST                                                 40
    10       2-Nov   Control Systems - MIDI, DMX, etc.
    11       9-Nov   Machine Learning - "The Master Algorithm"
    12     16-Nov    Generative Art, Music, Video - computational creativity       15
    13     23-Nov    Thanksgiving Break
    14     30-Nov    iOT - a sensor based world
    15       7-Dec   What does the future look like for AET?                       15


Grading
There will be four quizzes and a mid-term test. All will be done online in Canvas. The mid-term
test will be 50 minutes, in-class. Quizzes will done outside of classes. Due dates are posted in
Canvas.
Quizzes and Mid-Term
    1.  Spt 13 Quiz 1 Classes 1, 2, 3, 4              15%
    2.  Oct 11 Quiz 2 Classes 5, 6, 7                 15%
    3.  Oct 25 Mid-Term on all classes 1-8            40%
    4.  Nov 16 Quiz 3 Classes 10, 11, 12              15%
    5.  Dec 7 Quiz 4 Classes 14, 15                   15%
UT Policies
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes,
but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission
of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonest damages both the
student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-
career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please
visit the Student Judicial services Web site at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone 471-6222,
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc/ offers individualized assistance to
students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students


may come in on a drop-in or appointment basis.
Services For Students With Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you
miss a work assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious holy
day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at
Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to
the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed
as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail
on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html. (Optional: In this
course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be
responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements.)
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas to manage student’s work, grades, etc. Canvas is a Web-
based learning management system in which a password-protected site is created
for each course.
