                                            1! of 7!
        AMS 311S/AAS 310 : Gendering Asian America
                                  Summer Session 1
                              Instructor: Andi T. Remoquillo
                                     atremo@utexas.edu
                                T/TH (Zoom): 10-11:30 am
                               Office hours: M/W 10-11:30 am
                            Zoom Meeting ID: 954 8048 8912
Course Description
Gendering Asian America brings together conversations about Asian American history
and gender. Meaning, we will analyze moments in Asian America and how individuals
experienced each on differently depending on their gender, ethnic identity, and/or
socio-economic class. Course readings, assignments, and most importantly, class
discussions will help students increase their knowledge about American andAsian
American studies and develop sharper critical thinking skills.
Core themes explored throughout the course are as follows: migration and settling;
belonging vs. unbelonging; and representation vs. self-presentation. My ultimate goal
for the class is for students to think about these themes with more depth in relation to
U.S. history and present-day politics.
Writing Flag:
According to UT guidelines, courses with a Writing Flag must meet the three
following criteria:
• Students must write regularly and complete writing projects of quality.
• Students must receive feedback from the instructor to help them improve, and they
  must be given an opportunity for at least one revision.
• Students’ writing must make u pat least one-third of their total grade.


                                            2! of 7!
For more information, visit: https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/writing
Learning Objectives
• Become familiar with interdisciplinary methods and scholarship, as well as using a
  feminist intersectional lens when studying U.S. history.
• Learn how to make an argument in your writing, and think critically while
  sharpening your analytical skills. In other words, you will not be solely graded on
  your ability to regurgitate lecture, but also on how you synthesize your own thoughts.
• Become more comfortable with public speaking skills through class participation.
• Become familiar with introductory concepts of transnational feminism when
  studying racial formation in the U.S.
Readings, Analytical Responses, Blog Posts, and the Final Research Paper:
Readings:
       Each meeting is heavily organized around assigned readings, therefore it is
       essential that students come to class fully prepared for discussions — this
       entails doing the readings and brining in hard copies to class. Electronic
       versions of the readings will not be permitted unless otherwise discussed with
       me. If you are having issues printing readings on your own, contact me ahead
       of time and I will print them for you. While this cannot be an every-class
       occurrence, I am essentially showing you that there are multiple ways to bring
       in hard copies of the readings! Additionally, while there are no in-class exams,
       if I sense that students are not doing the readings then I will begin assessing
       your attendance through pop quizzes on assigned readings. Therefore, it is in
       your best interest to do the readings, take notes, and come to class ready to
       have some engaging conversations!
Analytical Reading Responses:
       Students are expected to write two analytical reading responses and one final
       research paper at the end of the semester. I will provide 4 opportunities to
       write a response — it’s up to you to decide when you’d like to write them.
       Responses are not simply summaries of the readings, but original analyses


                                           3! of 7!
       that discuss the readings in relation to broader conversations on gender,
       sexuality, and Asian American identity formation. Responses are 3-5 double-
       spaced pages, and must be analyzing at least 2 of the readings from the most
       recent weeks. For example, if you are turning in a response during ‘opportunity
       2,’ then you can only refer to readings assigned after ‘opportunity 1.’
        Your responses must have: an original title, heading, numbered pages, proper
       citations, and a work cited page. Lastly, always proofread before turning in a
       final product. While I am always happy to answer questions regarding papers, I
       cannot read your papers before they are due. Therefore, in addition to utilizing
       my office hours, I heavily encourage students to use the UT Writing Center’s
       services. Appointments and helpful handouts can be accessed on their website:
       http://uwc.utexas.edu/.
       Revisions: you are allowed to revise and resubmit one analytical response
       paper. In order to do so, you must meet with me first about your paper so we
       can discuss my comments/edits made. Revisions must be submitted no later
       than one 1.5 weeks after papers are returned.
Blog Posts:
       This is an online course in which we will only be meeting over Zoom twice a
       week. However, readings will still be assigned weekly blog posts in between
       classes. This is to ensure that you are still completing the readings,
       comprehending the material, practicing your critical thinking and writing
       skills, and engaging with your classmates.
       Prompts, instructions, and due dates for each blog post will be posted on your
       weekly Canvas modules. Discussion posts will also be located in Canvas. Since
       this course has a writing flag, posts should be written in a professional and
       academic manner.
       Lastly, blog posts are included in your attendance and participation grade.
       Meaning, if you miss a blog post assignment that is considered an absence.


                                            4! of 7!
Attendance and Participation:
Attendance
        I will take attendance during every class meeting. Because this is a summer
        course, unexcused absences can have a serious effect on your overall grade and
        comprehension of course readings. At the same time, however, I also recognize
        that everyone has other things going on in their lives. If you have a difficult
        work schedule or come across an emergency, let me know ASAP so that we can
        figure out another plan together!
Participation
        In addition to attending class regularly, you will also be expected to participate
        during in-class discussions. This is a seminar course, which means I will spend
        little time lecturing the class material and instead work as a leader and
        facilitator for classroom discussions that are very much dependent on students’
        active engagement.
        I understand that speaking in front of people you don’t know can be a little
        uncomfortable — particularly when it’s on material you may not be familiar
        with. However, engaging with others in the classroom is one of the most salient
        ways to succeeding in any seminar course. Seminar-style classrooms (whether
        in person or online) are also meant to facilitate a community style of
        intellectual growth. If you are concerned about your ability to speak up during
        class but would still like to remain in the course, come talk to me during my
        office hours so we can figure something out.
Civility Code
While difference of opinion during certain topics is expected, the safety of everyone is
always the priority. Our classroom is a space that is meant for intellectual growth,
which can often times be difficult when we aren’t used to the material, or feel at odds
with it. However, I assure you that being critically engaged and open as possible can
only benefit you in this course. With that being said, if you ever feel uncomfortable I


                                            5! of 7!
urge you to let me know ASAP, either in class or during my office hours. While I
always try my best to pay attention to the dynamics of a classroom and to take care of
the safety and well-being of each of your, it’s likely that I’ll miss a few things in a class
this large. Lastly, in accordance to UT policy, please ask me about my policy regarding
armaments in my office.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability that requires academic accommodations
should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) through the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement at: 471-6259 (voice), or 471-4641 (TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations. Please submit this official letter to me within
the first two weeks of class. If you require testing onsite at the SSD office, you will
need to fill out an SSD Test Reservation Form at least 10 business days before each
exam. You will need to provide me with the Instructor Portion of the form, as well. For
more information regarding onsite testing at SSD, please see:
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/adaptive-testing/ (Links to an external site.) Links to
an external site.
Grading
Attendance & participation: 30%
Response papers (2): 15% each
Proposal and bibliography for final paper: 10%
Final paper: 30%
Required Texts:
• Hune, Shirley and Gail M. Nomura (editors). Asian/Pacific Islander Women: A Historical
  Anthology. New York University Press (2003).
• Tang, Eric. Unsettled: Cambodian Refugees in the NYC Hyperghetto.


                                           6! of 7!
                 Gendering Asian America Schedule
  (Highlighted days are Zoom meetings. All assignments are due on the date they are
                                          listed)
Week 1: Intro to Course
Thursday 6/4: First day of class — review syllabus and class expectations.
Friday 6/5: Read https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/after-50-years-asian-
american-studies-programs-can-still-be-n1022331 and Lisa Duggan’s presidential address
at the American Studies Association (Canvas). Discussion post.
Week 2: Intersectionality and Asian America
Monday 6/8: No readings due today — begin readings for the following days.
Tuesday 6/9: Introduction (pick 1 out of the 2) in APIA Women. Read Espiritu’s article,
“Race, Gender, Class in the Lives of Asian Americans” (Canvas)
Wednesday 6/10: No reading due today. Discussion post.
Thursday 6/11: Read “Geography and Gender: Home, Again?” By Mona Domash and
Chapter 10 from APIA Women (Canvas).
Friday 6/12: No reading due today. Respond to classmates’ discussion post from
Wednesday. Reading response opportunity 1 due on Canvas.
Week 3: Chinese Exclusion Era & Women
Monday 6/15: No readings due today — begin readings for the following days.
Tuesday 6/16: Read Chapter 4 from APIA Women and “Fearing Yellow, Imagining
White” by Sang Hea Kil.
Wednesday 6/17: Read chapter 9 from APIA Women. Discussion Post.
Thursday 6/18: Read “Asian Women in Hawaii: Migration, Family, Work, and Identity
by Carol C. Fan (Canvas).
Friday 6/19: No readings due today; respond to classmates’ posts from Wednesday.
Reading response opportunity 2 due on Canvas.


                                          7! of 7!
Week 4: Constructing Asian American Masculinity (early 1900’s)
Monday 6/22: Read introduction to Chinatown Trunk Mystery by Mary Ting Li Lui
(Canvas). Discussion post.
Tuesday 6/23: Read ch. 1 to Chinatown Trunk Mystery by Mary Ting Yi Lui.
Wednesday 6/24: Read “From Forever Foreigners to Model Minority: Asian American
Men in Sports” by Yomee Lee (Canvas). Discussion post.
Thursday 6/25: No readings due. Watch film/show during class.
Friday 6/26: Read chapter from War Without Mercy by John W. Dower (Canvas).
Reading response opportunity 3 due on Canvas.
Week 5: War and Asian American Identity
Monday 6/29: Read chapter from Hiroshima in American by Robert J. Lifton (Canvas).
Discussion post.
Tuesday 6/30: Read “Like a Bamboo: Representation of a Japanese War Bride” by
Debbie Storrs. Watch Fall Seven Ties, Get Up Eight during class.
Wednesday 7/1: Read chapter 11 from APIA Women. Discussion post.
Thursday 7/2: Read chapter 2 from Body Counts: The War in Vietnam and Militarized
Refuge(es) (Canvas).
Friday 7/3: No readings due. Proposal and bibliography due on Canvas. Reading
response opportunity 4 due on Canvas (last opportunity).
Week 6:
Monday 7/6: TBD
Tuesday 7/7: TBD
Wednesday 7/8: TBD
Thursday 7/9: TBD
Friday 7/10: Final paper due today (?)
