                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                            INTRODUCTION TO BLACK STUDIES
                                        AFR 303, ANT 310D
                                           29620 & 30730
                  Ethics and Leadership, Cultural Diversity, Global Cultures Flags
                                           Online Streamed
                                              Fall 2018
Instructor: Traci-Ann Wint                             email: trwint@utexas.edu
Instructor: Dr. Edmund T. Gordon                       email: etgordon@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant:
LaKayla Williams
Michelle Ramirez
Technical Support: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu.
Course Description:
This course provides students with an introduction to Black Studies. In the first section of the
course we consider the history of Black Studies in the U.S. using the integration and development
of Black Studies here at the University of Texas, Austin as a case study. We then turn to
considerations of the historical construction of Africa, the Black Diaspora, and the idea of
Blackness. Building on this foundation the course provides students with the analytical tools to
critically explore canonical Black Studies literature, themes, and theories. This section of the
course interrogates race, gender, class, sexuality, and their intersections. The second section of the
course focuses on Black cultures, power, and politics. It utilizes the analytical tools provided by
the course to forge an understanding of Black gendered cultural forms. The third section of the
course focuses in on the expression and use of Black Studies and the ethical questions raised by
applying this perspective to everyday concerns in critical areas of social inequity.
The course meets online during scheduled class times and includes a live-streaming video
component. Students are encouraged to visit http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html to test
their computer and network connection and learn about the course structure.
Description of Online Format:
This is the Synchronous Massive Online Course (SMOC) version of the AFR303 course. Unlike
almost all other courses offered at the University of Texas, you will be viewing this class online
(from the comfort of your own home, library, or coffee joint) rather than in-person (except as
required.) Though delivered as a live stream through Canvas, this course takes place at the official
times described in the course schedule: 1:00 pm – 2:30pm Mondays and Wednesdays. You are
required to attend class by logging into the course site before 1pm on Monday and Wednesday to
watch the live, real-time video stream of our lectures and participate in class activities. It is very
important that you treat logging into the course website the way you would treat attending a


traditional course held in a classroom; attendance is required. You will have the opportunity to
pose questions online in real-time just as if you were raising your hand in class. The lectures will
have 6 -8 students participating directly with Dr. Gordon during the live class and another 18-20-
person studio audience. These students will be chosen through an application process on a first
come basis.
About the Live Online Class format:
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1211839. You can enter directly at this URL or through
Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you will need
your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, you can navigate your way to other
areas.
Some of the most important features include:
1.      Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the Video Stream
where you watch class every day, a help section, and several other important links you’ll use
through the course.
2.      Video Stream – The Video Stream is the page on which you will find the live lecture for
the course. The Video Stream will also display the outline for the current lecture and links to other
participation activities.
3.      Modules – The Modules page includes links to the Assignments, Readings, Lecture video
archives and other course documents.
Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Video Stream and Modules tabs.
Tech Requirements:
Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to an internet- enabled
laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should
have enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:
○       Computer laptop or desktop
○       RAM: at least 2GB
○       Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
○       Browsers: Safari, Firefox, or Chrome (highly recommended)
○       5Mbps internet connection speed (check here: http://beta.speedtest.net/)
You should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting the test
stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html.
There are multiple computer labs on campus for your use if you do not have a personal computer
or laptop. (You can find a listing of these labs here: https://it.utexas.edu/services/teaching-
classroom-technology-labs). If you do not have an internet-enabled device, some inexpensive ones
are available at local stores or on the internet, some for as little as $100. We also encourage you to
watch the lectures with your classmates so if you do not have a personal computer or laptop you
might consider pairing with a classmate who does.


Bandwidth limitations: Because the streaming video is bandwidth-intensive, you should not access
YouTube, Skype, Gmail video chat or other online video system, or any other program that is
bandwidth-demanding during class. During the class session, you should be watching the lecture,
taking written notes, and nothing else! (I recognize the temptation to multi-task. If you find
yourself frequently distracted online, I recommend you try browser-based solutions like
StayFocused or LeechBlock that prevent you from accessing certain tempting websites during
class hours).
Course communication:
During Class:
The Class Chat feature allows you to communicate with your TA and other students during the
class.
The Ask the Professor a Question feature on the Video Stream is the forum where students should
ask questions for clarification or further elaboration.
We expect that you will treat online discussions as though you are having a civil, respectful
discussion with your fellow classmates in the same classroom. Please refrain from using profanity
or any euphemisms for profanity. Please do not bait other commenters or personally attack them.
Please do not use sarcasm in a way that can be misinterpreted negatively. And please do not make
the same point over and over again. Also, please ensure that your discussion in the class chat
remain relevant to the topic a hand. In short, please just respect the right of your colleagues to ask
questions and discuss their opinions about the subject matter of our course on the discussion board
and refrain from unnecessarily being a distraction to others. Violators of these discussion rules
will simply be shut out of the online discussion board and will be asked to see the professor in
person.
Outside of Class:
The TAs and professor will often post Announcements in Canvas. Click on the “Settings” link in
the upper-right corner of your Canvas page, to adjust your email address and notification
preferences. This will allow you to receive email updates whenever course Announcements are
made, or when assignments and grades are posted.
If you have a specific, personal or grade-related question, please email your TA or visit them
during office hours.
Please do not use the Inbox feature within Canvas for course-related email.
Even though this is an online course, you are encouraged to communicate with the professors and
TA. Come to our posted online office hours, or send an email to set up an appointment if none of
the weekly office hours fit your schedule.


Honor system for quizzes and writing assignments:
By taking this class, you agree to abide by the University of Texas regulations concerning
cheating. During the quizzes you cannot receive help from others or discuss your writing
assignments with other students. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact
the TAs or instructors.
Information and data security:
All quizzes and online interactions in Canvas will be saved and stored. All information will be
kept for educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other
researchers will involve de-identifying the data, including the removal of names, UTEIDs, email
addresses, or other information. To further ensure that your information is secure, please do not
include identifying information in your online interactions with others. Remember that in online
interactions, the instructors and TAs will have access to all information. Please communicate in a
respectful manner.
Reporting technical problems:
If you experience a technical problem during class, your first course of action should always be to
immediately report the issue to tech support via the tech chat accessible through the Home Page or
the Video Stream. Please note that you must report any technical issue before the end of the
lecture during which the problem occurs. The professor and teaching assistants will not address
the ramifications that your technical problems might have on your grade if tech support does not
have a record of your problem. If you experience a technical problem outside of class, please
follow the link to contact tech support in Canvas.
Lecture Attendance – We Will Take Attendance!!
The course will meet two times per week for lectures by the professor. The lectures will present
empirical material, and interpretive perspectives not available elsewhere. They will be
complemented by the readings. Students are required to attend all lectures online. We will take
your attendance three to four times during each lecture!!! If students must miss lecture due to
sickness or other unchangeable obligations, they must inform the TA’s as soon as possible. You
are required to send explanations for absences to the TA’s email
(onlineAFR303ta@austin.utexas.edu) in advance when possible, and no later than 24 hours after
lecture. If a satisfactory explanation does not arrive at the attendance TA’s email within 24 hours
of lecture, the student will be graded down for an unexcused absence. You must attend lectures!
If you have read this far in the syllabus email a picture of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr to
onlineafr303ta@austin.utexas.edu.
In-Person Studio Attendance:
Although this is an online class, a self-selected group of students will attend each day. For those
who will attend class in the studio, please be at the building by 12:40 p.m. The doors will close


shortly after 12:45 p.m. so we can talk to you about studio rules. You will also get a chance to talk
with the instructors, TA, and the other students who will be part of this. Please note that food and
drinks are not allowed in the studio. Make sure to go to the restroom before you enter. When the
live broadcast is in session you will only be able to leave in the case of an emergency.
The studio classroom is in Mezes (MEZ) 2.206. Enter the building from the west main entrance
and walk up the stairs. Walk straight through the hallway and there will be an area for you to wait
near the end of the hallway. A TA will be there to greet you and let you in to the classroom. Be
sure to bring a laptop with you.
Course Requirements:
1. Class Attendance (6 pts.). Students are required to attend class
        a. Attendance - will be taken three to four times during every class meeting. A TA will
            send you pop-up “Instapolls” throughout the lecture at random times to gauge your
            participation. Students answering 90% or more of all instapolls sent during the
            semester will receive 6 pts. Those answering between 80% - 89% of instapolls will
            receive 4.4 pts. Those answering between 79% - 70% of instapolls will receive 2.4 pts.
            Those answering less than 69% of instapolls will receive 0 pts. ANY STUDENT
            WHO MISSES MORE THAN 50% OF THIS COURSE’S INSTAPOLLS WILL
            AUTOMATICALLY FAIL THE COURSE.
        b. 27 self-selected students will attend class in person in the studio for the entire semester.
            For these students attendance will be taken by a TA with a sign-up sheet. The same
            point system as above applies ie. Students attending 90% or more of in studio lectures
            will receive 6 pts etc.
        c. Students who commit to attending class in studio will receive a 2 point bonus on their
            final grade.
2. Participation (4 points) Students are expected to participate in class discussions in-person
        and online.
3. Vox Pops (5 points)
        a. students will conduct short video interviews with members of the UT population or
            general public. The questions are pre-determined and will be posted on Canvas. The
            videos can be recorded using your camera, smart phone, tablet, or laptop.
4. Quiz (10 pts.)
        a. There will be one timed quiz testing knowledge of African-American history and the
            history of Black Studies within the context of Blacks at the University of Texas. Only
            some of the materials for this quiz will be covered in class. Additional material on
            these subjects are available online and on Canvas. A study guide for the quiz will be
            available on Canvas. The quiz will be administered in Canvas and students can take it
            up to 2 times between 2:30 pm Wednesday September 5, 2018 and 5:00pm Friday
            September 14, 2018.
5. Short Essays (45 points)
        a. There will be 3 essays covering the main topics discussed throughout the semester. The
            prompts will be posted on Canvas and the essays are to be uploaded to Canvas by 5:00
            pm on their due date (Sept 28, October 19, November 21). Each essay should be 2-3
            double spaced pages. Essays are worth 15 points each


6. Research Project/Wikipedia Entry (15 points) You will create a new Wikipedia entry for a
    person, location, or occurrence directly related to Black Studies or Black Studies at UT. You
    are encouraged to approach this project as you would a research paper. The content must be
    verified and sources identified. Page text should be 2 double spaced pages and images should
    be included where relevant. It is best to get started on this early in the semester
        a. Let us know your topic by September 21 by filling out the sheet that will be made
            available on canvas.
        b. A research plan for your page is due by 5pm on Friday October 5. Your plan should
            outline your topic, abstract or project description and a preliminary bibliography or list
            of sources.
        c. Your final entry is due by 5:00pm on Wednesday November 9. The entry should be
            uploaded to Canvas as an assignment AND posted to Wikipedia. Instructions for
            posting to Wikipedia can be found on Canvas.
7. Ethics Case Study Essay (15 pts.)
        a. You will write an essay in which you discuss the ethics presented in a Case Study
            provided for you and determine a position you support regarding the issues raised by
            the Case Study. You must explain clearly why you have chosen the position you have
            taken. In your discussion, you must cite at least two scholarly essays assigned as class
            reading, and you must reference the arguments made during the presentation of ethics
            in class. Your essay must be no less than two and no more than three typed, double
            spaced pages. The prompt will be posted on Canvas November 30, 2018. The essay is
            due posted on Canvas no later than 5:00 Monday December 10, 2018. Late essays
            will not be accepted unless previously authorized. A rubric for writing this essay will
            be provided on Canvas.
Grades:
The TA will work to return assignments within two weeks. After receiving each graded
assignment, wait at least 24 hours before bringing concerns to the TA. Any concerns about grades
must be brought to the TA’s attention no more than one week after the student receives the grade.
Gordon will not discuss questions on the grading of your assignment with you unless you have
had a previous discussion with the TA who graded your assignment.
Graded Assignments:
Essays                                                                  45 pts.
Research Project/Wikipedia Entry                                        15
Ethics Case Study Essay                                                 15
Quiz African American History, Black Studies and UT                     10
Attendance                                                               6
Vox Pops                                                                 5
Participation                                                            4
TOTAL                                                                   100 pts.
Points to letter grades for final grade:


A = 94-100 pts.          A- = 90-93 pts.        B+ = 87-89 pts
B = 84-86 pts.           B- = 80-83 pts.        C+ = 77-79 pts.
C = 74-76 pts.           C- = 70-73 pts.        D+ = 67-69 pts.
D = 64-66 pts.           D- = 60-63 pts.        F = 0-59 pts.
Academic Accommodations and Academic Integrity:
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 512-471-6259 or 512-410-6644(video phone).
Academic integrity is central to the mission of the university. Each student is expected to turn in
work completed independently, except when assignments specifically authorize collaborative
effort. It is not acceptable to use the words or ideas of another person without proper
acknowledgement of that source. This means that you must use footnotes and quotation marks to
indicate the source of any phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or ideas found in published volumes, on
the Internet, or created by another student. For more information about the university’s
expectations for academic integrity, see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Course Protocols:
•   Rules for respectful discussion will be followed. These rules will be established and agreed
    upon by everyone early in the semester. If a student violates these rules, that student will be
    counted as absent for the day.
•   Written assignments are due as indicated on the syllabus unless otherwise specified. Late
    assignments will not be accepted unless an acceptable excuse is provided before the due date.
•   The University of Texas rules and regulations regarding plagiarism and intellectual honesty
    will be enforced. For details please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
•   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
    Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
    512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Readings:
Readings for African American History portion of Quiz:
http://www.npr.org/news/specials/blackhistorymonth/timeline.html#pre1800
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African-American_history
http://www.blackpast.org/timelines/african-american-history-timeline-1900-2000
All other readings will be available on CANVAS.
Recorded Lectures:


All live lectures are recorded and made available in Canvas Modules 24 hours after the class.
Students can re-watch the lectures on-demand. To review a recording, locate the Archived
Lectures module in Modules on Canvas.
Sequence of Topics and Readings:
                         1: Black Studies: Race, Culture, Power, Blackness
Topic 1: Black Studies and Blacks at UT
August 29       Blacks in higher education and Black Studies
                Reading: Karenga (1982)
Sept 3          NO CLASS
                Assignment: Vox Pop videos due to canvas by noon.
Sept 5          Blacks and Black Studies at UT
                Reading: Marsh Duren (1979)
Topic II: Africa, the Black Diaspora and Blackness
Sept 10         Africa and its Invention
                Reading: Davis (1998)
Sept 12         Out of Africa – The Diaspora
                Reading: Lovejoy (2000)
        Assignment: Last to take the quiz – Sept 14
Sept 17         Africa and Black Diaspora Cultures
                Reading: Falola (2003)
Topic III: The Conceptual Toolkit – Race, Gender, Class, and Sexuality
Sept 19         What is Race?
                Reading: AAA statement on race
                http://www.americananthro.org/ConnectWithAAA/Content.aspx?ItemNumber=258
                3
                On genetic ancestry testing: Bolnick et al. 2007
        Assignment: Research topic due: Sept 21
Sept 24         Social Inequality based in race and class
                Readings: Macintosh (1989)
Sept 26         Social Inequality based in race and class
                Reading: Domhoff (2012)


       Assignment: Essay 1 due September 28
Oct 1         Black as Identity: Does African Descent = Blackness?
              Reading: Vargas (2004)
Oct 3         Who is Black and who is not?
              Reading: Windance Twine (1999)
       Assignment: Research Proposal due – October 5
Oct 8         Gender: Roles, Ideology and Power
              Reading: Lorber (1994)
Oct 10        Intersectionality
              Reading: Kimberle Crenshaw
Oct 15        Black Feminist Thought
              Hooks Feminism (2015) / Hill Collins
                            Section II: Black Cultures in the World
Topic IV: Culture and Power
Oct 17        What is Culture? Culture and Power = Hegemony. What is Cultural Politics?
              Reading: Ngugi (1993)
       Assignment: Essay 2 Due: October 19
Oct 22        Black Culture: Culture of Resistance
              Reading: hooks – Plantation Patriarchy (2004)
Oct 24        Black Culture: Culture of Resistance
              Reading: West (1998)
Oct 29        Black Cultural Deficiency = Cultural Racism
              Reading: Moynihan
              Viewing: Vanishing Black Family
Oct 31        Black Cultural Deficiency = Cultural Racism
Nov 5         Black Cultural Deficiency = Cultural Racism in the World
Nov 7         Patriarchy and Black Cultural Forms
              Gordon (1998)
       Assignment: Research Project Due – November 9
Nov 12        Global Patriarchy and Black Cultural Forms


Nov 14       Patriarchy and Black Cultural Forms
Nov 19       Patriarchy and Black Cultural Forms / Movement and Controversy
Nov 21       NO CLASS (Thanksgiving)
       Assignment Essay 3 Due November 21
Nov 26       Ethics
Nov 28       Ethics: Critical Black Studies and Affirmative Action
             Reading: Axelsen (1977)
Dec 3        Ethics: Blacks, Criminality, Justice, Ethics
             Reading: Weaver 2007
Dec 5        Conclusions
       Assignment: Ethics Essay Due Dec 10
