                     Integrated Communications Management
                                       Fall 2019
        ADV 370J (PR 367) | Fall 2016 I | BMC 3.206 | Unique 06110/06570
   The University of Texas at Austin Stan Richards School of Advertising & Public
                                       Relations
                             Professor: Dee Anne Heath
                 Office/Office Hours: BMC 4.206/By Appointment
               Phone: 512 565-6247 (Students may call/text anytime)
                    Email: deeanneheath@gmail.com (preferred)
NOTE: Read through this document carefully. This document serves as a contract
between you and me; it defines our mutual expectations and responsibilities as
student and instructor. While I will make every effort to adhere to the schedule
set forth below, I reserve the right to make any changes to this syllabus that is
deemed necessary.
Required Text:
1.     Integrated Brand Promotion Management: Text, Cases, and Exercises John
       H. Murphy, Isabella C.M. Cunningham, and Liza Stavchansky de Lewis.
       Kendall Hunt Publishing (Available at Co- op and online)
Additional readings may be distributed in class, via email, or posted to canvas on
an ad hoc basis.
Course Objectives and Materials
This writing-intensive course requires you to think critically and:
   1. Apply knowledge to assess problems, isolate key facts, and rank-order salient


      management issues.
  2.  Think in a quantified and structured manner, following a structured decision-
      making process.
  3.  Make decisions and create action plans appropriate to the situation under
      consideration.
  4.  Efficiently and persuasively write up your analysis and sell your
      recommendations.
  5.  Then, defend your case against feedback from your peers and others.
Students are expected to have successfully completed prerequisite courses and
have a solid foundation in marketing as well as the advertising and public
relations functional areas. Students are required to quickly identify and resolve
any conflicts, fundamental inconsistencies, or background voids that exist.
Because the course requires a common advertising and public relations
foundation, students are responsible for timely background leveling. Advertising
and PR management teams form the basis for a significant portion of the course.
The ability to work effectively and efficiently in a group is essential to successfully
completing this course
Prerequisite:
Advertising 344K and 345J with a grade of at least C in each; and Marketing 320F
or 337 with a grade of at least C.
Website:
Access to any power point lectures if desired will be available on canvas.
Canvas:
In this class, Canvas will be used as the main class website. Be sure you have a
valid email address connected with Canvas to ensure receipt of communication
concerning the course. It is your responsibility to check Canvas regularly.
http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Strategy:
    1. Use class discussions of the text, cases, and outside readings as a common
       framework for the study of advertising and public relations management.


   2. Use individual case analyses and individual assignments to demonstrate
       your writing skills and communication problem-solving abilities.
   3. Use management team case analyses and class presentations to
       approximate the work environment of a management position on the client
       or agency side.
Evaluation:
   1. Measure problem solving and writing skills with case brief assignments. The
       core of this course revolves around case brief analyses. A premium is
       placed on the development of quantitative dimensions in support of case
       solutions.
   2. Measure management team performance based on management team
       analyses and presentations.
   3. Measure group contributions with a structured peer evaluation system. You
       will assess the performance of your peers in measurable, precisely
       articulated terms, and begin your understanding of this difficult
       management task with this assignment.
Course Requirements and Assessment
Class Participation 10%
Individual case brief assignments (3) 25%
Written team case analysis &presentations (2) (50:50) 25%
Individual assignments (2: agency & ethics) 20%
Current ICM event participation (1) 15%
Account team peer evaluation (1) 5%
Total 100%
Thus, you will turn in: 3 individual written case analyses, contribute to 2 team
written case analyses, contribute to 2 team case presentations, an agency
assignment, an ethics assignment, a current marketing article and 5 discussion
questions, and a peer evaluation of your account team.


Class Participation 10%:
Because class participation is such an important component of your learning in
this class, attendance is MANDATORY. It is also important that you be prompt to
class. Being late to class disrupts the other students and interrupts the discussion.
Please make every effort to be in class and ready to participate when class starts.
Missing more than two classes will severely impact your course participation
grade. Also, your class participation grade will be based on the quality and
frequency of your engagement with in-class and online discussions, as well as
your peer evaluation participation and thoroughness. A professional demeanor
and regular attendance is a prerequisite for full course participation points.
Individual Case Brief Assignments (3) – 25%:
This grade is based on your format, statement of the problem, list of critical
factors, definition of alternatives, a pro/con discussion, and conclusion/additional
comments. These are INDIVIDUAL assignment.
Written Team Case Analysis and Presentations (2 of each) – 25%: You are on
agency account team (of approx. 5-6 team members depending on enrollment).
The grade is evenly weighted between the team written case analysis and team
presentation. Your team turns in one written case analysis. The written team
analysis grade is based on the same standard for your individual case briefs (your
format, statement of the problem, list of critical factors, definition of alternatives,
a pro/con discussion, and conclusion/additional comments). The presentation
grade is based on your: professionalism, introduction, teamwork, delivery, visual
aides, statement of the problem/critical factors, definition of alternatives, a
pro/con discussion, conclusions, and how you handle Q&A. You must have the
presentation pulled up before the start of class. Bring your presentation on a jump
drive.
Individual Assignment: Agency Assessment – 10%: Go through the websites of
the top grossing ad agencies in the U.S., choose what you think is: 1) the most
creative agency, 2) the most strategic agency, and 3) the agency you would most
like to work for and why. These should be three different choices. Support your
choices with evidence and examples in a one page single-spaced 12pt. Times New
Roman report. Prepare for discussion. This grade includes the justification of your
choices to the class for discussion. Not discussing such in class is a letter grade
deduction. Note- most agencies are both advertising and PR. If you prefer one that


is purely PR that is ok as long as it is a very-well known firm that is top- grossing
nationally or globally.
Individual Assignment: Ad/PR Ethics – 10%: Find the most unethical or personally
offensive ad or PR execution you can (any format-DVD, video, print, newspaper,
radio spot, photo of billboard or outdoor advertising). Bring this in class and be
prepared to present this ad or PR execution to the class and discuss. Type three
reasons why it is unethical in your assessment (yet not illegal). The ad or PR
execution is to be turned in with 2 typed pages of why it is unethical based on
these three reasons and include a suggestion for alternative creative
strategy/copy/tactics. Then, conclude the paper after thinking: Has an ad or PR
execution ever enticed you to do something termed hedonic you ordinarily would
not do (i.e., gamble, drink, smoke, etc.)? Has an ad or PR execution ever enticed
you to do something termed beneficial you ordinarily would not do (i.e., vote,
volunteer, etc.)? Which is easier to entice in us-the good or the bad? How do
advertisers use this knowledge in their copywriting/layout strategy? This two-
page short writing and thinking assignment is due in class on the assigned date at
the beginning of class and uploaded to canvas by the start of class.
To find the ad or PR execution, do not Google “unethical ad” or “unethical PR”
because the point is for you to think critically about something YOU believe isn’t
right. I have done this search and it brings up what others find unethical. I want
you to use critical thinking about advertising and PR in society first, and then
search with your appropriate terms. For instance, search terms could be: violence
in video game ads, ads exploiting vulnerable groups (poor, children, teens, elderly,
handicapped), sexual exploitation, alcohol/smoking/gambling etc. The grade is
based not on your opinion, but how you support your claim with evidence and
reasoning. The grade also makes sure you address each part of each question.
Critical thinking is what I am looking for. A good debate sparked is appreciated.
Not discussing your unethical ad in class is a letter grade deduction.
Again, the above 2 assignments and the current event assignment are INDIVIDUAL
assignments.
Current ICM Event & Participation (Individual Assignment) – 15%: We keep it
current in this class. Lively participation on current topics is key to the success of
this course. You are assigned one day to pick an article from Ad Age matching the


week’s topic and lead a lively discussion. On your day, introduce the topic and
summarize the article (do not read the article verbatim). Come up with 5
interesting open-ended discussion questions for the class. Type these and turn
them in on your assigned day. Your grade is based on both the day you lead, and
the constant participation of others’ events during the semester. Thus, be ready
to talk and share and express your views.
Account Team Peer Evaluation – 5%: Your peers on your team will grade your
performance; this includes your attendance and participation in group meetings
and effort and contributions towards your group papers and presentations. While
your presentation and paper grade are the same for all team members, your peer
evaluation grade may differ. We respect your right to privacy, so you may print
out the form, fill it out in private, and bring it to hand in on the day it is due in
class. We will have a sealed envelope and these forms are confidential.
Grade System:
Faculty members are free to develop their own methods of evaluating the
performance of students in their classes, but I am required to make the methods
of evaluation to be used known in writing before the end of the fourth class day
each semester and the second class day each summer term. Thus, the grading
information is specified in advance here and will not change.
Letter Grade                          Scale (100%- NO ROUNDING)
                GPA Grade
A                                     92.5-100
                4.00
A-              3.67                  89.5-92.49
B+              3.33                  86.5-89.49
B               3.00                  82.5-86.49
B-              2.67                  79.5-82.49


C+               2.33                76.5-79.49
C                2.00                72.5-76.49
                 1.67
C-                                   69.5-72.49
D+               1.33                66.5-69.49
D                1.00                62.5-66.49
D-               0.67                59.5-62.49
F                0.00                <59.49
Student Responsibilities
Class Attendance/Listening in Advance to Preceding Online Lectures:
It is each student’s responsibility to attend class. To reward attendance, course
exams will include material presented in class, raised during in-class discussion,
and/or examples shared by students or Dr. Close during class. If you skip class
there is no way to do the in-class assignments. Thus, attendance is important. Be
accountable. Show up having listened actively to any preceding online lecture.
Class Conduct:
Please respect your classmates, TA’s and instructor’s time. Be on time – arriving
late will cause disruption to everyone in the classroom. Also be prepared to take
notes during class. Laptops may be used for this class referencing and note-taking
purposes.
Lecture Notes and Announcements:
You are responsible for all lecture notes, notes on screenings and guest lectures,
and any administrative announcements provided in lecture and on Canvas as
official notices. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to get notes and find
out what you missed from another student.
Assignments:


All assignments are to be typed. If you need help with writing use the
undergraduate writing center. Enlisting aid from anyone outside the class is a
breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty (please see below). Management
team analyses, case briefs, assignments, and peer evaluations are due at the
beginning of class on the due date. This means a HARD copy must be turned in by
the beginning of class IN ADDITION to uploading them to canvas before class
begins; late assignments are scored 0. If you have a conflict with the deadline,
alert me and turn it in early on canvas (verify with a time stamp) and give to a
peer to hand in class on the assigned day.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall
excuse a student from attending classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be
penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or
complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform
the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements
can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
If you have a documented disability that requires academic accommodations,
please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259
(voice) or (512)-410-6644 (video phone) or contact:
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/ Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes,
but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and


submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed
to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both
the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. For more information visit:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore,
you are responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related
information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail
regularly and frequently to stay current with university-related communications,
some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions at: http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-
student-notification-policy
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),
the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal


COUNSELING & MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful
student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything
else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support: Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC): M-F 8-5p, SSB, 5th floor, 512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu OR CALL CMHC
Crisis Line:
24/7, 512.471.2255, cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
(M-F 8-5pm, BMC 3.390, 512-471-7642)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
