Professor Zhao                                 ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                             page 1
                                    ACC 380K.7 – Fall 2019
                                 Financial Statement Analysis
Professor                            Wuyang Zhao
E-Mail                               Wuyang.zhao@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office                               CBA 4M.256 (mailbox in CBA4M.202)
Office Hours                         Monday 9 – 11, or by appointment
Office Phone                         (512) 471-2163
Course Web Page                      via Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/)
Teaching Assistants                  Minjae Kim (minjae.kim@austin.utexas.edu)
                                     Jun Zeng (zengjunjx@hotmail.com)
Course Meeting Times and Location
 Unique #                    Days                     Time                      Location
 02695                       Tue, Thu                 08:00 – 09:15             GSB 3.130
Course Objectives
     ▪    To get familiar with information contained in corporate filings, particularly 10-Ks
     ▪    To understand the importance of incentives and disagreements in capital markets
     ▪    To learn a framework for equity valuation using financial statement information
     ▪    To practice communicating our decisions using written and oral communication skills
     ▪    To evaluate and learn from professional analysts and short-sellers’ successes and failures
     ▪    To learn how to analyze large-scale financial data and to identify irregularities
A concrete objective of this course is that you should be able to analyze stocks and publish your
analysis on semi-professional outlets such as SeekingAlpha (SA for short – I will refer to this
website numerous times).
Note the last objective: in Fall 2019, I am adding a data-analytics element to the course. Students
are expected to learn how to use academic databases, particularly WRDS, to access and analyze
large-scale financial datasets (username and password are available in class).
Although we will review some accounting concepts, the primary objective of the course is NOT
to improve your understanding of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Instead the


Professor Zhao                                    ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                             page 2
goal is to improve your ability to interpret and manipulate financial statements. Reading materials
might also include cases and discussions on capital markets outside the U.S.
Materials
   Required text:
     ▪    Course reader: supplemental reading packet available at McCombs Copy Service (Room
          3.136)
   Optional texts:
     ▪    Financial Statement Analysis & Valuation 5e, by Easton, McAnally, Sommers and Zhang
     ▪    Equity Valuation & Analysis 4e, by Lundholm and Sloan.
     ▪    Financial Reporting, Financial Statement Analysis, and Valuation - A Strategic
          Perspective 8/9e, by Wahlen, Baginski, and Bradshaw.
     ▪    Business Analysis and Valuation: Using Financial Statements 5e, by Palepu and Healy.
     ▪    Financial Statement Analysis and Security Valuation 5e, by Penman.
     ▪    Regular readings of Barron’s, The Wall Street Journal, Business Week, Fortune,
          SeekingAlpha, and various analyst reports and short-selling reports.
Course Structure
During the semester we will learn a framework (I call it “PH framework” as it is highlighted by
Palepu and Healy in their famous textbook listed above) and a set of in-depth tools for financial
statement analysis and valuation. The steps in the framework include: (1) business analysis, (2)
accounting analysis, (3) financial analysis, and (4) prospective analysis (i.e., valuation).
       1. Business (or Industry/Strategy) analysis (Session 4)
          • The purpose of business analysis is to assess the profit and growth potential of the firm
              at a qualitative level. This step involves industry and competitive strategy analysis.
       2. Accounting analysis (Sessions 5-12)
          • The purpose of accounting analysis is to develop an understanding of whether a firm’s
              accounting captures its true underlying economic condition. This step involves
              analyzing management incentives, identifying areas of accounting flexibility, and
              evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies and estimates.
       3. Financial analysis (Sessions 14-16)
          • The purpose of financial analysis is to assess the firm’s historical financial performance
              in the context of its stated goals and strategy. Tools used for financial analysis include
              ratio analysis, cash flow analysis, and common size financial statements.
       4. Prospective analysis (Sessions 17-22)
          • The purpose of prospective analysis is to forecast the firm’s future and estimate the
              intrinsic equity value. Tools used for prospective analysis include forecasts of financial
              statements and valuation models.


Professor Zhao                                           ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                                        page 3
The course will be taught using a combination of brief lectures, case discussion, research and
practitioner insights, and current-event analyses – there will also be a “real-time” aspect to the
class. We will also learn from the experts, mostly financial analysts and short-sellers, by studying
their successes and failures. In addition, I will introduce my own research occasionally when I see
fit.
Note we are very fortunate to be able to have a famous short-seller, Soren Aandahl, the founder of
Glaucus and Blue Orca Capital, coming to give a guest lecture in November. It would be a great
opportunity for us to learn how to identify corporate fraud from financial statements.1
I will highlight two conceptual ideas and reiterate them multiple times throughout the semester.
First, we need to keep reasonable/professional skepticism on views by all market participants,
because they all have their unique incentives that might prevent them from acting in an objective
way. Second, we need to appreciate disagreements in capital markets, because financial statement
analysis and valuation is a subjective process – without disagreements we would not have capital
markets. I find these two ideas particularly important for students who have too much deference
to business elites but too little tolerance to debates, different perspectives, and the lack of
correct/standard answers.
I have attached a tentative schedule of class meetings (Appendix A) and the framework (Appendix
B) to the end of this document. It is possible that we may have to periodically revise the schedule.
Should significant revisions be required, I will post a revised schedule on Canvas.
Course Requirements and Grading
Your grade in the course will be determined as follows:
           Components                            Weights                                      Notes
           Homework Assignments                       20%               1 point per assignment
           Group Project                              20%               15/5 points for final report/presentation
           Midterm 1                                  25%               Covering business/accounting analysis
           Midterm 2                                  25%               Covering financial/prospective analysis
           Class Participation                        10%
                                                    100%
The historical distribution of grades is roughly as follows: 35%-45% A’s, 50%-60% B’s, 0-5%
below B. Plus/Minus grading applies to this course.
Description of Course Requirements
Homework Assignments
We have 20 assignments – the primary purpose is to require you to review the reading materials
before attending class. For this purpose, each assignment should be submitted by 1 AM before the
according session starts (see the class schedule in Appendix A). For example, you should submit
1
  Although Soren has already confirmed to come in November, there is a small chance that he cannot not make it given
his tight schedule throughout the year. In that case, I will deliver a back-up lecture on research insights – how academic
research tells us about the decision making of sophisticated players in capital markets.


Professor Zhao                                 ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                             page 4
Assignment 1 (HW1 hereafter) by 1 AM on September 3, as we will discuss materials related to
HW1 in class on that day.
You will submit all assignments via the course Canvas site. I will define a few hours after the
deadline but before the class starts as the “grace period” – Assignments will be labeled as
“Late” if they are received during the “grace period.” Assignment will NOT be accepted
after the class starts as it will lose its purpose. I recommend that you try to submit before the
deadline – you will get my attention if you constantly submit assignments in the “grace period.”
There are no exceptions to this policy, including sleeping late, computer problems, etc. I
realize this is tough, but a deadline is a deadline. In fairness to the many students who submit
their work on time, I will not grant extensions. In general, neither excused nor unexcused absences
will change assignment deadlines.
The assignments will be graded based on an effort basis. You will receive 0 if you did not hand in
the assignment, 0.5 of the points if your effort appears to be unreasonably low and 1 point if you
made a reasonable attempt to answer all of the questions.
Unless explicitly discouraged, you can work in groups on all assignments, but each person should
turn in his or her own solution. Failure to turn in your own work could result in a zero score
for that assignment.
Group Project
In this course, as in life, working effectively in a team is important. This is reflected by the fact
that a large portion (20%) of your final grade will be based on a semester-long group project, which
includes a written report and a presentation. In the second week of class, you will self-select into
groups (max 3 members/group for MPAs). As a group, you will choose one stock from a list
of retail stocks with market cap smaller than 10 billion – I will provide this list. I pick those
relatively small firms for two main reasons: (1) those firms are less scrutinized by the market –
there is a better chance that you will find something abnormal (unjustified accounting policy, etc.);
and (2) your work would be of higher value to capital markets – higher chance of getting it
published on SeekingAlpha.
As in PH framework, a complete firm analysis has four parts: (1) a business (or industry/strategy)
analysis, which includes an analysis of the primary industry or industries in which the firm
operates, and an analysis of the firm’s competitive and corporate strategies; (2) an accounting
analysis, which includes an analysis of the firm’s accounting flexibilities, management incentives
to potentially misreport, featured accounting practices, and procedures and any adjustments
necessary to bring reported numbers closer to economic reality; (3) a financial analysis, which
includes profitability and credit risk analyses; and (4) a prospective analysis, which includes
forecasts of future performance and valuation. The final written report will cover all four parts,
and will require you to make an investment recommendation (buy, hold, or sell/short) based
on your analysis. You will also present your analyses in class toward the end of the semester.
Due dates and times are listed on the course schedule. I will post detailed requirements for the final
report to Canvas in late September.
Grades for the final project and presentations will be numerical scores (with full marks of 15 and
5 points, respectively). Each member of the group will receive the same score.


Professor Zhao                                        ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                                        page 5
To make sure all group projects are on the right track, each group should have a brief group
meeting with me before the first mid-term (see Appendix A). ALL group members are
required to attend. We can have such meetings in the classroom (e.g., right before or after the
lecture) or preferably in my office (e.g., during office hour or by appointment). I will ask questions
to make sure that (1) all members are engaged in the group project, and (2) as a team you have
seriously started working on the group project. The meeting would also provide a good opportunity
for us to discuss any difficulties you have in working on the project.
I strongly encourage all groups to submit their reports to SeekingAlpha. This is very beneficial for
several reasons. First, you will find that the investing community cares about your work – people
read your report and provide comments. Second, you can improve your analysis and/or your
delivery by addressing other people’s comments. To provide some additional incentives, I will
give three bonus points to every member of group projects that are published on SeekingAlpha by
the second-to-last class (December 5, 2019).
Mid-terms
There will be two computer-based midterms scheduled on October 10, 2019 and November 21,
2019 from 6:30-9:30 pm. MPAs will be in GSB 3.130.2 Midterm I covers business analysis and
accounting analysis, while Midterm II covers financial analysis and prospective analysis. You will
find out that the best way to prepare for the exams is to put your effort into assignments, lectures,
and group projects. I will post sample exams two weeks before each midterm.
MPAs will be using your own laptop in GSB 3.130. The use of internet is strictly forbidden except
(1) in the first five minutes when you download the exam from Canvas and (2) in the last five
minutes when you upload your report to Canvas.
Grading Disputes
My TAs and I will do our best to grade your work fairly, but grading errors can occur. If you
believe we have made an error, you may request a re-grading of the assignment, project, or
midterm. Be aware, however, that grading errors can occur in both directions—errors can make
grades too high as well as too low. Therefore, if you request a re-grading, your entire work (either
an assignment or group project or mid-term) will be re-graded, and all grading errors will be
corrected. By requesting a re-grade, you accept the possibility that your grade may go either up or
down.
To request a re-grade, you must submit a written request to me within 48 hours from the time
when the assignment, project, or midterm was first returned. The request must state (1) the
specific area of dispute, (2) your recommendation for change in grade, and (3) an explanation or
justification for your recommendation.
Class Contribution
2
  The time and location of the midterms are still subject to change. I will let you know as soon as there is any update.


Professor Zhao                                  ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                              page 6
To help me more effectively evaluate your participation, I’ll make a tremendous effort to learn
everyone’s name so that I can easily identify contributions. You should also display your name
cards in class.
I will ask for self-reporting of class contribution toward the end of the semester. So for your own
record, please also keep a brief note of every important contribution you make in this class.
Class contribution is evaluated based on five categories: A (Outstanding Contributor: 9-10 points),
B (Good Contributor: 7-8 points), C (Marginal Contributor: 5-6 points), D (Non-participant: 3-4
points), and F (Disruptive Contributor: 0-2 points). The details of the policy can be found in
Appendix C (Class Contribution Assessment). Note one necessary but insufficient condition of
being Outstanding or Good contributor is that you attend the group meetings with me discussing
the group project prior to the first midterm.
I view class participation as both an opportunity and a responsibility. Class participation provides
an opportunity for students to practice important career skills in a low cost environment. Among
other skills, these include the ability to express and defend one’s ideas. (Remember, we may
challenge ideas, but we will not challenge people. Rude classroom behavior will result in a
reduction in class participation points.) The cost of not developing these skills will increase as your
career progresses (e.g., lost promotions). Class participation is also a responsibility because
students who attend a top business school expect to learn from the viewpoints of their classmates.
Non-participating students do not provide their classmates with this important benefit. I therefore
reserve the right to “cold call” students who are not participating in class discussions. My intent is
not to embarrass you; rather it is to help you get involved in the discussion where your classmates
can benefit from your ideas.
McCombs Classroom Professionalism Policy
The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the McCombs community. The
collective class reputation and the value of the McCombs experience hinges on the execution of
this policy. Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and
every class session. Students are expected to be professional in all respects. The McCombs
classroom experience is enhanced when:
•    Students arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and finish at the
     scheduled time. On time arrival shows respect for both fellow students and faculty and it
     enhances learning by reducing avoidable distractions.
•    Students display their name cards. This permits fellow students and faculty to learn names,
     enhancing opportunities for community building and evaluation of in-class contributions.
•    Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment improves when
     disruptions are limited.
•    Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning at McCombs takes place
     during classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they cannot contribute to the
     overall learning process. This affects not only the individual, but their peers who count on
     them, as well.
•    Students attend the class section to which they are registered. Learning is enhanced when
     class sizes are optimized. Limits are set to ensure a quality experience. When section hopping


Professor Zhao                                 ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                              page 7
     takes place some classes become too large and it becomes difficult to contribute. When they
     are too small, the breadth of experience and opinion suffers.
•    Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and debate are
     encouraged. Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.
•    Laptops are closed and put away. When students are surfing the web, responding to e-mail,
     instant messaging each other, and otherwise not devoting their full attention to the topic at
     hand they are doing themselves and their peers a disservice. Those students around the
     offending students face additional distraction because fellow students cannot benefit from the
     insights of the students who are not engaged. In addition, faculty office hours are spent going
     over class material with students who chose not to pay attention, rather than adding value by
     helping students who want a better understanding of the material or want to explore the issues
     in more depth. There are often cases where learning is enhanced by the use of laptops in class.
     Faculty will let you know when it is appropriate to use them. In such cases, professional
     behavior is exhibited when misuse does not take place.
•    Phones and wireless devices are turned off. We’ve all heard the annoying ringing of a phone
     in the middle of a meeting. Not only is it not professional, it cuts off the flow of discussion
     when the search for the offender begins. When a true need to communicate with someone
     outside of class exists (e.g., for some medical need) please inform the professor prior to class.
Academic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Because dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/) or the General Information Catalog Sec. 11-402
(http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-
conduct/) to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty. If the
application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is
your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Students with Disabilities
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) is housed in
the Office of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth floor of the Student Services Building.
Information on how to register and registration documentation (e.g., downloadable forms,
including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request letters, and releases of
information are available online at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/). Please do not hesitate to
contact SSD via phone (512) 471-6259, videophone (512) 410-6644, or e-mail
ssd@austin.utexas.edu, if you have any questions.


Professor Zhao                                 ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                            page 8
Class Web Sites and Student Privacy
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at The University.
Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available
within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions
and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a component of the sites.
Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their
directory information by notifying the Office of the Registrar in the Main Building, Room 1. For
information on restricting directory information see: https://registrar.utexas.edu/students/
records/restrictmyinfo/rmifaqs
Accommodations for Religious Holidays
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this
course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this
class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all
students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.
Quantitative Reasoning Flag
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed
to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments
you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world
problems.


                     Professor Zhao                                ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                     page 9
                                                 Appendix A: Tentative Schedule of Classes
Session Date   Day 2019 Topics                            Readings in course pack (CP):         Assignments      Group Project
1       29-Aug Thu Introduction
2       3-Sep  Tue Accounting and valuation basic         Amazon analyst report                 HW1
3       5-Sep  Thu Information source and data analytics  WRDS manuals (not in CP)              HW2              Member list & stock due
4       10-Sep Tue Business analysis                      Amazon MD&A; China Lumena report      HW3
5       12-Sep Thu Bias and flexibility in Accounting     Conceptual framework (not in CP)      HW4
6       17-Sep Tue Incentives in capital markets          Earnings quality & Gatekeepers paper  HW5
7       19-Sep Thu Conservative bias in GAAP              Amazon R&D                            HW6
8       24-Sep Tue Aggressive bias in GAAP                Goodwill paper                        HW7
9       26-Sep Thu Management discretion_ I/S items       Amazon I/S; PDD report (not in CP)    HW8
10      1-Oct  Tue Management discretion_ B/S items       Amazon B/S; Quintis report            HW9
11      3-Oct  Thu Management discretion_ off B/S items   Amazon leases                         HW10
12      8-Oct  Tue The role of non-GAAP                   Amazon MD&A                           HW11
13      10-Oct Thu Mid-Term I                                                                                    Group meeting deadline
14      15-Oct Tue Profitability and turnover             Amazon analyst report                 HW12
15      17-Oct Thu Credit analysis                        Amazon credit analysis                HW13
16      22-Oct Tue Cash flow analysis                     Amazon cash flow                      HW14
17      24-Oct Thu Forecasting I                          Amazon analyst report                 HW15
18      29-Oct Tue Forecasting II                         Amazon Q3’19 earnings (not in CP)     HW16
19      31-Oct Thu Cost of Capital                        Equity risk premium paper (not in CP) HW17
20      5-Nov  Tue Cash Flow Based Valuation              Four reports on Cisco                 HW18
21      7-Nov  Thu Income Based Valuation                 DCF vs. AEM debate paper (not in CP)  HW19
22      12-Nov Tue Multiples and complications            FCF in DCF paper (not in CP)          HW20
23      14-Nov Thu Guest speaker (renowned short-seller)  Guest speaker materials
24      19-Nov Tue Course Review & Wrap-up
25      21-Nov Thu Mid-term II
26      26-Nov Tue Group presentation                                                                            Final report due
        28-Nov Thu Thanksgiving
27      3-Dec  Tue Group presentation
28      5-Dec  Thu Group presentation
29      10-Dec Tue Group presentation                                                                            SeekingAlpha notice due


Professor Zhao                   ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019    page 10
Appendix B: Financial Statement Analysis Course Overview
The PH Framework


Professor Zhao                                  ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                             page 11
             Appendix C: Midterm/Final Participation & Professionalism Evaluation
In recognition of the high value I place on professionalism, my assessment of your participation
and professionalism will make up approximately 10% of your course grade.
Here’s how I plan to grade your class participation over the course of the semester:
•     Outstanding Contributor (A±: 9-10 points): Contributions to large-group discussions reflect
      thorough preparation. Ideas offered are usually substantive, provide good insights and
      sometimes change the direction of the class for the better. Arguments, when presented, are
      generally well substantiated and often persuasive. If this person were not a member of the
      class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished significantly. In addition
      to exceptional large-group discussion contributions, also actively participates in small-group
      discussions.
•     Good Contributor (B±: 7-8 points): Contributions to large-group discussions reflect
      satisfactory preparation. Ideas offered are usually substantive, generally provide useful
      insights, and occasionally offer a new direction for the discussion. Arguments, if presented,
      are reasonably well substantiated. If this person were not a member of the class, the quality of
      the large-group discussions would be diminished. In addition, also offers comments in small-
      group discussions.
•     Marginal Contributor (C±: 5-6 points): Contributions to large-group discussions reflect some
      minimal preparation. Ideas offered are occasionally substantive but seldom provide clear
      insights or new directions for the discussion. Arguments may be occasionally presented but
      are generally not well substantiated. If this person were not a member of the class, the quality
      of the large-group discussions would be diminished only slightly. This grade is warranted for
      those who participate only in small-group activities with no large-group contributions.
•     Non-participant (D: 3-4 points): This person has maintained attendance to some extent but has
      said little or nothing in class; hence there is no adequate basis for evaluation. If this person
      were not a member of the class, the quality of the discussions would be unchanged.
•     Disruptive Contributor (F: 0-2 points): If present in class at all, contributions to discussions
      reflect inadequate preparation. Ideas offered are rarely substantive, provide few, if any,
      insights and never offer a constructive direction. At best, contributions are obscure, confused,
      and indicate a lack of familiarity with the fact of the issues under discussion. At worst,
      comments demonstrate disrespect for others. If this person were not a member of class,
      valuable airtime would be saved.


Professor Zhao                                ACC 380K.7 Fall 2019                           page 12
Name _________________________________
YOUR assessment of your participation and professionalism in class since mid-term.
[Please circle one of the letter grades below. If you believe you deserve a “+” or a “–“ please add
it to the corresponding letter grade]
A                B              C              D                 F
Please provide evidence to support your above assessment.
  Session          Attend(Y/N) Contribution
  1
  2
  3
  4
  5
  6
  7
  8
  9
  10
  11
  12
  13(Midterm I)
  14
  15
  16
  17
  18
  19
  20
  21
  22
  23(Guest talk)
  24
  25(Midterm II)
  26(presentation)
  27(presentation)
  28(presentation)
  29(presentation)
