                                               TD314P/AET 319
                                           Production Laboratory
                              Experience producing a show as a member of the crew!
                                                        Spring 2020
                                  Unique #: 25700, 20705, 25710, 25715, 20755
Instructors:    David Tolin                                         Nanette Acosta
                [he/him/his]                                        [she/her/hers]
                Office: PAC 2.216A                                  Office: WIN 2.308
                Email: david.tolin@austin.utexas.edu                Email: nanette.acosta@austin.utexas.edu
                Office hours: By appointment                        Office hours: By appointment
                       David is the Associate Technical                     Nanette is the Costume Production
                       Director. When not mentoring stage                   Director. When not mentoring stage
                       crews, he is in the scenic studio                    crews, she is in the costume shop
                       supervising the construction of                      supervising the construction of
                       scenery.                                             costumes.
Course Description:
        This unique course will give you the experience of collaborating as a member of the production team to
        create a live event or show. You will learn the process of producing, rehearsing, and performing as a
        member of the technical production crew. You will be assigned to a position of wardrobe technician,
        console operator, or stage technician.
        We will hold a required informational meeting in the Oscar Brockett Theater in The Winship Building
        on Thursday 1/23 from 5:30pm-7:30pm. At the meeting, we will discuss expectations and how you
        can get the most out of this course. After the first meeting, we will not meet as a group again until your
        assigned production work begins. Some assigned positions may require you to schedule an
        appointment for additional training prior to the dates below.
Important Dates:
        January 23rd 5:30-7:30pm                     Class Meeting                             Brockett Theater
        *February 17th – March 8th                   Marcus or the Secret of Sweet (25705)Brockett Theater
        *February 19th – March 13th                  UTNT (25710)                              Lab Theater, 2.180, 1.134
        *March 30th – April 26th                     DRT: (R)evolution (25700)                 Brockett Theater
        *March 30th – April 19th                     Sense and Sensibility (25715)             Payne Theater
*Crew calls are typically 5:30pm-10:30pm Monday-Friday and 10am-10pm on Saturday and Sunday. You will
receive a more specific schedule prior to the production starting.
Required Supplies:
        You must wear closed-toe shoes that also cover the top of your foot and your heel everyday that you
        are called. This is for your safety. For rehearsals, you should wear comfortable clothes that you can
        move in, climb ladders, and get dirty. During Dress Rehearsals and Performances, you will be required
        to wear black pants, a long-sleeved black shirt, and dark-colored shoes. It is recommended that
        you bring a pencil to take notes and a small flashlight. Cell phones are not acceptable flashlights
        backstage.


Grading:
        Due to the nature of this course, every student will be assigned unique tasks and responsibilities. The
        majority of your grade will be earned through the documentation of these responsibilities with a daily
        call log entry assignment in Canvas. Additionally, you will be graded in four areas: Time Management,
        Technical Skills, Interpersonal Communication, and a written Process Reflection Paper. The first three
        areas will be evaluated based on self-assessment, instructor observations, and peer-assessment during
        your production assignment. The written reflection paper will be due by the end of the semester.
        Students who volunteer for additional production duties will be exempt from the written paper -- email
        your instructors if you are interested. You will be graded on the following areas:
Daily Call Log Entries (80%):
        At the end of each work call you will be required to write a brief log entry through Canvas. You will
        have 48 hours from the end of the call time to submit your assignment. Entries will not be accepted for
        unexcused absences. Entries turned in late will not receive full credit. Incomplete entries will not
        receive full credit. Each entry must meet the following expectations to receive full credit.
                 I have submitted the actual time I was signed in and present and the actual time I signed out. If I
                 am sick, I will still submit a log and note my absence.
        and      I briefly describe what I did during the call.
        and      I describe at least one observation about the process. It can be about my responsibilities or
                 something that I observed about others.
Time Management (5%):
        Being present is vital to your success in this course and the success of the productions. You must meet
        the following expectations to receive full credit.
                 I have confirmed that I am available for all of my scheduled rehearsals, performances, and other
                 time commitments for my assigned production.
        and      I arrive and sign in on the callboard prior to my scheduled call time.
        and      Once I have signed in, I am ready to begin my work and check in with my supervisor.
        and      I take breaks when notified and return from breaks on time ready to follow instructions.
        and      I stay until my supervisor dismisses me and I have signed out on the callboard.


Technical Skill (5%):
       The success of a production depends on everyone involved to reliably execute their tasks. You must
       meet the following expectations to receive full credit.
                I have learned the specific tasks from my assigned position and improved my performance over the
                course of the production.
       and      I have taken ownership of my responsibilities by keeping notes or using some other strategy to
                recall and effectively carry out those responsibilities during the run of the production. I have
                demonstrated consistent focus at my position.
       and      I have demonstrated a commitment to safety for the cast, crew, audience, and myself during my
                assigned production.
Interpersonal Communication (5%):
       Productions require that many people work together to achieve success. You must meet the following
       expectations to receive full credit.
                I demonstrate respect for all individuals involved in the production process.
       and      I communicate clearly and effectively with my cast, crew, and production team during my assigned
                production before, during, and after crew call times. I listen to instructions carefully and do my
                best to follow through with reasonable requests.
       and      I work as a member of a team to problem-solve as issues or challenges develop during the
                production.
       and      I am present and focused on the process. I know when it is appropriate to be social and when it is
                not.
Process Reflection Paper (5%):
       At the end of the production you will receive a list of reflection prompts. The paper will be in essay
       form. You must meet the following expectations to receive full credit.
                After thinking about the process; I have answered at least 5 prompt questions that were provided.
       and      I have supported each prompt answer with at least one specific example from my experience.
       and      My writing is mostly free of grammatical and spelling errors and is written with complete
                sentences.


Grading Scale for this course is below:
                          A 93-100                             C 73-76
                          A- 90-92                             C- 70-72
                          B+ 87-89                             D+ 67-69
                          B 83-86                              D 63-66
                          B- 80-82                             D- 60-62
                          C+ 77-79                             F 0-59
Production Attendance Policy:
             •   It is the policy of the Department of Theatre and Dance that our majors attend department
                 season productions and that this attendance is a part of the coursework for our majors' classes.
                 For the fall semester, you are required to attend the following performances: Marcus; or the
                 Secret of Sweet Feb. 26-Mar. 8 at the Oscar G. Brockett Theatre; Sense and Sensibility, April 8-19
                 at the B. Iden Payne Theatre; and (R)evolution, April 15-26 at the Oscar G. Brockett Theatre
                 Information on how majors may obtain discounted admission is available on the Department of
                 Theatre and Dance wiki under the "Student Resources" tab
                 (https://wikis.utexas.edu/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=51841138).
        Note that while all Theatre and Dance majors are required to see departmental productions, only
        Theatre and Dance majors' courses are required to utilize this as part of the coursework.
Additional Course Policies
Cell Phone Usage:
Cell phones are required to be silenced or turned off during rehearsals and performances. Please refrain from
texting during that time. At breaks you may check you phone. If extreme circumstances require your attention
to a phone call, please let your supervisor know.
Food and Drinks:
        During rehearsals, no food or drink (except sealed water bottles) shall be consumed in the theater,
        backstage, or the dressing rooms. A “green room” will be provided to give you a place to eat, drink, or
        have snacks during a break. Please help keep Winship clean by cleaning up after yourself.
University of Texas Honor Code:
        The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
        individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
        values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students:
        All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
        the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
        Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
        University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
        recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of


       this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
       http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Please refer to the Handbook of Academic Production Policies and Procedures for additional policies.
Documented Disability Statement:
       Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
       Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
       phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter
       from SSD.
       § Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
            instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
            conversion, etc.).
       § Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field
            trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given
            day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
       § Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
            phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
            http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
       If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
       Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
       through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
       Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
       Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy:
       The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
       (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
       “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
       undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer
       student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause
       for dropping more than that number.”
Religious Holidays:
       By UT Austin policy, you must notify instructors of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
       the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
       assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
       complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Changes:
       This syllabus is subject to change upon the discretion of the instructors.
