VISUAL ARTS OF THE CARIBBEAN
Eddie Chambers, Spring 2020.
Visual Arts of the Caribbean (class ARH 345M, LAS 327, AFR 374F)
 Unique number: 19965
M-W-F
12:00 to 1:00
2.204
Office hours, Wednesday, 1:00 – 3:00 pm
ART 3.324
eddiechambers@austin.utexas.edu
512 471 7554 office number
Consistently framed, in some quarters, as little more than a holiday destination, the Caribbean is
in actuality one of the world’s most fascinating and complex regions. The countries of the
Caribbean, at once united and divided by the great expanse of the Caribbean Sea, are home to a
wide range of religions, cultures, nationalities, ‘races’, and peoples. Whilst Spanish-speaking
Cuba and French-speaking Haiti are in some ways the artistic giants of the region, equal stature
can be attached to the biggest English-speaking island of the Caribbean, Jamaica. Together with
its neighbors such as Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, and Guyana, the English-speaking
Caribbean has produced much of the most dynamic art to come out of the region during the
course of the 20th century. This class will look at the work of a fascinating group of modern and
contemporary Caribbean artists. The history of the region is a compelling and fascinating one,
embracing as it does a variety of factors including the trans-Atlantic slave trade, 20th century
patterns of migration and travel, and ‘New World’ sensibilities. This class will examine the work
of a range of Caribbean artists whose practice came to the fore over the course of the
20th century, from the 1920s right up to the present time. Artists to be studied include
practitioners such as Edna Manley, Barrington Watson, Albert Chong, and artists with
substantial links to the Caribbean such as Jean-Michel Basquiat. In addition, the class will
critically explore the visual culture of the region, through the mediums of film, documentaries,
record sleeves, and tourist imagery. Visual Arts of the English-speaking Caribbean will be


invaluable to those students looking to broaden their understanding and familiarity with
Caribbean artists, those living within the region and those who have moved away and are now
practicing in countries such as the United Kingdom and the United States.
This class carries a Global Cultures flag
THIS IS A DRAFT SYLLABUS.
(Week of) Wednesday January 22
Introduction: What’s Caribbean, Who’s Caribbean.
Text: Veerle Poupeye, “Introduction”, Caribbean Art, Thames and Hudson World of Art,
London, 1998, pp. 9 – 24
(Week of) Monday January 27
Slavery, Racial Identity and visual art in the Caribbean and its Diaspora
Text: James Walvin, “The African Diaspora”, Chapter 4 of Slavery and the Slave Trade: A Short
Illustrated History, University Press of Mississippi, Jackson, 1983, pp.40-63
(Week of) Monday February 3
Edna Manley and the Creation of ‘Jamaican Art’
Text: David Boxer, “Edna Manley – sculptor”, Jamaica Journal 18/1 nd pp. 25-40
(Week of) Monday February 10 (no class on Wednesday and Friday of this week)
Ronald Moody: a Jamaican Abroad
Text: Guy Brett, “A Reputation restored: The Rediscovery of sculptor Ronald Moody”, Tate
Magazine, March-April 2003: 78-80


(Week of) Monday February 17
Aubrey Williams, World Painter
Text: Guy Brett “Introduction”, catalog essay in Aubrey Williams, exhibition at Shibuya Tokyu
Plaza, Japan, 1988, unpaginated
(Week of) Monday February 24
Tam Joseph, Urban Griot
Text: “Nancy Hynes in conversation with Tam Joseph”, in catalog for exhibition This is History,
Gallery II, University of Bradford, 1998, unpaginated.
(Week of) Monday March 2
Intuitive art, Folk art, Outsider art: a problem with labels
Text: David Boxer, “Introducing Fifteen Intuitives”. The transcript of a lecture delivered at the
National Gallery [of Jamaica] on July 10th, 1987, pp. 2-12 of the exhibition catalog Fifteen
Intuitives, National Gallery of Jamaica, July 12 – October 31, 1987
(Week of) Monday March 9
Eugene Palmer: From Jamaica to London
Text: Richard Hylton, catalog essay for Index, Wolsey Art Gallery, Ipswich, 2004, unpaginated.
SPRING BREAK – March 16 - 21
(Week of) Monday March 23
Denzil Forrester: From Grenada to London, then on to Cornwall
Text: John Lyons, “Denzil Forrester’s Art in Context”, catalog essay for Dub Transition, Harris
Museum and Art Gallery, Preston, 1990, pp.16 - 21


(Week of) Monday March 30
Albert Chong: from Jamaica to Colorado
Text: Jeff Hoone, catalog introduction to Across the Void, Menschell Photography Gallery,
Syracuse University, 2000, pp. 4 – 5
(Week of) Monday April 6
Barrington Watson: Jamaica’s Popular Artist
Text: Petrine Archer–Straw “The Dynamic Sixties”, in Jamaican Art: An Overview, Kingston
Publishers, 1990, pp.57 – 61.
(Week of) Monday April 13 (No class on Friday April 17)
12-inch square messages: the art of the reggae record
Text: tbc
(Week of) Monday April 20
What Place for Jean-Michel Basquiat? Voodoo’s Gleeful, Ambassador
Text: Leonard Emmerling, “Basquiat and The 1980s Art Scene”, in Basquiat, Taschen, 2003, pp.
7–9
(Week of) Monday April 27
Not Quite Sun, Sea and Sand: Films, Life and Debt and Jamaica for Sale
Text: tbc
(Week of) Monday May 4


The Caribbean Exhibited: A History
Texts: New World Imagery: Jamaican Art (1995) and Infinite Island: Contemporary Caribbean
Art (2007) catalog essays
Friday May 8 - test
Tuesday May 12 - Submission of 3500-word paper
Particulars
Students are required to produce response papers, relating to the previous week’s classes. The
first response paper and précis are due FRIDAY FEBRUARY 7. The reaction papers should be a
word length of about 500 words. Similarly, students are required to produce a 400-word précis,
(a summary) of one of the previous week’s assigned readings. Précis and Response papers will
comprise 30% of the final grade. A 3500-word research paper, relating to some aspect of the
class, must be submitted no later than 10.00am on Tuesday May 12, 2019 at 10:00AM.
Extra Credit opportunities will be posted on Canvas, as and when they arise.
Course textbook: Veerle Poupeye, Caribbean Art, Thames and Hudson World of Art, London,
1998
Accommodation.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. Students with disabilities may request appropriate
academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-2557, http://diversity.utexas.edu/ (Links to an
external site.) For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students, http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
Academic Integrity


University Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: “Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students,
and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Please see UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics) and an explanation or example of what
constitutes plagiarism (Link to University Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-
10/ch01/index.html). For further information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
Class Attendance
Students are required to attend all classes. Please inform instructor ahead of time if you will miss
any class. Full attendance is 20 points. For every unexcused absence from class, a student will
drop 5 points. University policy on holy days states, “A student who misses classes or other
required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be
made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.” Unless absences
have been notified in advance, students failing to sign the class attendance sheet will be
considered absent. Class attendance and participation will count towards final grade.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Assignments and Grading
Attendance 20 points
Class participation 10 points
Response papers 30 points
Research Paper 30 points
Test    10 points
Total…………………………………..100 points


A……………………………………….90-100 points
B……………………………………… 80-89 points.
C…………………………………….... 70-79 points.
D…………………………………… …60-69 points.
E……………………………………….50-59 points.
F………………………………………. Below 50 points.
There are no exams relating to this class, there is a mandatory test on the last day of class.
Any student not present will forfeit the 10 points allocated for the test
Class readings will be made available on Canvas. Likewise, class announcements will be posted
on Canvas
No laptop use in class
No cell phone use/texting in class
No note-taking on cell phones
