GOV 350K – Statistical Analysis in Political Science
Unique # 80673
Summer 2020
Professor:             Stephen Jessee
                       Email: sjessee@utexas.edu
                       Office hours: W 12:00-2:00, F 12:30-1:30pm
Teaching Assistants:
   All office hours will be held over Zoom. See links in “Calendar” tab in Canvas.
Today, data are available on almost any topic. In a now-classic quote, E.O.
Wilson said “We are drowning in information, while starving for wisdom. The
world henceforth will be run by synthesizers, people able to put together the
right information at the right time, think critically about it, and make important
choices wisely.”
This course will teach students the skills needed to unlock valuable and
important knowledge from data. The class will be taught online, but extensive in-
person help will be available to students through online office hours and optional
help sessions which will be conducted via video conference.
Students will learn how to obtain data, how to manipulate it into a useful format,
how to analyze it to produce insights, and how to present these findings
effectively. These skills will be useful in future coursework as well as in a wide
range of professional contexts. In other words, the skills you will learn in this
class are highly valuable!
This course will teach students how to examine data to uncover patterns, how to
estimate simple statistical models to understand relationships between variables,
how to build predictive models, and how to learn about cause and effect. There
are no mathematical prerequisites for the course and we will not use much
beyond basic arithmetic. The main requirement is a willingness to think carefully.
For data analysis, we will use the R statistical programming environment. R is
open source and freely available. It is commonly used in academia, business,
and other contexts, and includes tools for simple analyses as well as more
advanced methods. Many employers view basic statistical knowledge and the
ability to use R as great assets when making hiring decisions.


Although this is not a math class per se, it will be somewhat mathematical. There
are no prerequisites beyond basic middle and high school math, but students will
have to use mathematical reasoning to understand the course’s concepts.
Students should not worry that they are not a “math person.” If you know +, -, ×,
and ÷, you just need to be willing to learn the rest.
Textbook
The main text for the class is:
     • OpenIntro Statistics (4th Edition), by David Diez, Mine Cetinkaya-Rundel
        and Christopher Barr.
This book is available as a free pdf here: https://www.openintro.org/book/os/
If you’d like a hard copy, you can order one through Amazon for around $20 (see
the same link above). To download the book for free, you will have to “Add Ebook
to Cart” and “Check Out” but you can choose how much you pay (i.e. you can
pay nothing if you want). There is a standard pdf version and a “Tablet-Friendly
PDF”, which is basically a pdf with very small margins that looks better on a
tablet (and maybe on a computer too depending on your preferences).
Students sometimes find it helpful to have multiple sources for material. Below, I
list several optional texts. Students should feel free to consult these for slightly
different perspectives on the ideas we cover. I will also assign other readings,
which will be posted on Canvas. Any assigned readings will be announced to
students in advance.
Optional texts for students who want multiple references:
     •  The Cartoon Guide to Statistics, by Larry Gonick and Woollcott Smith
            o This is a somewhat silly perspective on the basic concepts in
                probability and statistics. As the name suggests, it’s full of cartoons.
                But the explanations of many of the ideas are actually very clear
                and useful. I have heard that pdfs of this book can be found online.
                Any version should be fine – don’t need to worry if it’s the latest
                one.
     •  Data Science: A Gentle Introduction, by James Scott.
            o Nicely written and thoughtful overview of basic probability and
                statistics, written by a UT professor. Available as free pdf here:
                https://jgscott.github.io/STA371H_Spring2018/files/DataScience.pdf


    •    Using R for Introductory Statistics, by John Verzani
            o Available as free pdf here: https://cran.r-
                project.org/doc/contrib/Verzani-SimpleR.pdf A good combination of
                basic intro R and intro statistics. Note: this book uses “=” as the
                assignment operator instead of “<-“ that we will use in the class so
                you’ll have to adjust when looking at the code.
    •    An Introduction to R.
            o Basic but fairly comprehensive introduction to R. Avaiable as free
                pdf here: https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-intro.pdf
                It’s pretty dry (reads more like an instruction manual than a
                textbook), but that makes it good for reference.
    •    A Modern Dive into R and the tidyverse, by Albert Kim and Kelly
         McConville.
            o (Referred to simply as “Modern Dive”). Good introduction to R and
                RStudio, but relies heavily on some fancier R packages that we
                won’t cover directly (the so-called “tidyverse”) so much of the R
                code will look different from what we use.
    •    R for Data Science, by Hadley Wickham and Garrett Grolemund.
            o Free online (see https://r4ds.had.co.nz) book that provides a great
                introduction to modern R for statistics. We may assign some parts
                of this book on general R and best practices. But it relies heavily on
                some fancier R packages that we won’t cover directly (the so-called
                “tidyverse”) so much of the R code will look different from what we
                use.
Other than these books, you will often find answers by searching online (Google
an error message you received or search for “histograms in R”). Or you can
search for your question on http://stackoverflow.com where it’s likely someone
has already asked something similar. Obviously, the professors and TAs are
here to help as well. I would suggest that you try to figure out things on your own
at first. Searching for solutions to error messages isn’t the most exciting thing to
do, but it’s a skill that will serve you well later on, so while you should always feel
free to ask us any questions you have, there’s a benefit to attempting to figure
these things on your own for a bit. When you’re really stuck, though, let us know.


Class Structure
This course will consist of weekly “modules” of material, which will include
recorded video lecture segments, software walkthroughs and reading
assignments. Each module will be posted on a Friday and quizzes (to be taken
after doing reading and watching lecture segments) for a given module must be
taken by the following Wednesday at 11pm. Each module will also have a
problem set, which will be due Thursday at 11pm and a computing assignment (a
“lab”) which will be due Friday by 11pm.
Quizzes
Students will complete online quizzes after doing readings and viewing pre-
recorded lecture videos. These quizzes will give students an opportunity to
assess their understanding of the material.
Quizzes must be taken by 11pm Wednesday. After this time, the quizzes will be
closed and students will receive a grade of zero for any quizzes they did not
complete.
Students may use notes or other materials during the quizzes but should work
alone. Students must work by themselves on the quizzes – collaboration is
not allowed on quizzes.
Problem Sets
Problem sets will be posted at the start of each section of material and will be
due each Thursday by 11pm, turned in through Canvas. Students can work
together in small groups on problem sets, but I trust that you all know the
difference between helping each other something figure out and copying. Sharing
answers online or in large groups or shared documents is not allowed.
Computing Assignments (AKA “Labs”)
We will be using the R statistical package, which can be downloaded for free at
http://www.r-project.org. It is recommended that you run R through a program
called RStudio, which is also free to download. We will provide instructions for
installing and using both of these programs.
Each week we will have a computing assignment, which we will call “labs”, which
will be due Friday by 11pm, turned in through Canvas.
Students should write their responses in R Markdown (through RStudio) and will
turn in “knitted” HTML files with their lab writeups. We will provide instructions for
students on using R Markdown, but you can also find a simple introduction here:
https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/lesson-1.html (we will only use the most basic
functionality of R Markdown in this course)
Students can work together in small groups on lab assignments, but I trust that
you all know the difference between helping each other something figure out and
copying. All keystrokes must be your own, not copied and pasted from another
student’s assignment. Sharing answers online or in large groups or shared
documents is not allowed.


Semester Project
Each student will work on a semester long project in which they pose their own
research question, then gather and analyze data in order to learn about the
answer. The paper will have several intermediate assignments that are designed
to help students.
Dates for project assignments (all to be submitted through Canvas):
         Choose a Research Question         (due by Tu 6/16 at 11pm)
         Gather Data                        (due by Tu 6/30 at 11pm)
         Final Paper                        (due by Tu 7/13 at 11pm)
The semester project grade will be a combination of the three above project
assignments, weighted 10%, 20% and 70%, respectively.
Late Assignments
Late computing assignments and problem sets will be penalized by 10 points for
each day late (so 10 points off if it’s 1 minute late, 20 points off if it’s 24 hours
and one minute late, etc.).
Grading
Course grades will be based on the following percentages:
                      Quizzes:                      20%
                      Computing Activities:         25%
                      Problem Sets:                 25%
                      Project:                      30%
The following grade cutoffs will be used to calculate final course grades:
         93-100              A                      77-79                   C+
         90-92               A-                     73-76                   C
         87-89               B+                     70-72                   C-
         83-86               B                      60-69                   D
         80-82               B-                     Below 60                F
I will round up (92.5 = A, but 92.49 = A-).


Academic Honesty and Integrity
Issues of academic dishonesty will be taken very seriously and any finding of
cheating or other unethical behavior will be pursued to the full extent possible
under university policy. Students should consult the University of Texas Honor
Code.
There will be no deadline extensions without prior written consent from the
professor. These special accommodations will be granted only for valid medical
or other serious reasons, defined at the professor’s discretion. Students who
miss exams and provide an excuse afterwards will not be granted a makeup and
may be given zero percent on the exam in question.
***I understand that these are unique times. If you have a potential issue, let me
or a TA know as soon as you can. We will work with you. But it’s much more
likely we’ll be able to find an option that’s satisfactory for everyone if we know
earlier, rather than if we hear after you’ve already missed a deadline or fallen
way behind in the class. In other words: we’re here to help, but you’ll have to
let us know if you need help.
Special Needs
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
with Disabilities, 471-6259, https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
All students needing special accommodations should email the professor as
soon as possible at the start of the semester so that we can work out
accommodations to help you succeed.


Technical Support
If you experience a technical problem that is not related to course content, but
instead is specific to your computer or Canvas itself, click on the "Online Course
Tech Support" item in the left-side navigation bar. The Online Course Tech
Support chatbot, called "LAITS Bot", will assist with technical problems and can
escalate your question to a human if it cannot readily answer your question.
Technical Requirements for Online Instruction
All students are required to have access to a laptop or desktop computer,
running either Windows or macOS operating systems. (Tablets, smartphones,
and Microsoft Surface devices are not supported.) Your computer should meet
the following requirements:
    •   Modern and up-to-date operating system (macOS or Windows)
    •   Browser: Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox (If using Safari
        or Firefox, be prepared to download Chrome and use it.)
    •   5 Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
    •   Functional webcam and microphone
    •   Zoom installed and configured
Confirm that your computer is able to stream video by
visiting https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.php
