 ARCHAEOLOGY AND ETHNOHISTORY OF CONTACT PERIOD LATIN AMERICA
                                            ANT 380K/LAS 391
                                                  31830/39980
                                                    Fall 2018
                                Meeting: SAC 4.120, Thursdays, 2-5:00 pm
Instructor: Professor R. Alan Covey
          Office: RLP 4.406; E-mail: r.alan.covey@austin.utexas.edu; Phone: (512) 232-2084
          Office Hours: T 8:30-10 am, and by appointment. Please schedule by email.
Table of Contents
  I. Rationale………………………..1               VI. Course Requirements………..3         IX. Other University Notices and
  II. Course Aims and Objectives…..1         • Attendance and participation Policies…………………….……..4
       • Aims                                • Religious Holy Days               • Use of e-mail
       • Specific Learning Objectives        • Readings/Materials                • Documented Disability
  III. Format and Procedures………..2           • Assignments/Assessments              Statement
  IV. Tentative Course Schedule........2     • Use of Canvas                    • Behavior Concerns Advice
  V. My Assumptions…………….....2           VII. Grading Procedures……….....3           Line (BCAL)
                                         VIII. Academic Integrity…….…....4       • Q-drop Policy
                                              • UT Honor Code
I. Rationale: Spanish exploration and colonization in the Americas took place on diverse
landscapes and unfolded over several centuries. This class will use key case studies of interest to
students to track the arc of Spanish expansion, emphasizing the diverse indigenous societies that
it affected. After considering medieval Iberian motivations for conquest and growth, we will
move through a series of regional cases, reading on the archaeology of indigenous societies in
the late precontact period, as well as primary sources from the time of first contact. This
approach will emphasize long-term developments in Spanish expansion strategies, as well as the
responses of local societies.
II. Course Aims and Objectives:
Aims: I will work with students to develop reading lists that offer both structure and flexibility
as we discuss broad themes of Spanish-indigenous contact in Latin America. Two core aims are
to consider how Spanish motivations for, and representations of, peripheral incursions changed
over time, as well as to evaluate how the material remains of indigenous populations compare
with documentary descriptions of these groups in Spanish eyewitness documents.
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
          •   demonstrate a familiarity with multiple regional cases of Spanish-indigenous contact
              in Latin America by reading extensively, posting critical responses to class topics,
              and actively discussing course topics during seminar meetings
          •   show a strong comprehension of a specific case of culture contact by designing a
              reading list and leading discussion for one or two class meetings
                                                         1


         •   possess a stronger critical sense of the archaeological and historical records of the
             contact era, based on broad readings and seminar discussions
III. Format and Procedures: This is a seminar course, and its success depends on the active
participation of each student. Individual preparation is fundamental to the success of the course,
so each student is responsible for selecting her readings in advance of a class meeting (usually by
the Friday before a class), and for posting an annotated bibliography and discussion questions by
Wednesday evening. Students should review the postings of classmates prior to the class
meeting, so that class time will be driven by discussion of core issues. I will generate reading
lists for the first weeks of the semester, moving through case studies in chronological order. For
cases of personal interest to a student’s research, that student will take responsibility for
compiling a reading list and key questions for the week, and will facilitate discussion during that
class. I encourage students to consult with me at least two weeks prior to the class meeting to
discuss the proposed reading list and topics. See below for a description of these graded
components.
IV. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.  
Week 1 (August 30): Course introduction, discussion of medieval Iberian expansion
Week 2 (September 6): Iberian Colonization in the North Atlantic
Week 3 (September 13): Archaeology of Pre-Contact Caribbean
Week 4 (September 20): Voyages of Columbus
Week 5 (September 27): Archaeology of the Intermediate Zone
Week 6 (October 4): Panamanian and Central American Expeditions
Week 7 (October 11): Archaeology of Late Postclassic Mesoamerica
Week 8 (October: 18): Cortés and Alvarado in Mexico and Guatemala
Week 9 (October 25): Archaeology of the Late Horizon Andes
Week 10 (November 1): The Pizarro Expedition and Its Aftermath
Week 11 (November 8): Archaeology of the Southern Cone
Week 12 (November 15): Expeditions to Chile and Paraguay
Week 13 (November 29): Archaeology of the US Southwest and California
Week 14 (December 6): From Coronado to the Missions
FINAL EXAM: There is no final exam for this course
V. My Assumptions
         I approach a graduate seminar with the assumption that students are passionately driven
to become working professionals, but not necessarily anthropological archaeologists focused on
a single region or period. I also assume that students divide their time between their other
coursework, teaching appointments, and research. I assume that students want to maximize
learning, to use the seminar as much as possible to accentuate individual areas of interest, and to
spend time in class in engaging discussions of topics of relevance to their own work.
                                                        2


VI. Course Requirements:
      1.   Class attendance and participation policy: Attendance and active participation are
            fundamental to the success of this seminar, and attendance at all class meetings is
            required unless prior arrangements have been made with me. Everyone is expected to
            arrive punctually, prepared for a professional discussion of class topics. Because the
            course is discussion-based, there is no reason for laptops, tablets, or phones to be used
            during the class, unless arrangements have been made with me.
                Religious Holy Days
                By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
                the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
                assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
                complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
      2.   Course Readings/Materials: Students will read from a long list of recommended
            readings, posted on Canvas. Most sources are electronic journal articles that are
            available free of charge through the UT libraries. Some sources are books that are
            available through Google Books, and some sources, if selected, will require a student
            to access material at the library or via interlibrary loan.
      3.   Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation: Beginning in Week 2, each student will
            be evaluated weekly on three aspects of class performance: an annotated
            bibliography, discussion questions, and attendance/participation in class. The
            annotated bibliography should concisely summarize the weekly reading completed
            by the student, intended to provide a very rough overview of the source for seminar
            participants who have not read it. The discussion questions will be a list of any
            questions or themes that the student would like to bring up in class, and these can be
            added at the end of the annotated bibliography. Both of these products are to be
            posted on Canvas by 5 pm on the Monday prior to a class meeting. NB: Work that is
            posted after the 5 pm deadline on Monday and before the start of class on Tuesday (2
            pm) will receive a 10% deduction. Late work will not be accepted after the start of
            class, unless prior arrangements have been made.
         4. Use of Canvas in class: This class uses Canvas for a number of Web-based course
              management functions. Canvas can be accessed at http://canvas.utexas.edu/. The
              university provides support and tutorials for interested students—it is your
              responsibility to learn and access the site in order to prepare for classes, labs, and
              exams. For this course, Canvas will be used primarily as a place to post the course
              syllabus, reading lists, and student article summaries and critical responses.
VII. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
                (a) Attendance/Participation (25%). Punctual attendance and active
      participation are necessary to attain a high score. Students needing to miss class for
      appropriate reasons should arrange in advance with the professor so that the absence can
      be approved.
                (b) Annotated Bibliography/Discussion Questions (50%). Starting Week 2,
      each student will post these on Canvas by 5 pm on Monday.
                                                         3


                    (c) Organization of Class Meeting (25%). Each student will work to develop a
          class topic and reading list for one of our seminar meetings. Students will be evaluated
          based on the clarity of the topic, appropriateness of the reading list, and quality of
          discussion questions used to structure the class meeting.
I will provide feedback for students whose performance is not satisfactory at regular intervals,
but am willing to score and comment on student work as requested.
Grade Scale:                                 B-: 80.00-82.99                           D: 63.00-66.99
A: 93.0+                                     C+: 77.00-79.99                           D-: 60.00-62.99
A-: 90.00-92.99                              C: 73.00-76.99                            F: Below 60.00
B+: 87.00-89.99                              C-: 70.00-72.99                           Note: Grades will not be
B: 83.00-86.99                               D+: 67.00-69.99                           rounded
VIII. Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.  
Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student's own work.
Collaboration is an important part of this course, and it is important to state precisely when collaboration
is acceptable.
Reading Summaries: Each reading summary is to be prepared individually by each student on the basis
of their own reading of a selected source. The summary should be a page-by-page overview of the
source, and it should provide substantially more information than an abstract would.
Critical Responses: Critical responses are to be written by each student on the basis of their own reading
for a given class. Students are expected to prepare and post their critical responses prior to consulting
those of other students.
Class Meeting Development: Students will collaborate actively with another student to fill each student-
directed class meeting, and may consult with other students and the professor while engaged in this work.
IX. Other University Notices and Policies
Excused Absences for University Extracurricular Activities
Students participating in an officially sanctioned, scheduled University extracurricular activity should be given the
opportunity to make up class assignments or other graded assignments missed as a result of their participation. It is
the responsibility of the student to make arrangements with the instructor prior to any missed scheduled examination
lab for making up the work.
 Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
     •   All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
          student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students
          are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
          communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
          mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions
          for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
                                                             4


Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
  
       §   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
            instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
            etc.).
       §   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
            required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
            transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
       §   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
            reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
            http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
   If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
   discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
   among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
   Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
   http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231:
            “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
     undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
     dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than
     that number.”  
Emergency Evacuation Policy
   Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm
   is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
            §   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
                 exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
            §   If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
            §   In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.  
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.  
                                                       v v v v
_____________________________________________________________________________
                                                               5
