David (D.S.) Cohen          ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu          Office: DFA 4.112 Wednesday         Fall 2018
                                                                           10-12p
AET 339 NARRATIVE DESIGN
Course Sections
 Instructor                          UID                   Meeting Times                Room
 David (D.S.) Cohen                  20993                 T/R 3:30 - 5P                ECJ 1.304
Abstract
        An cross-disciplinary design course where students explore establishing, communicating,
        and assimilating a cohesive and immersive narrative into all aspects of digital games
        experiences. Students will focus on both design theory and practice as they develop
        methods for seamless narrative integration into the game design, systems, mechanics,
        environments, characters, mood, and aesthetics.
Objective
        Learn the process of integrating narrative into all elements of a digital game.
Assessment
        This course is project and journal based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on successful
        completion of project, and journal objectives. Assignments are worth 60%, the final project is
        worth 30%, and the remaining 10% of the final grade is based on professionalism which is earned
        by attending class during the scheduled meeting times and conducting oneself in a professional
        manner.
        No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
        complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before the
        deadline for doing so passes.
        Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send an
        email and attach any class work as needed.
        Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
        fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
        will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
        grade of A+.
        Letter grade equivalents:
          A = 94-100                         C+ = 77-79                          D+ = 67-69
          A- = 90-93                         C = 74-76                           D = 64-66
          B+ = 87-89                         C- = 70-73                          D- = 60-63
          B = 84-86                                                              F = 0-60
          B- = 80-83
                                                                                                            1


        File Format:
        Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, concept art, etc. File Format: PDF;
        Game Builds – File Format: Executable file (.exe)
        File Naming Convention: ​If submitting as an individual…
        Firstname_Lastname_AssignmentName_Numeric DateSubmitted
        Example: davidc_conceptpitch_07042018
        If submitting as a team…​TeamName_AssignmentName_DateSubmitted
        Example: davidc_conceptpitch_07042018
        IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it may not
        read correctly.
Classroom Policy
        Devices
             ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
                 this with me prior to class).
             ● Cell phones can be used to audio record lectures, and take photos of work written on the
                 board of lecture slides, but should not be used for note taking or research.
             ● Larger devices can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media
                 (unless related to class activities)
        Food/Drink
             ●   Food is not allowed in class.
             ●   Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
                 when not in use.
Required Equipment
        All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running the Unity game
        engine, Maya, audio recording and editing, and video editing software of your choice. Either Mac
        or PC is fine.
Calendar
Note – This is outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
 1              8/30                                                                Journal 1
                Course Intro
                Role of the a Narrative Designer
                Journal - ​Select a game and break down the narrative components.
                Show all of the ways the narrative is communicated, not just the
                primary story (A-Story) but the story of each character, the world,
                situation, etc.
 2              9/4
                Narrative Theory in games - Narratology Vs. Ludology
                9/6                                                                 Journal 2
                                                                                                         2


  Direct, Implied, and Projected Narrative
  Do players have an impact on narrative?
  Journal - ​Projected Narrative: Write a narrative for a 1980 arcade
  game that does not contain a direct narrative. Include the visuals,
  environment, and mechanics as part of this narrative.
3 9/11                                                                 Journal 3
  Gameplay/Mechanics or Story - When Narrative Begins?                 Project 1
  Journal - ​Select a game and write a breakdown of how the
  mechanics were used to help communicate the story.
  Project 1 - ​Write game concept focusing on mechanics and player
  interactions. Do not include the story.
  -
  9/13
  LAB
4 9/18                                                                 Journal 4
  Storytelling in games. Word Narrative, Player Narrative.             Project 2
  How the story works within the mechanics.
  Journal - ​Examine a game that contains both a world narrative and
  a separate player narrative. Identify their differences and how they
  come together.
  Project 2 - ​Write a story pitch that works within your previously
  approved game mechanics
  -
  9/20
  LAB
5 9/25                                                                 Journal 5
  Developing an emotional connection for players                       Project 3
  Developing Characters
  Journal - ​Examine two characters (player character and NPC) in a
  game and how they create an emotional connection for the player.
  Identify how this is achieved through story and gameplay.
  Project 3: ​Character Q&A, Character sheets, and character
  moodboard
  -
  9/27
  LAB
6 10/2                                                                 Project 4
  Creating emotional tone with sound
  Project 4​ - Develop a tone video with sound and visuals
  -
  10/4
  LAB
7 10/9                                                                 Project 5
  The Hero's Journey - Creating it for your character and players
  Project 5​ - Outline your narrative to develop a character arc.
  Show how this arc connects to the phases of the The Hero’s
  Journey
  -
                                                                                 3


   10/11
   LAB
8  10/16                                                                  Journal 6
   The multi-act structure in games                                       Project 6 - Part 1
   Rising and falling action with narrative (peaks and valleys)
   Episodic Games and Worlds Without Ends.
   Journal - ​Examine the level to act structure of an existing narrative
   focused game. Identify how the overarching narrative was split into
   levels, and the story of the individual levels.
   Project 6 - Part 1 -​ Break your narrative into five level summaries,
   give each level an act structure that also connects to the
   overarching story.
   -
   10/18
   LAB
9  10/23                                                                  Project 6 - Part 2
   Marrying narrative experience with the level / player flow.
   Multiple choices, branching paths.
   Evolution of player choice
   Do players control the narrative?
   Project 6 - Part 2: ​Develop your five levels into flow charts that
   exhibit branching events, player choice, and gameplay experience
   working with the narrative.
   -
   10/25
   LAB
10 10/30                                                                  Journal 7
   Game Dialogue                                                          Project 7
   Game Barks
   Journal -​ Analyze the dialogue from a single level of an existing
   game. Is it text or VO? How is the dialogue used to communicate
   information to the player. What kind of information does it convey?
   Project 7​ - Write dialogue for the five levels of your game in
   required spreadsheet format. Identify if it is on-screen text or voice
   over. Dialogue must move the story forward.
   - ​Write series of barks for player characters and NPCs that are
   functional, while adding to the narrative.
   -
   11/1
   LAB
11 11/6                                                                   Journal 8
   Maps and Storyboards                                                   Project 8 - Part 1
   Journal - ​Review three environments from a current game. Explain
   how they communicate narrative with just the environmental
   elements
   Project 8 Part 1: ​Create maps for the first three gameplay
   environments in your game (total 3 maps). Identify key gameplay
                                                                                             4


   and narrative elements within the map, and player movement to
   communicate what they will experience and when.
   Identify and create a scale which will be used in building the
   environment.
   -
   11/8
   LAB
12 11/13
   Environmental Storytelling
   Project 8 Part 2: ​Create Moodboards for the environment within
   each of your five maps.
   -
   11/15
   World Building
   Project 8 Part 3: ​Build an environment in Unity that communicates a
   narrative.
   Follow scale outlined in your map (Single Unit is 1 meter in Unity)
13 11/20
   LAB
   -
   11/21
   Thanksgiving (No Class)
14 11/27
   In Class - Teams of two: Exchange environments and write the story
   your team member's environment is telling you.
   Compare what you found with what they intended.
   Project 8 - Part 4:​ Submit your environment with the write up it is
   intended to communicate, along with the write up from your
   teammate
   11/29                                                                Project 9
   Narrative through sound design
   Project 9​ - Develop a tone video with sound and visuals for your
   environments.
   https://freesound.org/
15 12/3                                                                 Project 10 - Final
   Final Requirements
   Project 10 Final Project
        ● Narrative Bible
        ● Tone Video (Character and Environments)
        ● In-Game Environments
   -
   12/5
   LAB
   12/10 (Last day of class)
   Narrative Careers in Games
   Final Due
                                                                                           5


6

Units of Study
   1. Narrative Approaches to Games
          ○ Explore game design and storytelling opportunities through all elements of a game.
   2. Elements of Narrative Design
          ○ Terminology and concepts useful for narrative design.
          ○ Define Narrative development construction through design, visuals, audio, and player
              experience
   3. Narrative Designer Role
          ○ Displaying narrative in environment, sound, and emotion through the building of a game
              environment and the creation of a tone video.
          ○ Articulate how the narrative will be constructed for a game through the building a series
              of design documentations, culminating into a Narrative Bible
Process
      Students will work individually in the role of Narrative designer for a game. They will research
      narrative design in existing games, pitch a game concept and narrative, then integrate the
      narrative into all elements of their game.
      Narrative Design Journal
              Throughout the course students will document research, analysis, writing and design
              exercises that they must document in an online journal.
      Projects 1 : Game Concept Pitch (Mechanics Only)
               Ludology argues that player experience is the the central focus of all games. Write a
              game concept focusing on mechanics and player interactions. Do not include the story.
      Project 2: Story Pitch
              Develop a narrative for a game that work with the game mechanics pitched in Project 1.
      Project 3: Characters
              Answer a series of questions about your characters. The answer to these questions will
              help flesh them out as characters that can be identified with.
              Develop character sheets for your player character and the key NPCs (minimum of three)
      Project 4: Hero's Journey
              Outline your narrative to develop a character arc. Show how this arc connects to the
              phases of the The Hero’s Journey
      Project 5: Level Narrative Outlines
              Break story into five level summaries, give each level an act structure that also connects
              to the overarching story.
      Project 6: Narrative and Player Flow
                                                                                                         7


                  Develop your five levels into flow charts that show branching events, player choice and
                 gameplay experience working with the narrative.
         Project 7: Dialogue
                 Write dialogue and barks for the five levels of your game in required spreadsheet format.
                 Identify if it is on-screen text or voice over. Think about how the dialogue can compliment
                 the gameplay and environments. Main dialogue must move the story forward, while Barks
                 should be functional, while adding to the narrative.
         Project 8: Environments
                 Create a map of one environment per level (total 5 environments) then build the level out
                 within Unity (okay to use Unity Store Assets). Finalize Maps upon completion of your
                 level.s
                 Split into teams of two. Exchange your environment projects and write the story your team
                 member's environment is telling you.
         Project 9:
                 Develop a tone video with sound and visuals. Include the environment you've created.
         Project 10:
                 Final Narrative Bible
                     ● Narrative Bibles are used for all development team members to understand how
                          the narrative will be integrated into every element of the game.
                     ● Updating, refining, and combining your previous document based projects will
                          culminate into a full Narrative Bible.
                     ● Final Tone Tone Video of your game.
                     ● Submit In-Game Environments Unity Project
Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns professionalism credit.
Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to attend class meetings. If attending a
scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are expected to promptly notify the instructor of
extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher
education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including
any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
                                                                                                           8


University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
academic honesty University of Texas Honor Code The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. • If you require
assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. • In the event of an
evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re
given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
Services office.
                                                                                                           9
