African American Literature Through the Harlem Renaissance
FALL 2018
Professor Matt Richardson
E376R/AFR 372E
Office Hours and Location: Tues 2-3:00 GWB 3.200M
email: through canvas
________________________________________________________________
Course Description:
The eighteenth century saw the inauguration of writing from enslaved Africans in America.
Even from a condition of bondage, their work contributes to literary and intellectual debates
about the nature and limitations of freedom, personhood and citizenship. We will begin by
examining issues of capture, fugitivity and legal condition in relation to gender and sexuality
from the perspectives of slaves and freed people. We will also examine works by African
American authors writing a generation after slavery as they look back to slavery in order to
imagine the future of African Americans. This course is a survey of major black writers in the
context of slavery and its immediate aftermath. Throughout the course, we will read literature,
supreme court decisions, literary and legal theory, and view films and documentaries that
illuminate the period of the eighteenth century through the early twentieth century in African
American culture and history.
Course Requirements:
Office Hours: Students are encouraged to come to office hours at least once during the
semester to discuss your progress in the class and any additional questions you may have. You
are encouraged to take further advantage of office hours and I am also available by
appointment.
Attendance and Participation: Students are expected to attend class every session. Participation
in all aspects of the class is MANDATORY including short in-class writing assignments that will
happen throughout the semester. All readings and assignments should be completed before
class meetings and students are responsible for adding to class discussions of material. Please
note that attendance and participation is worth 15% of your total grade. Late arrivals are
disruptive to class and I will not repeat concepts and assignments given during class. If you
miss a class or are late, you are still responsible for any announcements, assignments, lecture
material and/or deadlines that are made. Your grade will be affected if you have more than 1
unexcused absence during the semester.
Short Writing Assignments/blog posts: There are 5 writing assignments and a final paper in the
form of blog posts to earlyblackliterature.wordpress.com. Short essays are designed to help
students analyze the historical and theoretical importance of the primary course material.
Collectively the short essays are worth 20% of your final grade and are counted in addition to
class participation, so take them seriously.


Midterm and Final: The midterm and final papers are designed to assess students’ accumulated
knowledge. The final will be a take home exam. Papers must be TYPED, double-spaced, with
times new roman (or equivalent) 12 point font and 1inch margins.
Canvas: I will be in contact with you about updates in assignments through Canvas It is the
students’ responsibility to make sure that Canvas has your updated email address.
http://canvas.utexas.edu/
NO LATE PAPERS. NO LAPTOPS. NO CELL PHONES
Code of Mutual Respect: In general, this is not a lecture class, but one grounded in dialogue.
Feel free to be candid and direct in this class. Your opinions and insights are important, and
your voice needs to be heard, so look forward to the opportunity to chime in. I will respect you
as adults and assume that you will treat others in the class with respect as well. Because we will
be sharing many personal ideas which may conflict with your own personal ideas and beliefs, it
is important that you strive to be considerate, sensitive, and respectful. Be prepared to offer
constructive criticism as well as receive it. We will discuss work that includes lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender themes in this course. Students are expected to approach all class
material with maturity and academic rigor.
Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are not
your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action which will also be reflected in their grade.
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who
requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities
area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, please come talk to me.
Books are available at the University CO-OP and the Course Reader is available at Jenn’s Copy
on Guadalupe St. (512) 473-8669. Please note that there are some required readings that are
not in the course reader or the main texts. They will be available online or as handouts in class.
Grading Policy
Midterm Paper (6 pages)         30%
Short Writing/Blog Posts        20%
Final Paper (10 pages)          35%
Attendance & Participation      15%
Required Texts


Classic Slave Narratives, includes Olaudah Equiano, The Interesting Narrative and Other
Writings; Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life; Harriet Jacobs, Incidents in the Life of a
Slave Girl and Mary Prince, Narrative of the Life of Mary Prince
Three Classic African American Novels, includes William Wells Brown, Clotel: Or the
President’s Daughter; Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, Iola Leroy; Charles Chesnutt, Marrow of
Tradition
Nella Larsen, Passing
Alain Locke, New Negro
Course reader is available at Jenn’s Copy on Guadalupe.
 Week One
            30-Aug INTRODUCTION
 Week Two
                     Phillis Wheatley, Memoir and Poems of Phillis Wheatley. 3rd Edition ed. Miami,
             4-Sep Fl: Mnemosyne Publishers, 1969.
                     Wheatley & “‘I Was Born’: Slave Narratives, Their Status as Autobiography and
                     as Literature,” James Olney, in The Slave’s Narrative, Charles T. Davis and Henry
             6-Sep Louis Gates, ed., NY: Oxford University Press, 1985.
 Week Three
            11-Sep Start Olaudah Equiano:The Interesting Narrative and Other Writings, (1788)
 September 13        Olaudah Equiano, blog post due Sunday at 6pm
 Week Four
                     Equiano and Selections by Immanuel Kant, from Race and the Enlightenment,
                     A Reader. Emmanuel Chukwudi Eze, ed Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell
            18-Sep Publishers,1997.
                     Start Frederick Douglass: Narrative of the Life & Thomas Jefferson “The
                     Difference is Fixed in Nature” from Race and the Enlightenment, A Reader.
                     Emmanuel Chukwudi Eze, ed Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishers,
                     1997Selections by Immanuel Kant, from Race and the Enlightenment, A
                     Reader. Emmanuel Chukwudi Eze, ed Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell
            20-Sep Publishers, 1997.
 Week Five
            25-Sep   Frederick Douglass: Narrative of the Life
                     Frederick Douglass and Dred Scott Case and David Walker: Appeal to the
            27-Sep Coloured Citizens of the World (1829).


Week Six
                 FILM Sarah Baartman & “Writing Sex, Writing Difference." Black Venus:
                 Sexualized Savages, Primal Fears and Primitive Narratives in French. Durham,
                 NC: Duke University Press, 1999. FIRST“Account of the Dissection of a
           2-Oct Bushwoman,” from The Journal of Anatomy and Physiology (1867).
           4-Oct Film discussion Midterm PAPER DUE
Week Seven
           9-Oct Harriet Jacobs, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl (1861).
          11-Oct Jacobs, Saidiya Hartman, Scenes of Seduction; blog post due Sunday at 6pm
Week Eight
          16-Oct Henry Bibb, Narrative of Henry Bibb
          18-Oct Clotel: The President’s Daughter (1853).
Week Nine
          23-Oct Clotel & Cheryl Harris, "Whiteness as Property." Critical Race Theory
                 Clotel & Start Frances Ellen Watkins Harper, Iola Leroy (1892). Blog post due
          25-Oct Sunday 6pm
Week Ten
          30-Oct Finish Iola Leroy.
           1-Nov Film: Birth of a Nation
Week Eleven
                 W.E.B. DuBois “Of Our Spiritual Strivings” and “The Dawn of Freedom” from
                 The Souls of Black Folk, NY: Bedford Books, 1997 (originally published in 1903)
           6-Nov & Start Charles Chesnutt: Marrow of Tradition (1901)
           8-Nov Marrow of Tradition blog post due Sunday at 6
Week Twelve
         13-Nov Marrow of Tradition
                 Alain Locke “The New Negro” and "The Negro Youth Speaks," from The New
                 Negro: Voices of The Harlem Renaissance,” NY: Simon and Schuster, 1997 (first
                 published 1925). Selected Poems from The New Negro.Last Day of Class. Blog
         15-Nov Post due Sunday 6pm
Week Thirteen
         20-Nov Thanksgiving
         22-Nov Thanksgiving


  Week Fourteen
                             Spunk,” “Compromise,” "Carma," from The New Negro: Voices of The Harlem
                 27-Nov Renaissance,” NY: Simon and Schuster, 1997 (first published 1925).
                 29-Nov New Negro: Selected Poems, Course Packet: Smoke, Lillies and Jade
  Week Fifteen
                   4-Dec Nella Larsen Passing
                   6-Dec Nella Larsen Passing
Final Paper Due on December 10th by 5pm.
Policies:
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone), or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own
work. For additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Q-Drop: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q
drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Title IX: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all
its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
      1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
      2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
           involved in a Title IX investigation.
      3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about


reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Web Site: Canvas.
