AET 139 –
Intro To Augmented Reality
Wednesdays @ 5pm-8pm                   DFA 4.126 (computer lab)
Lecturer: Johannes Larcher
CEO, SubVRsive Inc.
Office: N/A
Email: johannes@subvrsive.com
This class is currently offered to upper division students only. Class limited to 15 upper division
SDCT students.
Synopsis
This course covers the history, potential, technological breakthroughs and limitations, as
well as the business and real life applications of Augmented Reality. Far from a new
concept, AR has recently emerged as the heir apparent to the VR Hype of 2015/6, and
is attracting significant consumer interest and venture capital investment. This course
dives deep into the concepts and underpinning technologies of AR, studies examples of
successful and unsuccessful AR ventures, and introduces a framework for evaluation of
high potential use cases of AR within the constraints of today and tomorrow. This
course employs the Socratic Method of teaching, and participating students must be
comfortable with speaking publicly, getting called on to participate in group discussion,
and debating issues with fellow students.
Weekly Syllabus
  Class Date           Topic
  1        Sept 5      The media and entertainment business innovation
                       paradox. A brief history of immersive computing.
                       Definitions of extended reality categories. Core
                       technologies at the heart of extended reality.
  2        Sept 12     Extended reality as the ultimate empathy and productivity
                       machine. The XR hype and disillusionment cycle.
                       Adoption cycle dynamics. AR’s unique opportunity to
                       achieve mass adoption.
  3        Sept 19     Case Studies in AR Hardware: Google Glass, Microsoft
                       Hololens, Magic Leap, Apple iOS, Google Android and
                       more.
  4        Sept 26     Case Studies in AR Experiences: Pokemon Go, Blippar,
                       Snapchat Filters/Lenses, StoreViz, Wayfair and more.
  5        Oct 3       The future is augmented. A discussion of possible
                       scenarios for the evolution of augmented reality.


Please note: class will not meet on October 3rd. A voluntary makeup class will be
offered on October 5th at 4pm, location DFA 4.106.
Grading
The final grade will depend on the following:
     -   Attendance 25%
     -   Class Participation 25%
     -   Final Paper 50%
Final Paper assignment will be published on Canvas by 09-15-2018 and will be due by
10-17-2018.
No plus/minus grades will be given.
Required Reading
All required reading materials will be published on Canvas. Some of these reading
materials will come at a modest cost and will need to be purchased by students.
UT Policies
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly
in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false
or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other
assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonest damages both the student’s learning
experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on
scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at


http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone 471-6222,
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc/ offers individualized assistance to students who want
to improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students may come in on a drop-in or
appointment basis.
Services For Students With Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office
of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a
work assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given
an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the
policy of the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least
fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious
holy day.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-
mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html. (Optional: In
this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be
responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements.)
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas to manage student’s work, grades, etc. Canvas is a Web-based
learning management system in which a password-protected site is created for each course.
