ARC 560R, ARC 696_ITA
Advanced Design Studio, Reading the Italian City
Fall 2018
Instructor: Smilja Milovanovic-Bertram
Description and Format
This advanced architectural design studio is taught at the University of Georgia
International Residential Center in Cortona. Italy and the Italian city become both the subject
and physical laboratory for a series of design investigations.
The subject matter of this studio is the space of the Italian City, and how it carries meaning. This is
an exceedingly complex issue, one that sets a rich and engaging formal structure and refined
material condition against historic circumstance, evolving patterns of behavior and inhabitation,
the cultural status of the poetic, etc., a situation in which the why is often as important as the
what.
The studio will design and study objects within the fabric of the city. We will use Castiglion
Fiorentino as the subject and physical laboratory for a design project. The small town of
Castiglion has been continuously inhabited since Etruscan times. Its layers include Etruscan,
Roman, Medieval, Renaissance, and modern influences and will provide a background for
students to speculate, interpret and create. The studio will deal with contemporary design issues
within a historic context. Students will draw from the rich local resources of history, urban form,
culture, materiality, and technology, all of which have direct relevance to the inquiry. The hill
towns of Tuscany and Umbria (Pienza, Montepulciano, Siena, Perugia, Florence) will provide the
examples, inspiration, and prototypes for exploring issues of context and sense of place in
current architectural design issues.
The format of the studio (and associated readings and exercises) is set out in three parts: 1.)
urban space analysis; 2.) Italian urban space in general; 3.) specific Italian cities. You will be
asked to undertake a variety of short graphic and written exercises to further the discussions
arising from the readings. The studio will begin with a series of analysis and mapping exercises,
linked to the site we will visit. The mapping will span from saucer to cityscape.
You will be given a specific program early in the semester, and its resolution will cover the
remainder of the semester. The subject of the project is less the resolution of the program's
functional dictates than its status as an institution within the city. While the design of project will
be its ultimate goal, the studio will investigate Italian design sensibility and its fascination for
depth, autonomy and continuity, across a series of blurring scales, from personal object to
personal space to social space to urban condition.
Design studio project work will be assembled in a publication at semester’s end.
Your grade will also include your participation in the program exhibit that will take place in
Spring, 2019.
Mapping                                  15%
Project                                  70%
Publication                              10%
Exhibit + Study in Italy blog            5%


.
Mappings
Michel de Certeau           The Practice of Everyday Life
Denis Cosgrove              Mappings
Richard Sennett             The Conscience of the Eye
Reading Cities
Stan Allen                  “Field Conditions” in Points + Lines
Stan Allen                  “Infrastructural Urbanism” in Points + Lines
Spiro Kostof                The City Shaped
Kevin Lynch                 The Image of the City
Rafael Moneo                “Aldo Rossi” in Theoretical Anxiety and Design Strategies
Andrew Peckham              “The Dichotomies of Rationalism in the 20th Century Italian
                            Architecture” in AD Journal Volume 8
Norberg-Schulz              Roma Interrotta
Norberg-Schulz              Genius Loci
Aldo Rossi                  Architecture of the City
Colin Rowe & Fred Koetter   Collage City
Rem Koolhaas                “Generic City” in S, M, L, XL
Rem Koolhaas                “Toward The Contemporary City; Beyond Delirious” in Theorizing A
                            New Agenda for Architecture
Robert Venturi              The Campidoglio: A Case Study
Robert Venturi              Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture
Textbooks
J.H. Plumb                  Italian Renaissance
Grading
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than
grading in other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable
elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived
from a broader, more subjective set of issues.
Grading for studio courses is broken into three components for each given mark:
1/3 grasp (the ideas and understanding of the project at hand, combined with an
appropriate process of inquiry),
1/3 process (the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas) and
1/3 resolution (the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through
representation).
Your work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the semester.
Grade descriptions
A : excellent work


Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and
visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
complete on all levels.
B : good work
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.
Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
excellence.
C : required work
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued
with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
D : poor work
Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal
clarity or logic of presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate
the required design skill and knowledge base.
F : unacceptable work
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable.
Note that this grade will be assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
X : (excused incomplete)
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may
only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an
agreement as to a new completion date. Studio work must be completed before the
second week of the next design semester in which you are enrolling, according to
School of Architecture policy.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE
ARRIVALS.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused
absences may be dropped from the course without further notice. The minimum
penalty for more than three unexcused absences is a full letter drop in your final grade
for the course. Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss
class.
Academic Integrity
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced.


Refer to the Student Judicial Services website for official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
Please refer to The Role of Faculty in Confronting Scholastic Dishonesty brochure
published by Student Judicial Services for information on confronting students who
violate scholastic dishonesty policies. For further information, visit the SJS website at
http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ or call 471-2841.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a
specific physical need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of
Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be
determined. Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for
Students with Disabilities, also found via the web at deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Security, safety and the studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it
necessitates the careful attention to the needs of everyone in it. Please see your
instructor if there are any problems (music, visual pollution) that you are unable to
resolve on your own. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to
you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Please be mindful not to admit
any uninvited visitors and keep all exterior doors locked after hours.
Be smart. Be safe.
smilja@mail.utexas.edu
office: Santa Chiara Study Center
