                ADV 475/483-5 ​       Portfolio 4
                                                  (Unique Numbers: 06770, 06660)
the person handing out grades:                         the real brains of the operation (your TA):
Ryan Romero                                            Regan Gavin
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com                             rtgavin@utexas.edu
Office: BMC 4.306                                      Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays                          Hours: TBD
        11am - 12:30pm, 4pm - 5pm
All of this has happened before...
...and while you likely won’t take another portfolio class, all of what you do here will happen
again, ad nauseam, for the rest of your career. Hopefully, that sounds awesome to you. You’re
on the hunt again for the absolute best of ideas, but this go-round we’re looking for a bit more.
We’re going to need the best, the most perfect, the flawless...oh, and all of it damn quickly.
In addition to the work, you along with your cohorts in Portfolio 3, will be the leadership the rest
of Texas Creative looks up to. You’re going to help support and evolve the brand, be our
ambassadors, and bring glory to the program and yourselves!
Class Objectives
    ●   Revisiting Past Work
        Perfection is sought and so revisiting past campaigns that will exist in the student’s
        portfolio is necessary. Having more experience now, the student will improve past ideas
        and, where possible, add more campaign elements.
    ●   Furthering a Brand
        Students learn the importance and real-world issues that arise when maintaining a
        brand as they worth together to keep Texas Creative fresh, relevant, and representative
        of our program to agencies all across the world in areas including social media, web
        presence, event organization, mentoring, and culture within the program.
    ●   Selling Yourself to the Right Target
        Students develop their online presence including their portfolio of work, LinkedIN
        connections, and resume. Instruction is given on what agencies are looking for, how to
        seek out the right job, communicate with creative recruiters, and other
        job-hunting/landing tips and tricks.
    ●   Award Shows
        Having lots of spec work in their portfolio already, there is time for a larger focus on
        award shows and gaining the type of recognition that draws the attention of industry
        recruiters.
    ●   Skills and Software - Unique Snowflake Training


        Illustration, typography, long-form copy, photography, and more. Now is the time to set
        themselves apart from other candidates. Therefore guidance and instruction are given
        on how to integrate and highlight any specialties or unique talent of the student.
Trading books for tiny statues
You aren’t required to get a book (yay!) but you’ll probably want to set aside a small pile of
money for entry fees to various award shows (boo! And also yay!). The ADDY Awards, The
Clios, Cannes...they’re all out there and they all need to see you shine. Don’t cheap out here,
awards can really get your name out there.
Stop talking and say something
You’ll be presenting. A lot. And you’ll be saying a lot in very short amounts of time. I’m going to
hold you to strict time limits and we’re going to crank through a lot of work each class. That
means there’s no time to screw around. Bring thought-thru ideas, all but executed (maybe
even a little executed) each class because we (and by “we” I mean “you”) don’t have time for
anything else. You may even think about doing a dry run or two with your partner before class
to make sure your timing is bang-on. Be sure to leave time for laughs and questions. Ok,
maybe not that much time for laughs.
Selfless acts
Well, only kind of. This semester you’re going to give back to Texas Creative a little bit. In
return, you’re going to have actually produced work/events you’re proud of that actually went
out into the real world. The better your ideas and executions are -> the more light is shone on
Texas Creative -> the more eyes that will see the work you did for Texas Creative and the rest
of your books -> the better job you’ll get -> the better Texas Creative’s reputation becomes ->
the better it looks that you went to Texas Creative... you see what I’m gunning for here? It’s a
mutually beneficial circle of creative life. Mufasa would be proud.
Selfish acts
Besides the work you do “for Texas Creative” you will be expected to tackle a minimum of 4
other projects using all digital, manual, bought, borrowed and stolen methods available. My
expectations aren’t just high, they’re real-world executable, award-winning, Creative Director
mind-blowingly high. In other words, don’t bring none of that weak s!#@ up in here. You are
about to be held to a nearly impossible standard, but your books and your future careers will
thank me for it, whether or not you decide to do so your student evaluations. There will be a
minimum of 18 pieces total.
        NOTE: The lightnin’ round
        I must see and approve all work prior to Critique Wique. I reserve the right to remove
        work shown without my approval. If I remove work and you don’t meet the minimum
        requirements you may not be allowed to participate in the final portfolio review.
Push your pixel pushing skills. What passed for quality or even campaigns in previous portfolio
classes might not hack it for P4. You have to grow. Though it’s no longer mandatory, Lynda
classes and the like are highly encouraged. You are the top of the heap. If your stuff doesn’t


top the rest of the heap’s work then what are you doing here?
Remember, advertising is subjective. There are no right answers. Do better each time and play
nice with others. The ad biz is small and incestuous. Your friends here will be your colleagues,
competitions, and cohorts. Love them. Fear them. Respect them. You’re all in this together.
How we do
        Simple. Direct. Efficient.
        Some instructors require the niceties of email etiquette - “I hope this email finds you
        well. How are you? Thank you for looking at this. Here’s my life story…” This has its
        place in the world, but I far prefer efficiency. Your emails should be short, and to the
        point, with a direct question as to what is required of me. Not rude, just direct - What
        do you need? What am I looking at? How can I help? I’d prefer you not send, “thank
        you” or “got it” emails. These serve only to clutter my email box. If you simply must say
        “thanks” please wait and send me a thank you note at the end of the semester. We’re
        gonna work hard together and we’re going to need every second we can spare. So let’s
        be streamlined.
        Feedback
        Google docs is your friend. Learn it. Live it. It’s the easiest and fastest way to share
        your work with me to get comments and feedback. When you share a google doc make
        sure I have access to comment. If I don’t, I will simply delete your email. Don’t lose time
        because of your carelessness. Additionally, do not share the document via google docs
        with me AND send a separate email explaining you shared a document with me. Let’s
        keep emails to a minimum.
Mounting not required
History dictates you don’t have to mount your final work this time around. I think it looks less
professional. If you want to step up and do it, I think it makes you shine, but it’s your book.
That said, you still need:
                ‣ A fresh X-Acto #1 knife + pack of extra blades (borrowable/shareable)
                ‣ A metal straightedge ruler (borrowable/shareable)
                ‣ ​TWO (2) ​black queen-size FLAT bedsheets (lowest thread count wins!)
Final Grades:
12.5% = Project 1 - The Weakest Link
12.5% = Project 2 - D&AD (not to be confused with AD&D)
12.5% = Project 3 - Future Lions
12.5% = Project 4 - Soup to Nuts
20% = Selfless Acts of Advertising
20% = Participation, Professionalism, & Peer evals
10% = All-or-nothing “checklist” for portfolio work this semester
Hey, wait a sec...what’s this last thing? This semester you’re going to have to check several
boxes with the work you do. They needn't be in any particular project or campaign but at the


end of the day if they’re not all there you’ll receive a letter grade sized ding to your final grade.
    - Killer video execution(s) - ​Could be a single online video, a series of 6 second
         pre-rolls, a three-piece television campaign or something else. Plan and shoot it well.
    - Immersive experience - ​Choose the right product and then involve your audience in
         something bigger than an ad. Lots of things can fall under this category so do your
         research, look to the greats of the past, and conjure a good one.
    - Unique Digital Interaction - ​Tech is limitless and new stuff comes out every day. Find
         a way to leverage digital dots you know or could conceive of actually existing and
         connect them to something new for an experience we’ve never seen before.
Note: There is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum grade of C in all
communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major. I believe that grade is a B for
graduate students. Grades are true to form. You earn a C by being average. That means you showed up and
checked all the boxes. Impress me and get a B. If I think you could start a business with me tomorrow maybe that’s
an A.
How to succeed
‣ Treat this like it’s already your job. It basically is. In fact, it’s your job to get a job. Let’s do
this!
‣ Fail big! Make mistakes and own them. We all learn from them.
‣ Play nice. Be a good partner. Seriously. Do your end and then some.
‣ Spend a significant time working outside of class. You know I don’t mean a little.
‣ Study award shows and latest work, seek out all kinds of existing and emerging creativity,
and develop your skills. Keep your eyes open. FAR more important than you think.
‣ Seek a balance. Absorb advertising and culture as much as possible but leave yourself time
for your own contributions. Remember, you’re a creative. Create.
Open Away From Face
As a child, I once asked my father to explain to me the words printed on the caps of bottled soda. He
said it was there to keep people who shook up the soda from accidentally hitting themselves in the eye
when they opened the bottle. “But that’s common sense. Why do we have to tell people basic
information like this? What a giant waste of time.” So anyway, here’s your bottle cap.
         showing up.
         I do not take roll but there is an expectation that you are here. Missing a class that moves as
         quickly as we will puts you significantly behind. If you have a job interview or some other
         pressing emergency it’s up to you to make the call. You are an adult and can decide which is
         more important to attend. You needn’t let me know you’re going to miss a class (see efficiency
         in emails point). Know that repeated absence or lack of participation in class could influence
         your grade. You are a budding professional in a deadline-driven industry. That means you are
         expected to do all of the work all of the time. Show up ready to present in every class. If I decide
         to call on you or your partner to show me what you’re up to, you better have something to say. If
         the class, as a whole, does not have enough prepared for class then class may just be canceled.
         And trust me, you need every bit of class time you can get each semester.
         favorites exist.
         I, like every professor, has on occasion been accused of having favorites. Guess what. I do. So
         do your parents, your bosses, everyone you meet in the world, and you. Maybe you care about
         being a favorite and maybe you don’t, but I’d encourage you to keep reading. The thing is, my


favorite students are the ones who apply themselves, do the work, process all the feedback and
work to better their work and themselves. They needn’t always do as I suggest but they should
seek to understand criticism and use that information to do better. Then, they come back big,
hard, and often. They don’t make excuses. They don’t show up without work. They don’t keep
repeating the same mistakes over and over without seeking help to rectify them. Why do I like
these people? Because they’re here to do the work.
Good news! You’re already my favorite student and staying that way makes you more
successful at what you came here to do. But show me you don’t want to work, you don’t want
to care, you don’t have time to participate and while you won’t lose the opportunity to do good
work, you will begin to lose respect from me, your peers, and future bosses. That’s how the
world works. Nobody expects you to be good right off the bat, few are. You just have to want to
be good and then take the steps to get there. Do that and you’ll always be my favorite
snowflake.
thicker skin through advertising.
No matter how much of an introvert you may be, how delicate your feelings are, or how attached
you are to your art, advertising is not and will never be private. It is a public endeavor. Period.
Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes harshly, by your colleagues and me. Fair and
honest critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. It can even be difficult for those who are.
Remember: you are not your work. Don’t take criticism to heart, take it to head. Consider it.
Process it. Use it. Keep your cool and know that very few ideas make the final cut. Critique is
difficult to hear no matter who says it and no matter how they say it. The people in this room are
here to build your book and get you a job. We are not a creative director worried about you
taking his job, we’ve nothing to gain from making you feel bad, and we’re not the internet trolls
who will tear your work down from the shadows. Sadly, all of that is going to happen later on in
the real world. For now, know that we’re your instructors, your colleagues, and your friends
trying to make you better.
let’s get passionate.
We talk about a lot of things in class. As creatives, our goal is to make real, truthful human
emotional connections. And both humans and emotions are nothing if not messy. Touchy
subjects will be brought up and discussed because we’re putting real work out into the real
world where those subjects exist. While we have to discuss (and grow from doing so) the impact
these thoughts and ideas have on society from an academic perspective, I will not tolerate
racism, hate speech, misogyny or any other kind of marginalization and neither should you.
We’re navigating a very delicate time in our society and if someone, including myself, ever
crosses a line, even accidentally, I encourage you to come to me or to my TA and address your
concerns. Chances are the person in question was simply mistaken or ignorant on the subject
and will want to apologize. This is how we grow. This is how we move forward. You are safe
here. You are welcome here. Do not bottle up your concerns as nobody can feel creative if they
don’t feel safe and we won’t undermine our mission to grow your creativity.
things change, stay in touch.
In this course, and in Texas Creative in general, we have a few methods of communication.
Make sure your Canvas email is updated to a current, reachable account. Join Slack. You can


         find ours at: ​Texas-Creative.slack.com​. You will be responsible for checking Canvas, Email, and
         Slack and staying up to date on all topics. Do so or risk missing important news, class updates,
         jobs, announcements, money giveaways, beach vacations, concert tickets, and more.
UT Made Me Say It
A collection of mandatory stuff from the University. You should probably read it.
Don’t cheat. Don’t steal work.
The usual university rules apply to cheating and plagiarism. When it doubt, refer to Wheaton’s
law. If you are caught doing either, you will automatically fail this course. Please familiarize
yourself with the university’s policy on plagiarism​ ​here.
It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for support. Our
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW | CMA
4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is unavailable)
         Need Immediate Help?
                      - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                           | 512-471- 3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
                      - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
                           cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
If there’s a family emergency, you’re having health issues, miss class, etc.
Hit up Student Emergency Services first. Let them handle telling your profs.
https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Need other accommodations?
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information:
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
This is a safe space, just not always a confidential one. So says the federal government.
You can talk to me about anything. However, if it involves sex discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence (including dating and
domestic violence), stalking, or discrimination on the basis of pregnancy ​I am required by law
to disclose this information to our Title IX office or I will lose my job and be legally prosecuted.
You can find more info at ​titleix.utexas.edu


But, when? WHEN?!​ (subject to change)
W, 1/22     Syllabus, Introductions - Begin Project 1 - The Weakest Link
M, 1/27     Project 1
W, 1/29     Project 1
M, 2/3      Project 1
W, 2/5      Project 1
M, 2/10     Project 1. Begin Project 2 - D&AD
W, 2/12     Project 1
M, 2/17     Project 1.
W, 2/19     Project 1.
M, 2/24     Project 2. ​PROJECT 1 DUE
W, 2/26     Project 2
M, 3/2      Project 2
W, 3/4      Project 2
M, 3/9      Project 2
W, 3/11     Project 2. Begin Project 3 - Future Lions
3/16 - 3/20 Spring Break
M, 3/23     Project 3. ​PROJECT 2 DUE
W, 3/25     Project 3
M, 3/30     Project 3
W, 4/1      Project 3
M, 4/6      Project 3
W, 4/8      Project 3. Begin Project 4 - Soup to Nuts
M, 4/13     Project 3
W, 4/15     Project 3.
M, 4/20     ​Project 4.​ ​PROJECT 3 DUE
W, 4/22      Project 4
M, 4/27      Project 4
W, 4/29      Project 4
M, 5/4       Project 4
W, 5/6       Project 4
W 5/13       ​PROJECT 4 DUE
F, 5/15       Final Critique! Setup at 8. Open 10am - 5pm.
