                                                                                                1
                 M f362K PROBABILITY I – WB – FIRST DAY HANDOUT
       Summer 2020, Unique # 85535, MTWThF 1:00 pm to 2:30 pm, Online via Zoom
Instructor: Kanthimathi Sathasivan, Ph.D. (You can call me Dr. Satha)
Course Description: An introductory course in the mathematical theory of probability,
fundamental to further work in probability and statistics, includes basic probability properties,
conditional probability and independence, various discrete and continuous random variables,
expectation and variance, central limit theorem, and joint probability distributions.
Principles of set theory and a set of axioms for probability are used to derive some probability
density and/or distribution functions. Special counting techniques are developed to handle some
problems. Properties associated with a random variable are developed for the usual elementary
distributions. Problem solving is required, and some theorem proving can be done, but the course
emphasizes computation and intuition.
Mathematics 362K and Statistics and Data Sciences 321 may not both be counted.
Prerequisite: M 408D, 408L or 408S with a grade of at least C-.
Learning goals: You will be learning the following concepts by attending the lecture, trying
problems in class and outside class, doing homework, and taking the quizzes, tests, and the final
exam.
Basic combinatorics: Counting principle, permutations, combinations.
Basic concepts: Sample spaces, events, basic axioms and theorems of probability, finite sample
spaces with equally likely probabilities.
Conditional probability: Reduced sample space, independence, Bayes' Theorem.
Random variables: Discrete and continuous random variables, discrete probability mass
functions and continuous probability density functions, distribution functions, expectation,
variance, functions of random variables.
Special distributions: Bernoulli, Binomial, Poisson, Geometric, Negative binomial, Hyper-
Geometric, and Uniform discrete random variables, Uniform, Normal, and Exponential
continuous random variables, approximation of Binomial by Poisson or Normal.
Jointly distributed random variables: Joint distribution functions, independence, conditional
distributions, expectation, covariance
Sums of independent random variables: expectation, variance.
Inequalities and Limit theorems: Markov's and Chebyshev's inequalities, Weak and Strong Law
of Large Numbers, Central Limit Theorem.
Course Outcomes:
      The ability to think and approach a problem mathematically
      Develop problem solving skills
      Improve written and organizational skills
      Explain and reason solutions


                                                                                                  2
      Apply the techniques and skills to other areas
      Prepare the fundamentals for other courses.
Required Text: A First Course in Probability, tenth edition by Sheldon Ross
GRADING: Final grade for the course will be determined using two midterm tests worth 20%
each, final exam worth 25%, homework worth 20%, and quizzes worth 15%. Minimum score
needed for the + and – letter grades are given in the table below.
Percent     93%      90%     87%     83%     80%     77%      73%     70%     67%    63%      60%
Grade        A        A-      B+      B       B-      C+       C       C-      D+     D        D-
TESTS (40%): The two midterm tests will be given during your regular class period. Tentative
dates and chapters covered for test 1 and test 2 are June 17th (Chapters 1, 2, 3, and sections
4.1 to 4.5) and July 1st (sections 4.6 to 4.8.2, Chapter 5, and sections 6.1 to 6.3) respectively.
Prior to each midterm, I will announce information about the midterm on Canvas and in class.
Tests will be given online on Canvas during class. Any questions concerning the grading must be
addressed within one week after the papers are graded. There will not be any makeup or
rescheduled tests for any reason. The lowest test grade will be replaced by the average of test 1,
test 2, and the final exam. If you must miss a test, your grade for the missed test will be 0 and
that will be the lowest test grade.
FINAL EXAM (25%): Final exam is mandatory, and it will be given on Canvas on Friday, the
10th of July from 9 am to 12 noon. The final exam will be comprehensive. The final exam
score will not be replaced.
Tests and the final exam are open book and open notes. You may use a calculator for the tests
and the final exam. Make sure it has !, nCr, and nPr. Recommended (easy to use) calculators are
TI-30XIIS, TI-30XIIB (MultiView okay). Other common calculators are TI30xa, TI30xs. If you
use a graphing calculator or a professional (Pro) calculator you need to show the work for
integration and probability (on test 2 and final exam).
HOMEWORK (20%): Homework will be assigned over the lecture. Homework will be posted
on canvas. You are encouraged to discuss homework assignments with your peers, but you are
expected to write up your own solutions. It is good idea to keep a homework notebook of your
own work and for practice homework problems. Copying another student’s solution or copying
from any other source is a violation of honor code. All assignments must be handwritten. Always
provide the reason and enough work to check the validity of your solution. Organize your work
clearly and provide the solutions in the correct order. You need to scan your homework and turn
it in electronically on Canvas as a single pdf or jpg file. Make sure the scanned work is clear and
legible before uploading it to Canvas. It is a good idea to label the file with your name and
homework number. Assignments are due at the beginning of the class (at 1 pm) on the due date.
You will be able to submit it early. Please submit the assignments as soon as you finish it and do
not wait until the last minute to upload it. PRINT your full name, EID, and the homework
number at the begging of your assignment. Two lowest homework grades will be dropped and
that will accommodate students who must miss a homework due to any reason.


                                                                                                      3
QUIZZES (15%)
There will be unannounced quizzes on material covered before or discussed in the lecture on
Squarecap. (Squarecap is free for our class. Do not pay for subscription.) We will start the quiz at
the end of the class, and it will be left open until 12 noon the next day. It is your responsibility to
check if there is a quiz or not by logging in to Squarecap in case if you miss a class or leave
early. Two lowest quiz grades will be dropped and that will accommodate students who must
miss a quiz due to any reason.
LECTURE: The lectures will be held on Zoom using a document camera. We will cover a fair
amount of material from Chapters 1 to 8. We will not cover all sections. There will be questions
on Squarecap during lecture to increase interaction and feedback. This participation will be
considered for a small extra credit. Also, you can ask questions using the ask and vote feature
during lecture on Squarecap.
ATTENDANCE: I expect you to be committed to attend all classes and join the lecture sessions
on time and stay there until the end of the lecture. If you must miss class, the lecture notes will
be posted on Canvas. The material covered in class and the homework problems assigned will
give you an idea of the level of difficulty considered in this class. The material becomes difficult
after chapter 3 and do not underestimate the class using the first three chapters.
How will students learn?
Students attend lectures and solve problems by actively involving and participating in every
learning activity. Attempt and solve the problems assigned for practice. Complete all the
assigned homework with a due date in an organized manner and turn it in on time. Complete all
the quizzes. Practice problems to prepare for midterms and exam. Students form group study
sessions to review.
DO NOT SHARE COURSE MATERIALS: Course Materials are COPYRIGHTED. You are
not allowed to share any assignments, handouts, lectures, exams, solutions, materials posted on
Canvas, or documents related to this class. Sharing any class material online or otherwise in any
form, including your own work submitted for this class, without my approval is considered
academic dishonesty. If something from the class is found online which you have posted, you
will be reported for an academic integrity violation.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY POLICY: Students who violate University rules on academic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students,
and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For
further information, please visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
OTHER INFORMATION
Students with disabilities: The University of Texas provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office


                                                                                                   4
of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
If you qualify under the University’s Learning Disability Policy, your letter from the Dean will
take effect after it is presented to your instructor.
Academic dishonesty: You are encouraged to discuss homework assignments with your peers
but you are expected to submit your own work. During tests you are expected to use only the
allowed resources. Getting help in any form is prohibited during tests. Students who violate these
expectations can expect to receive a failing grade on the test or the course and be reported to the
Dean of Students office for academic dishonesty. These types of violations are reported to
professional schools, should you ever decide to apply one day. Do not do it – it’s not worth the
consequences.
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
conjunction with a program course requirement.
University Code of Conduct: (Student Honor Code) The core values of the University of
Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct)
Religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a
test, a homework assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Email: If you must email me include M 362K, class time and the brief reason for the email on
subject line. Always include your full name, EID and what you want to communicate in the body
of the email. Before emailing, check if the information you are looking for is available on
canvas, or class work (e.g. due dates, homework, etc). I will answer your email only if it is
necessary (determined by me). Please wait for at least 24 hours or the weekend before you send
me a reminder.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Student Services Bldg (SSB), 5th Floor
Hours: M--F 8am--5pm
512 471 3515
www.cmhc.utexas.edu
IMPORTANT DATES FOR FIRST-TERM
June 5th, Friday: Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration
require the approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean. Last day


                                                                                                  5
undergraduate students may register and pay tuition without the approval of the registrar. (See
General Information, chapter 4, for details.)
June 9th, Tuesday: Fourth class day; this is the date the official enrollment count is taken. Last
day an undergraduate student may add a class, with required approvals except for rare and
extenuating circumstances.
June 24th, Wednesday: Last day an undergraduate student may change registration in a class to
or from the pass/fail basis or credit/no credit basis.
July 9th, Thursday: Last day to drop a class, with required approvals.
DEADLINES FOR DROPPING A COURSE: If you drop a class on or before the 4th class
day, the class will not show up on your transcript. If you drop a class after that date, the course
will show up on the transcript with a “Q” grade. After the last day to withdraw, it is not possible
to drop a course except for extenuating (usually non-academic) circumstances.


                                                                                                    6
                            Tentative Schedule - Mf362K Summer 2020
                (Textbook: A First Course in Probability, tenth edition by Sheldon Ross)
Class     Date      Day       Sections                                   Topic
  1      June 4    Thurs      1.1, 1.2      Introduction, Basic principle of counting
  2      June 5     Fri       1.3, 1.4      Permutations, Combinations
  3      June 8    Mon      2.1, 2.2, 2.3   Introduction, Sample Space and Events, Axioms of
                                            Probability
  4      June 9     Tue     2.4, 2.5, 2.7   Some Simple Propositions, Sample Spaces Having Equally
                                            Likely Outcomes, Probability as a Measure of belief
  5     June 10    Wed        3.1, 3.2      Introduction, Conditional Probabilities
  6     June 11    Thurs      3.3, 3.4      Baye’s Formula, Independent Events
  7     June 12     Fri       4.1, 4.2      Random Variables, Discrete Random Variables
  8     June 15    Mon        4.3, 4.4      Expected Value, Expectation of a Function of a Random
                                            Variable
  9     June 16     Tue          4.5        Variance
 10     June 17    Wed        TEST 1        Sections 1.1 to 4.5
 11     June 18    Thurs     4.6, 4.6.1     The Bernoulli and Binomial Random Variables, Properties
                                            of Binomial Random Variable
 12     June 19     Fri      4.7, 4.8.1,    The Poisson Random Variable, The Geometric Random
                                4.8.2       Variable, The Negative Binomial Random Variable
 13     June 22    Mon        5.1, 5.2      Introduction, Expectation and Variance of Continuous
                                            Random Variables
 14     June 23     Tue       5.3, 5.4      The Uniform Random Variable, Normal Random Variable
 15     June 24    Wed       5.4.1, 5.5     The Normal Approximation to the Binomial Distribution,
                                            Exponential Random Variable
 16     June 25    Thurs         5.7        The Distribution of a Function of a Random Variable
 17     June 26     Fri       6.1, 6.2      Joint Distribution Functions, Independent Random
                                            Variables
 18     June 29    Mon        6.2, 6.3      Independent Random Variables, Sums of Independent
                                            Random Variables
 19     June 30     Tue          6.3        Sums of Independent Random Variables
 20      July 1    Wed        TEST 2        Sections 4.6 to 6.3
 21      July 2    Thurs      6.4, 6.5      Conditional Distributions: Discrete Case, Continuous Case
 22      July 6    Mon      6.6, 7.1, 7.2   Order Statistics, Introduction, Expectations of Sums of
                                            Random Variables
 23      July 7     Tue          7.4        Covariance, Variance of Sums, and Correlations
 24      July 8    Wed        8.1, 8.2      Introduction, Chebyshev’s Inequality, and the Weak Law of
                                            Large Numbers
 25      July 9    Thurs      8.3, 8.4      The Central Limit Theorem, The Strong Law of Large
                                            Numbers
 26     July 10     Fri   COMPREHENSIVE FINAL EXAM – 9 am to 12 noon
    Note: The above schedule is tentative, and it is subject to change. Any change to this
    schedule will be announced in class.
