                 The University of Texas at Austin – Department of Anthropology
                                              Fall 2019
    ANT 391 ANTHROPOLOGY BETWEEN CULTURE AND SOCIETY
 Unique                 Day                Time                     Location
 31270                  Tuesday            2:00 - 5:00 PM           SAC 5.124
Instructor:             Sofian Merabet (sofian.merabet@austin.utexas.edu)
                        Office Hours: Thursday 2:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m.
                        or by appointment in SAC 5.156
Course Description:
Based on book publications by faculty members of the UT Anthropology Department, this
graduate seminar explores some of the current debates in the US surrounding the
anthropological study of culture and society. “How can we make sense of sociocultural
anthropology as an academic discipline today?” is the central question of this course.
Problematizing whether and, if so, how area studies and various practices of ethnography have
played a role in shaping the idea of the “field,” we will look at location and positionality as a
principal site of epistemological limitation and possibility for anthropological research.
Required Texts (listed alphabetically): [ordered at the University Coop,
www.universitycoop.com, 2246 Guadalupe Street, Austin, (512) 476-7211]
Campbell, Craig (2014) Agitating Images: Photography against History in Indigenous Siberia.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Cons, Jason (2016) Sensitive Space: Fragmented Territory at the India-Bangladesh Border.
Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Handman, Courtney (2014) Critical Christianity: Translation and Denominational Conflict in
Papua New Guinea. University of California Press.
Hartigan, John (1999) Racial Situations: Class Predicaments of Whiteness in Detroit. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
                                                                                                  1


Keeler, Ward (2017) The Traffic in Hierarchy: Masculinity and Its Others in Buddhist Burma.
Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.
Menchaca, Martha (2016) The Politics of Dependency: US Reliance on Mexican Oil and Farm
Labor. Austin: The University of Texas Press.
Peterson, Marina (2010) Sound, Space, and the City: Civic Performance in Downtown Los
Angeles. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Smith, Christen (2016) Afro-Paradise: Blackness, Violence, and Performance in Brazil. Chicago:
University of Illinois Press.
Stewart, Kathleen and Lauren Berlant (2019) The Hundreds. Durham: Duke University Press.
Strong, Pauline (1999) Captive Selves, Captivating Others: The Politics and Poetics of Colonial
American Captivity Narratives. Boulder: Westview Press.
Sturm, Circe (2002) Blood Politics: Race, Culture, and Identity in the Cherokee Nation of
Oklahoma. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Course Requirements for Registered Students:
The class relies on the intellectual commitment and active participation of all students. It will be
run primarily as discussions within a seminar format. In order for the course to be effective, all
students must have the reading assignments completed and ready for in-depth discussion for
each class. Regular attendance is required. Attendance in class, however, does not constitute
participation. You must come to class having carefully read all materials and be prepared to
discuss, question, and argue about issues raised in the readings. It will be beneficial for you to
take excerpts/notes on any material that you find enlightening, controversial, or objectionable.
You should also take notes in class on themes, key terms, and debates we tackle. These note-
taking strategies will be crucial for your regular in-class presentations of the readings and the
drafting of your final research paper. In short:
1) Do all assigned readings (while taking excerpts/notes!) by the date indicated on the syllabus
and participate actively in the general class discussion.
2) Regular one to two 15-minute presentations on the weekly readings to be assigned to
students. They are intended to launch the general seminar discussions. Although everybody will
have read the assigned texts, the presentations should include a general overview of the text’s
argument and a set of questions the presenter wants the class to respond to.
3) Three to five-page description of the final research paper (“Project Outline”) to be submitted
to the instructor on Tuesday, October 22nd. The outline will be a fully drafted text (no bullet
points!) that will develop the main argument of the paper and explain its premises (data
                                                                                                   2


collection, theoretical approach, etc.). During the weeks prior to October 22nd, the students will
have ample opportunity to verbally present their respective projects to the rest of the class.
4) 10 to 15-minute presentations on the respective final research project on Tuesday,
December 3rd.
5) 15 to 20-page term paper on any relevant topic dealing with the anthropological study of
culture and society due on Thursday, December 5th. Focused topics on your own scholarly
interests that raise a central research issue or query are best. Avoid general or overview topics.
You must include at least 25% of the readings in your paper.
The writing assignment (final research paper) is designed to develop critical reading, analytical,
and writing skills. Evaluation criteria include, but are not limited to, critical and integrative
analysis of texts, clarity of thought, ability to synthesize readings and, occasionally, class
discussions into your own argument, and ability to formulate a theoretical grounding for it.
   Every student is highly encouraged to visit the UNIVERSITY WRITING CENTER
 Students who consult with the Writing Center and have the instructor officially
     notified by email will earn additional 2 points on their respective papers.
                                 (http://uwc.utexas.edu/grad/)
    The UWC offers free support for UT graduate students in all departments. UWC graduate
    services include individual consultations, writing groups, writing retreats, workshops, and
                                             presentations.
Consultations
Up to four consultations per month with a trained writing consultant
Presentations
Available to visit graduate orientations, classes, and groups throughout the semester
Writing Groups
Join a community of peers for accountability and encouragement
Resources
Resources for academic writers of all stages, including handouts, videos, and helpful links.
Writing Retreats
Focus on quiet, sustained writing at the UWC’s full-day writing retreats
Workshops
Learn about upcoming workshops and view presentation slides from past events
                                                                                                  3


Consultations
     •   Graduate students can schedule up to two consultations a month with a professional
         writing consultant.
     •   Graduate student consultations can cover any writing project (e.g. dissertation chapters,
         articles, conference papers, grant proposals, etc.) at any stage in the writing process
         (e.g. analyzing CFPs, brainstorming, restructuring, etc.). Consultants can be particularly
         helpful in discussions of process, but they can also review up to eight pages of writing
         during a session.
     •   Consultants do not proofread or edit writing, but rather provide non-directive, non-
         evaluative support about the audience, purpose and context of academic writing.
         Consultants also discuss how to improve the writing process, time management and
         motivation.
     •   In consultations covering co-authored projects, we encourage all authors of written
         material to be present.
Please note that appointments are made in advance on a first-come, first-served basis. If you
must cancel your appointment, please do so at least 24 hours in advance. Students who miss
two or more appointments will be unable to meet with a consultant until the following
semester.
The UWC has resources for academic writers of all stages, including presentations, videos, and
handouts that cover everything from grammar to citation styles. Students are also welcome to
visit the UWC Library, which contains books on discipline-specific writing styles, dissertation
writing, and other topics relevant to writing in graduate school. The UWC books cannot be
checked out, but students are welcome to stay and read them.
Here are some additional resources for UT graduate students:
     •   UT’s Counseling and Mental Health Center offers free, confidential counseling and
         groups for graduate students, including a Dissertation Support Group and a Graduate
         Student Support Group. Graduate students who are UT employees are also eligible for
         counseling and stress reduction services through the CMHC’s Employee Assistance
         Program.
     •   Communications courses for international graduate students
     •   Writing and editing assistance for international graduate students
     •   Graduate writing services and advising at Sanger Learning Center
     •   Scholars Commons at PCL
     •   GSA Graduate Writing Groups
                                                                                                    4


Grading Procedure:
    -  Term Paper (outline, partial drafts, and final text): 70%.
    -  Presentations of weekly readings: 15%.
    -  Presentations of own work (in process as well as final): 15%.
Please note that the instructor reserves the right to make changes in the syllabus when
necessary to meet learning objectives.
Reading Schedule: (this schedule is tentative and subject to possible revision)
Week 1:
- Tuesday, September 3rd              - Introduction to the seminar
Week 2:
- Tuesday, September 10th             - Strong, Pauline (1999) Captive Selves, Captivating Others:
                                      The Politics and Poetics of Colonial American Captivity
                                      Narratives. Boulder: Westview Press.
Week 3:
- Tuesday, September 17th             - Sturm, Circe (2002) Blood Politics: Race, Culture, and
                                      Identity in the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. Berkeley:
                                      University of California Press.
Week 4:
- Tuesday, September 24th             - Hartigan, John (1999) Racial Situations: Class
                                      Predicaments of Whiteness in Detroit. Princeton: Princeton
                                      University Press.
                                                                                                 5


Week 5:
- Tuesday, October 1st  - Smith, Christen (2016) Afro-Paradise: Blackness, Violence,
                        and Performance in Brazil. Chicago: University of Illinois
                        Press.
Week 6:
- Tuesday, October 8th  - Menchaca, Martha (2016) The Politics of Dependency: US
                        Reliance on Mexican Oil and Farm Labor. Austin: The
                        University of Texas Press.
Week 7:
- Tuesday, October 15th - Peterson, Marina (2010) Sound, Space, and the City: Civic
                        Performance in Downtown Los Angeles. Philadelphia:
                        University of Pennsylvania Press.
Week 8:
- Tuesday, October 22nd - Stewart, Kathleen and Lauren Berlant (2019) The
                        Hundreds. Durham: Duke University Press.
                        - 3 to 5-page Term Paper Outline due!
Week 9:
- Tuesday, October 29th - Campbell, Craig (2014) Agitating Images: Photography
                        against History in Indigenous Siberia. Minneapolis:
                        University of Minnesota Press.
Week 10:
- Tuesday, November 5th - Handman, Courtney (2014) Critical Christianity:
                        Translation and Denominational Conflict in Papua New
                        Guinea. University of California Press.
                                                                                   6


Week 11:
- Tuesday, November 12th             - Cons, Jason (2016) Sensitive Space: Fragmented Territory
                                     at the India-Bangladesh Border. Seattle: University of
                                     Washington Press.
Week 12:
- Tuesday, November 19th             - Keeler, Ward (2017) The Traffic in Hierarchy: Masculinity
                                     and Its Others in Buddhist Burma. Honolulu: University of
                                     Hawai’i Press.
Week 13:
- Tuesday, November 26th             - Writing Period/American Anthropological Association
                                     (AAA) annual conference.
Week 14:
- Thursday, December 3rd             - Presentations of Final Research Papers
Final Papers due on Thursday, December 5th!
Note that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities
                                                                                                7
