Fall 2019
                      ADV 392-3: Advertising Research I
Tues/Thurs. 11 – 12:30 pm
CMA 3.130
Dr. Deena Kemp
dkemp@austin.utexas.edu
BMC 4.376
Office Hours: Thursdays 1:30 – 2:30 pm (or by appointment)
Course Description
This course is a survey of qualitative and quantitative research methods and is designed to
provide a foundation for conducting and evaluating empirical research related to advertising.
Course Objectives
     • Understand the advantages and limitations of various research designs
     • Explain principles related to sampling, measurement, reliability, and validity
     • Develop research questions and hypotheses
     • Design and independently conduct simple studies
     • Conduct and interpret basic statistical analyzes
     • Critically evaluate research conclusions
     • Understand ethical standards for conducting research
Course Format
This is a graduate seminar course. As such, the majority of our class time will be spent
discussing the readings assigned for each session. To facilitate our discussion, you will complete
the readings before each class and post a response to the discussion board on the course Canvas
site. Your response should comment on things you found interesting, challenging or
questionable, ask questions about things that you found unclear, and/or raise issues for further
discussion. Come to class prepared to engage with and learn from one another. In addition to
discussion, there will be several in-class activities to help you apply principles from the readings
and prepare to complete the course assignments.
Texts
Davis, J. J. (2012). Advertising research: theory & practice. (2nd Ed.) Upper Saddle River, NJ:
        Pearson Education, Inc.
Journal articles available on Canvas
SPSS—access through UT Computing or purchase student copy; or R—free download


Assignment
Your participation in class discussion and activities, including posts responding to the readings,
is a significant part of your course grade. Additionally, there will be five homework assignments
and a semester-long project. Detailed descriptions of each assignment will be posted to Canvas.
Participation                           20%
Homework Assignments                    50%
         Responsible Research Conduct Training
         Qualitative Method Paper
         Survey Questionnaire
         Method Critique
         Data analysis paper
Research Proposal and Presentation 30%
Grading Scale
94% or higher             A        74 – 76.99%      C
90 – 93.99%               A-       70 – 73.99%      C-
87 – 89.99%               B+       67 – 69.99%      D+
84 – 86.99%               B        64 – 66.99%      D
80 – 83.99%               B-       60 – 63.99%      D-
77 – 79.99%               C+       59% or lower     F
Course Policies
Reading responses are due by 9am before the corresponding class session and may not be
submitted late. Assignments are due by 5pm on the assigned dates. Late submission of
assignments is strongly discouraged and will result in one letter grade reduction for each day.
Incomplete course grades will only be considered in extenuating circumstances (i.e. severe
illness).
Canvas
I will use Canvas to communicate with you outside of class time and to make the assigned
articles and other material available to you. Additionally, you will submit your assignments and
your comments on the readings via Canvas. Please bookmark our class site and be sure to check
it frequently. https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1263977
                                                                                  ADV 392-3 |      2


Tentative Course Schedule
The course schedule is subject to change throughout the semester. Additional readings will be
posted in advance of their corresponding class session.
 Date           Topic                                    Assignment
 Thurs. 8/29    Course Introduction                      Research Interest Description
 Tues. 9/3      Nature of Research                       Davis Chap. 1
 Thurs. 9/5     Research Questions and Hypotheses        Reading on Canvas
 Tues. 9/10     Secondary Research                       Davis Chap. 3
 Thurs. 9/12    Research Ethics                          Davis Chap. 2
                                                         Human Subjects Training
 Tues. 9/17     Sampling                                 Davis Chap. 4
 Thurs. 9/19    Qualitative Methods                      Davis Chap. 5
                                                         Research Questions & Bibliography
 Tues. 9/24     Focus Groups                             Davis Chap. 6
 Thurs. 9/26    Analyzing Qualitative Data               Davis Chap. 7
 Tues. 10/1     Guests                                   TBD
 Thurs. 10/3    Guests                                   TBD
 Tues. 10/08    Measurement                              Davis Chap. 11
                                                         Qualitative Method Paper
 Thurs. 10/10   Survey Research                          Davis Chap. 10
 Tues. 10/15    Survey Research                          Davis Chap. 12, 13
 Thurs. 10/17   Experimental Research                    Davis Chap. 14
 Tues. 10/22    Experimental Research                    Reading on Canvas
                                                         Survey Questionnaire
 Thurs. 10/24   Descriptive Statistics                   Davis Chap. 15
 Tues. 10/29    Descriptive Statistics                   Reading on Canvas
 Thurs. 10/31   Guests                                   TBD
 Tues. 11/5     Inferential Statistics                   Davis Chap. 16
                                                         Method Critique
 Thurs. 11/7    Inferential Statistics                   Reading on Canvas
 Tues. 11/12    Guests                                   TBD
 Thurs. 11/14   Reporting Research                       Davis Chap. 21
                                                         Method Outline
 Tues. 11/19    Observational Methods                    Davis Chap. 8
 Thurs. 11/21   Observational Methods                    Davis Chap. 9
 Tues. 11/26    Independent Research                     Data Analysis Paper
 Thurs. 11/28   No Class (Thanksgiving Break)
 Tues. 12/3     Content Analysis                         Reading on Canvas
 Thurs. 12/5    Research Presentations
 Tues. 12/17    Final Papers Due                         Submit by 5 pm
                                                                               ADV 392-3 |    3


Student Rights & Responsibilities
    ▪ You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    ▪ You have a right to respect.
    ▪ You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    ▪ You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    ▪ You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    ▪ You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
        improve your learning environment.
    ▪ You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
        shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    ▪ You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
        with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
        overwhelming.
    ▪ You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
        others.
    ▪ Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
        bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    ▪ You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
        someone is excluded.
    ▪ You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each
        other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Statement of Respect and Inclusivity
You are expected to contribute to an inclusive and respectful class environment. Students of all
backgrounds are to be treated fairly and with honesty, integrity, and respect. We will cover
sensitive issues in class. Civil discourse, reasoned thought, sustained discussion, and constructive
engagement without degrading, abusing, harassing, or silencing others is required of all students.
Names and Personal Pronouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to instructors with the student’s
legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender
pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
                                                                                     ADV 392-3 |   4


and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you
use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a previous class), you must
cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web
address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
You should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted to a plagiarism-
detection tool such as Turnitin. Turnitin is a software resource intended to address plagiarism
and improper citation. The software works by cross-referencing submitted materials with an
archived database of journals, essay, newspaper articles, books, and other published work. In
addition, other methods may be used to determine the originality of the paper. This software is
not intended to replace or substitute for my judgement regarding detection of plagiarism.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
email address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but
at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your
e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: https://ugs.utexas.edu/vick/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you
from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we can develop a
plan to meet your need and the requirements of the course. The University also provides a range
of resources to help you achieve your academic and personal goals:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
                                                                                    ADV 392-3 |     5


learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644
(video phone) or ssd@austin.utexas.edu. http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep, and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle.
You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part
of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than
later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life
events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Moody Writing Support Program
The Moody Writing Support Program provides one-on-one coaching, workshops, and video
resources to help undergraduates become better writers.
moodywriting@austin.utexas.edu
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/undergraduate/moody-writing-support-program
Canvas Tech Support for Students
Canvas technical support for students is available 24/7 at 1-855-308-2494. Or click the Help icon
in Canvas to have a live text chat with a technical support representative.
University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu
UT Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
IT@UT: https://it.utexas.edu
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a
culture of care on campus, go to: https://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Title IX Reporting
                                                                                   ADV 392-3 |     6


Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
        have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or
with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they
are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The Office of Campus Safety and Security provides the following recommendations regarding
emergency evacuation. For more information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety or call 512-
471-5767.
    ▪ Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
    ▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    ▪ Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
    ▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
        re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
        The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    ▪ Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at: https://emergency.utexas.edu.
                                                                                    ADV 392-3 |     7
