                                 Advertising 377M (06100)
                                       Media Investments
                                       Monday/Wednesday 8a-930a
                                                  BMC 4.206
Lecturer          Tracy Arrington
Email             tracyarrington@austin.utexas.edu
Office            BMC 4.356
Office Hours      Monday 930-10a, Wednesday 930-10a and by appointment
TA/GA             To be named
Course Overview and Objectives
Media Investments is an introduction to the art and science of media placement. Media 'buys' typically
represent the largest percentage of an advertising budget, thus impactful and efficient media schedules
are critical to the success of every advertising campaign. The best creative is meaningless if no one sees
the work. The best plans are meaningless without effective, strategic, comprehensive media evaluation,
assertive negotiation and secure placements. Advertisers have an expectation that their money will be
spent wisely and that those responsible for the investments will be accountable for every dollar - no one
can afford a different scenario. This class is designed to prepare you for the realities of today's
fractured media marketplace and will equip you with tools you need to thrive (not just survive) at job
one on day one.
This course will be presented from three points of view - agency, client and vendor. Perspective is
crucial, as the ability to approach media opportunities from different points of view directly impacts the
outcome for all involved. The more nimble your mind, the more information you have, the more often
you will win. While possessing an intimate knowledge of the technical aspects and metrics associated
with different media types is essential to assessing advertising opportunities, there is more to media
investing than knowing the numbers. Through the course of the semester we will:
        build a strong familiarity with various tones, techniques and delivery-methods regularly used by
         parties involved in the investment process
        develop a fluid understanding of how and why certain tones, techniques and delivery-methods
         are impactful (and/or damaging)
        acquire effective personal techniques to use throughout the negotiation process, under a
         variety of conditions
        establish a solid foundation and understanding of data sets and KPIs used to evaluate each
         major media type
        expand our media vocabularies to include a thorough understanding of investment-related
         terminology
        gain the ability to comprehensively evaluate multiple media offerings and provide solid rationale
         for conclusions
        put forth strategic recommendations and close the sale (to the client, to the vendor and to the
         agency)
        become skilled at contributing to the campaign process in every role to improve client results
        learn to move beyond the obvious and become innovative in our approach to media
        avoid 'shiny object syndrome'
        remove ‘that’s not my job’ from our vocabularies


Assignments
Broadcast Buying Grids - One of the most important tools used to build and analyze broadcast
schedules is media buying software, providing an organized look at investment options. In this exercise,
students will construct their own buying grids in Excel. Two grids will be constructed & formula loaded -
one for radio & the other for television/cable.
One on Ones - With so many media options available to investors, time, access and information have
become precious commodities. For this exercise, the class will be randomly split in half. Students in
group A will be buyers. Buyers will receive a client briefing document prior to the one-on-one meetings.
Students in group B will become sellers and will receive a sales product/priority briefing, along with a list
of clients the buyers represent. On the first one-on-one session day, the buyers will host a series of 7-
minute meetings with various sellers. After each meeting, both the buyer and the seller will have 7
minutes to complete a review/assessment of the meeting on a provided assessment form. On the
second one-on-one session day, the roles of groups A & B will be reversed. Following the session days,
each student will compose two single-page POVs - one on the importance of effective tactics and
delivery-methods utilized by buyers in the investment process and the second on the same for sellers.
Grades for this exercise will be weighted 80% POVs/materials prepared for the exercise, 20%
assessment forms.
Media Buying Exercises - Rapid-response homework assignments. Total of five. Will be given in class,
will be due the next class day.
Media Investment Portfolio – Student groups will be presented with real-time media avails and will
complete buys in each major media type on behalf of an actual client. Buy summary paperwork and
rationale will be completed, as it would be for a supervisor/client, and all materials will be submitted at
the end of the semester. The resulting portfolio will demonstrate the students’ knowledge of sound
investment options in each vertical and an understanding of the elements of value in each media type as
they relate to client goals.
Build Your Media Knowledge Base – You are expected to stay current with media news and events.
Suggested reading includes www.mediapost.com, www.mediaweek.com, www.adage.com,
www.imediaconnections.com, www.iab.net. Specific articles may be assigned throughout the semester.
A note about class attendance & participation – Small assignments may be given throughout the
semester to facilitate discussion in class. These assignments will be turned in & counted toward the
participation grade, along with verbal participation during class itself.


Grading
      A         92.5-100%
     A-         89.5-92.4%
     B+         86.5-89.4%
      B         82.5-86.4%
     B-         79.5-82.4%
     C+         76.5-79.4%
      C         72.5-76.4%
     C-         69.5-72.4%
      D         59.5-69.4%
      F        Below 59.4%
 Media Buying Exercises                  20%
 Broadcast Buying Grids                  15%
 One-on-Ones                             20%
 Media Investment Portfolio              30%
 Class Attendance & Participation        15%
 TOTAL                                  100%
Deadlines and Standards
Materials for this course will primarily be distributed online, though some assignments will be made in
class. Email will also be used to communicate course information - check your email every day before
class. Graded assignments will be returned in class. Retain your original assignments until grades have
been submitted at the end of the semester. Assignments not retrieved by the last class day will be
destroyed.
Hard copies of all assignments are to be submitted in class, by 8 a.m. on the scheduled due dates, unless
otherwise noted on the assignment emails. Paperwork should ALWAYS be ‘client-ready’ – presented in
a professional manner, stapled, foldered, etc. as appropriate. Points will be deducted if work
presented is not client ready. Late assignments, turned in past 8:00a, will be scored 0. It is advisable
and acceptable to turn assignments in early.
Attendance and participation are required at all class, presentation and team meetings. Please check in
with the TA upon arrival to class each day so that s/he may record your attendance. S/he will stop
recording at 805am – if you arrive past this point your attendance will not be recorded. Each student
will receive two ‘free’ days during the semester – absences on these days will not impact the student’s
attendance grade and may be used as the student sees fit (interviews, trips w other professors, etc.).
Note that OOO days may not be missed. These days are noted on the calendar. Significant absences
beyond the two ‘free’ days can affect a student’s final score by up to two letter grades. Depending upon
scheduling opportunities there may be optional off-site, after-hour and off-class day meetings. Students
are encouraged to attend these optional meetings.
No food or drink allowed in class. Cell phones should be turned off during class as well. If your phone
disrupts class you are required to leave the room in a quiet, orderly manner. You may rejoin the class at
the next regular class meeting.


Use of laptops/tablets in class is permitted for note-taking purposes only. If a student is observed
using a laptop for other purposes during class (including use of social media and IM) they will be asked
to turn the device off for the remainder of the class period.
Everything produced for class assignments is to be your original work. Enlisting aid from anyone outside
the class is considered a breach of UT’s Standard of Academic Integrity and will be dealt with
accordingly. All written assignments produced outside the classroom are to be composed on, and output
as, hard copy from a personal computer.
Participation in UT-Austin’s Electronic Course Instructor Survey (eCIS) is required. A screen shot
showing that the survey has been completed (a screen shot of the post-completion screen, NOT the
comments themselves) is to be submitted via email to both Tracy Arrington and the course TA by 8a
on the last day of class. Students that do not submit the survey will have 2.0 points deducted from
their final grade.
Grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors can significantly reduce an assignment score. Please review
documents carefully before submitting for evaluation.
The schedule of events is tentative and is subject to change. Students are responsible for changes to the
schedule as announced in class or via email.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Mandatory Reading: All students agree to read then abide by the University of Texas at Austin’s
Standard of Academic Integrity and understand the nature of Academic Dishonesty as defined by UT-
Austin at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php and
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a meeting, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support:
For immediate support, visit or call the Counseling and Mental Health Center M-F 8a-5p, SSB 5th Floor,
512.471.3515, cmhc.utexas.edu, or call the CMHC Crisis Line 24/7 at 512.471.2255
The CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW. She is available
M-F 8a-5p in CMA 4.134 or can be reached at 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she doesn’t answer).


Course Schedule
Date DOTW                              Topic                             Assignments Due     Students Receive
 8.29  W  Course Overview and Expectations
  9.3  M  LABOR DAY - NO CLASS
  9.5  W  From the ATB Forward - The Investment Process
 9.10  M  Interpersonal Communication - Investors + Clients/Internal
 9.12  W  Interpersonal Communication - Investors + Sellers
 9.17  M  Construction and Strategy - RFPs
 9.19  W  Impactful RFP Responses                                                           Portfolio Assignment
 9.24  M  Research, Evaluation, Metrics & Negotiation - Print                                       MBE1
 9.26  W  Portfolio Workshop - Print                                          MBE1
 10.1  M  Research, Evaluation and Metrics - Audio
 10.3  W  Negotiation - Audio                                                                       MBE2
 10.8  M  Portfolio Workshop - Audio                                           MBE2           BBG Assignment
10.10  W  Research, Evaluation and Metrics - Television & Cable
10.15  M  Negotiation - Television & Cable                                                          MBE3
10.17  W  Portfolio Workshop - Television and Cable                            MBE3
10.22  M  Research, Evaluation, Metrics & Negotiation - OOH                                         MBE4
10.24  W  Portfolio Workshop - OOH                                             MBE4
10.29  M  Research, Evaluation, Metrics & Negotiation - Digital                            MBE5, OOO Assignment
10.31  W  Portfolio Workshop - Digital                                      MBE5, BBGs
 11.5  M  Effective Selling Techniques
 11.7  W  Seller Panel - GUESTS
11.12  M  One-on-Ones - Roles A/B - ATTENDANCE REQUIRED
11.14  W  One-on-Ones - Roles B/A - ATTENDANCE REQUIRED
11.19  M  Dynamic Investment Partners - Google and Facebook
11.21  W  THANKSGIVING - NO CLASS
11.26  M  Hybrid Media Offerings, AV That Adds Value                    OOO POVs+Materials
11.28  W  Setting Final Decision Criteria, Playing Defense, Acts of God
 12.3  M  Writing Winning Rationale for Every Recommendation
 12.5  W  In-class work session (Portfolio)
12.10  M  Game-Changing Media Trends                                         Portfolios
