                            Syllabus for ALD 118C: McNair Seminar
                                              Spring 2019
                                  Wednesdays 5-6 PM, MAI 220F
                                          Office: SSB 4.410
Instructors:
    1) Darren D. Kelly, Ph.D.
        darren.kelly@austin.utexas.edu
    2) Eric Dieter, Ph.D.
        ericdieter@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants:
    1) Taylor Payne
       tpayne@utexas.edu
    2) Pablo Montes
        pmontes@utexas.edu
                              COURSE SEMINAR DESCRIPTION
The purpose of this course is to provide an experience for students to familiarize themselves with
the academic discipline, to establish and center their research and to prepare for their pursuit of
graduate studies programs. This semester, students will begin researching their respective fields
in order to gain a better understanding of how they fit within their academic discipline(s), and
vice versa. Through writing assignments, course work, guest speakers, and readings, students
will explore the culture of their discipline, including key issues, research methodologies,
publications, and scholars in their field. The course is designed for students to become
acquainted with their field so that they are better prepared to work with and/or challenge current
research produced in their areas of interest, as well as prepare students to think about their
graduate school application processes.
Tips for success:
This course is designed to enable you to take responsibility for your learning and research. This
requires self-discipline and self-management of your own time. Be proactive about these
assignments and budget your time/energy accordingly.
Be proactive in consulting your faculty mentors to become better acquainted with
methodologies, literature, and approaches in your field of interest.


                                             CLASS
                                           POLICIES
Attendance and Participation
To maintain a rich conversation that we can all cultivate throughout the semester, student
attendance, timeliness, preparation, and engagement are essential. We understand that things
come up; as such, you are allowed one absence (excused or unexcused) throughout the course
of the semester. With each additional absence, we will lower your final grade by one letter
grade each subsequent time.
Cell Phones and Email during Class Time
Please let those in personal and professional life know that you are not available during class
time. Limit access to personal computing devices only during times in class when we are
accessing class materials or you are using the device to take notes, participate in class
instruction and/or learning.
                                           GRADING
Assignment                                        Percentage            Due Dates
Attendance/Participation                          75%
Research Presentation                             25%
                                        ASSIGNMENTS
Attendance/Participation – 75%
You are expected to attend class and be an active participant in the class. This will include
participating in conversations, interacting with any guest speakers, etc.
Presentation – 25%
Presentations: The presentation will be to give an update on your current research. This will
consist of a brief literature review, methods section, preliminary results, next steps. If there
are no preliminary results, you will be expected to create an expected results section. If
preliminary results are not what you expected you will still need to present those and explain
what these results mean


                          COURSE OUTLINE
Date                 Course Content                 Assignments Due
                     Brief Update on
1/23                                                5 min conversation
                     Research Project
        Presentation from LBJ Research Group
1/30
             Discussion of Summer Programs                  2/7
 2/6
     Grad Life Problems – Helping Family Understand
2/13                                                       2/14
      Grad Life Problems – Financial Awareness and
2/20
                        Surviving
                       UNT Recap
2/27
                    Research Update
2/28
           Grad Life Problems – Relationships
 3/6
                     Research Update
3/13
      Grade Life Problems – I’m a PhD, now what?
3/27
 4/3                 Research Update
4/10    Grad Life Problems – Department Politics
4/17                 SRI Orientation
4/24            McNair End of Year Event


Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify us of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Use of Canvas
This course requires the use of Canvas, a Web-based course management system with password-
protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu/ to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, and to post grades. You can find support in using Canvas at
http://guides.instructure.com/.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). We are not required to provide accommodations without an official
accommodation letter from SSD.
    ▪▪ Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
        (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies
on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial
Services web site at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty. Please see the following website and view the video for
information on plagiarism. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/plagiarism
