  40595: MAS 374/ WGS 340/AFR 372C/ AMS321 : Women of Color Feminism in the U.S.
Dr. N. Guidotti-Hernández                              Office Hours W 12:30-3:30pm
Fall 2018                                              or by appointment
CMA 3.114                                              Office: BUR 422
MWF 11:00am-12:00pm                                    email: ngh24@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This interdisciplinary comparative ethnic studies course examines the most influential works
produced by those subjects whose political and cultural investments in a collaborative, cross-
cultural critique of U.S. imperialism and heteronormativity has been called “Women of Color
Feminisms in the U.S.” In order to situate these works historically, materially, and culturally, we
develop a facility with historical and contemporary discourses of nationalism, gender, race,
sexuality, and class. Our goal will be to engage in a sustained and critical exploration of the
limits and promises of “Women of Color Feminisms in the U.S.” What about this feminism
centralizes racial solidarities, and what is gained by using this politically fraught label? How
does its discourse carry over into everyday practice? How do we account for trans identities
under this rubric? How do the documents produced under its name draw from the anti-colonial
writings of writers of color? What is the relationship between this mode of feminism and more
recent elaborations of global and transnational feminisms?
Learning Objectives: The main purpose of this course is to understand the category of analysis
Women of Color (WOC) and how feminist solidarities, theories, and practices have emerged
through those who identify with the term. Students will
        • learn basic theories of WOC feminisms in historical perspective and understand the role


         of political and social intervention, especially generated by feminist activists and scholars.
         • develop a sophisticated and responsible vocabulary for discussing pressing political and
         social issues
         •understand how intersectionality (the nexus of sex, gender, disability, race, class, and
         religion) creates overlapping and interdependent systems of disadvantage and inequality.
         •Learn how to use a critical ethnic studies framework for discussing feminist solidarities
         across and between U.S. minority groups
         • develop critical reading and writing skills.
Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that
has experienced persistent marginalization.
ASSIGNMENTS AND POLICIES:
Attendance and Participation
In order to keep up with the class discussion and the writing assignments, it is important not only
that you come to class regularly, but that you also come prepared. You should read carefully and
think about what you are reading. This class is small enough to allow for discussion and your
contributions can help to shape the direction of our inquiries. Students are permitted up to four
unexcused absences. Every excused absence needs to be adequately justified with a doctor’s note
for illness, family emergencies, or other documentation. Students will be responsible for knowing
class materials.
Students are expected to participate in class discussion. Come to class with one idea you want to
discuss based on the reading. Please bring your books and articles to class for the appropriate
day’s material. I hope you actively participate in this course because I have found it is the best
way to engage you in learning.
Laptops are allowed in class given the mass of digital content we will work with. Please be
judicious and mindful of your screen usage in class, utilizing it for the task at hand (readings and
taking notes). Students should have the opportunity to engage in multiple forms of learning and
this is one that should be done with good faith intentions.
Groundrules: When I lecture, you can use your laptops; when we are engaging in
conversation with one another, we put them away. When you are solving problems, you
can use your laptops; when we discuss the meaning of those problems, we put them
away. When we write in class, you can use your laptops; when we are giving one another
feedback on our writing, we put them away.


ESSAYS
** All essays should conform to the standards for this course: 12 point times font, double spaced
type, with one inch margins, and a standardized citation format (MLA, Chicago, ect.).***
Your first essay will be to create and close read a meme that is related to and generated
from one or more critical of the texts from the course. You will be asked to give an in-depth
consideration of theories of Women of Color Feminisms based on that particular
text as you visually and textually construct the meme. The Professor will provide more
information when the assignment is given. The meme should be printed on the first page
of the paper and the 4-5 pages of text should be printed on the following pages
The second paper will be a 4-5 page critical analysis of transfeminism using either Snorton’s
Black on Both Sides or Lemus’s Like Son as a primary text. How do trans identities expand and
complicate women of color feminisms? This is the question you will answer as you write your
essay.
If you are concerned with your particular level of writing expertise, please see me during
office hours for more information and additional skills-based support. I am always happy to help.
(30% of grade)
Essay Revisions
Students will have an opportunity to rewrite the both essays if they received a “B” grade
or lower. Students must incorporate the feedback from the Professor in the rewrites in
order to improve their grade. When turning in the rewrite, please submit the original with the
revision. The two grades will be averaged.
Final Research Essay
Prior to the end of the course, you will be required to write a prospectus of your final
paper. It will consist of the first two pages of the final paper and must contain a well developed
thesis paragraph and annotated bibliography with a minimum of 4 outside academic sources.
(5% of grade)
Your final essay will be a 6-7 page research paper that draws upon different theoretical
perspectives about contemporary Women of Color Feminisms in the US. This is a research
paper. Consultation of outside sources is necessary. Students will need a minimum of 6 academic
sources to complete assignment requirements. Please consult the Professor for approval of your
topic. A handout about assignment particulars and topics will be handed out during the fifth
week of classes. (25% of grade)
Peer Review
Prior to when the final papers are due, students will work in groups for peer review. A
detailed handout will accompany this process. By this stage, students should have a
minimum of 4 pages of the final paper written. You will perform the peer review, hand
the author back the review sheets and edited essays, and turn everything in with your


final paper. Be sure to turn everything in so that your peers can receive credit. (5%)
Presentation of Final Projects/Essays
Students will present their papers to the class on the final days of the semester using
Powerpoint or Prezi. Please be sure to hand in a printed copy of the Powerpoint or Prezi to the
instructor, along with your paper.
Your presentation should contain an argument and evidence, just like your paper. (5%)
The final paper must be 6-7 pages.
Extra Credit
Opportunities for extra credit will present themselves throughout the semester. Students may
attend designated events and write a 1-2 page paper in response to the event. Students can also
read chapters in Haciendo Caras/Making Face, Making Soul or The Angela Davis Reader that
we did not cover in class and write a paper about them. Students can also watch an episode of the
series Vida or Pose and write a paper about how they relate to the class. This paper can add
points to your paper grade overall. For example, if you have an B+ average on the papers, the
extra paper will give extra points and bring you to an A.
Your final grade is calculated through the following components.
                               25% Final Paper
                               5%      Prospectus and Bibliography
                               5%      Peer Review
                               30% Long Papers
                               30% Attendance and Class Participation
                               5%      Presentation
POLICY ON LATE WORK
NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED. IF YOU ARE ILL OR WILL MISS THE PAPER
DEADLINE, CONTACT THE INSTRUCTOR 24 HOURS PRIOR TO THE DUE DATE. YOU
MAY BE GRANTED AN EXTENSION DEPENDING UPON THE CIRCUMSTANCES. IT IS
YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE ARRAGNMENTS PRIOR TO ASSIGNEMENT DUE
DATES.
Scholastic Dishonesty
You are bound by the University’s policies regarding plagiarism. Violation of these rules is
grounds for failure in the course. Retain drafts and other relevant materials for writing
assignments. You may be required to submit these on request. In order to avoid charges of
plagiarism, make certain to cite all sources that you use.
If you think that you will need help to avoid plagiarism when writing a paper, please check with
the Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Trigger Warnings
Because of the course content, I will provide advance notices that indicate when or how online


posts or course materials contain matter that might be considered inflammatory or even
traumatizing. My goal is to support potentially vulnerable students by providing disclaimers
prior to the course or before explicit content is discussed. The place of trigger warnings in
contemporary scholarship and critique is vital to our learning environment about these difficult
topics that often alienate survivors. The instructor-student experience in pedagogy is one of
exchange and we should have an open environment where we can together make classroom a
place of respectful challenge and transformation. Sometimes we experience land mines, where
you feel disconnected or alienated by the material. Please be gentle with yourself and understand
this is a normal response to trauma and violence. I use a trauma-centered pedagogy in this class
to curtail triggers. It’s my job to make this a safe space to share. How do we build trust in this
classroom? There will be a spectrum of responses: some will be very aware of their feelings and
others will be coming to this fresh. Keep an open mind and let's work together to create a safe
and nurturing learning space
Accommodations:
 The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. If you think you need accommodation under these
circumstances, you must provide written proof within the two first weeks of class. For more
information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259, or visit the website
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/m)
     •   Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
     •   Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
         accessible
     •   Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
General Safety Policies:
Recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security (phone: 512-471-5767; website: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/):
- Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
- Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building.
- Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first two weeks of class.
- In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
- Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
- Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Basic Needs Security
Any student who has difficulty affording groceries or accessing sufficient food to eat every day,
or who lacks a safe and stable place to live, and believes this my affect their performance in the


course, is urged to contact the Dean of Students for Support. Furthermore, please notify the
professor if you are comfortable in doing so. This will enable her to provide any resources that
she may possess.
Prohibition of Sex Discrimination, Sexual Harassment, Sexual Assault, Sexual Misconduct,
Interpersonal Violence, and Stalking
It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin to provide an educational and working
environment for its students, faculty, and staff that is free from sex discrimination (including
discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression), sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence (including domestic
violence and dating violence), and stalking. In accordance with federal and state law, the
University prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex (including gender) and prohibits sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence, and stalking. Responsible
Employees of the University are required to promptly report incidents of prohibited conduct as
provided in this policy.
If you believe that you or anyone you know has been subject to any of these forms of
mistreatment, please talk with the Professor immediately so that I can get you the help you need.
Course Format and Procedures
Students can expect lectures and regular group discussions during class about the materials and
concepts being studied in the course.
How to Succeed in this Course
Regular class attendance is important. Before you come to class: read the assigned readings, take
notes and prepare your reflections and questions about these materials (refer to reading
worksheet handed out in class and posted on Canvas with guidance on how to read texts).
Complete course assignments and turn them in on time. You can use office hours if you have
more questions or need further assistance.
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your
needs and the requirements of the course.
Required Texts
Anzaldúa, Gloria. Haciendo Caras/ Making Face, Making Soul
Davis, Angela. The Angela Davis Reader.
Lemus, Felicia Luna. Like Son.
Snorton, Riley. Black on Both Sides: A Racial History of Trans Identities
An * indicates that the reading is on the Canvas Website.


COURSE SCHEDULE
9/29         Introduction to course.
I. Women of Color Feminist Frameworks and Terminology
9/31         “‘Women of Color in the U.S.’: Pedagogical Reflections on the Politics of ‘the
             Name,’” Minoo Moallem*
9/3          Labor Day, No class
9/5           “Teaching the Differences among Women from a Historical Perspective:
             Rethinking Race and Gender as Social Categories,” Tessie Liu*
9/7          “Notes from the (Non)Field: Teaching and Theorizing Women of Color,”
             Rachel Lee *
9/10          “Where in the Transnational World Are U.S. Women of Color?” Sandra Soto*
             II. Historic Women of Color Feminist Practices
9/12         Haciendo Caras pp. Xv-xxvi and 3-14
9/14         Research Day, no class
             Please come to class prepared to discuss ideas for your final paper the following
             class session
9/17         Haciendo Caras pp.42-74
9/19         Haciendo Caras pp. 139-168
9/21         Haciendo Caras pp. 170-178 and 199-211
9/24         Haciendo Caras pp. 223-224 and 245-290
9/26         Haciendo Caras pp. 297-301 and 304-334
9/28         Haciendo Caras pp. 335-344 and 371-375
10/1         Open Discussion Day
10/3         Haciendo Caras pp. 377-402


10/5        The Angela Davis Reader pp. 29-39
10/8        The Angela Davis Reader pp. 61-73
            Essay #1 Due in Class
10/10       The Angela Davis Reader pp. 74-95
10/12       The Angela Davis Reader pp. 96-110
10/15       The Angela Davis Reader pp. 129-137
10/17       The Angela Davis Reader pp. 149-160
10/19       The Angela Davis Reader pp.161-192
10/22        The Angela Davis Reader pp. 193-209
10/24       The Angela Davis Reader pp. 210-221
IV. Trans Women of Color Feminsims
10/26       Black on Both Sides (pp.1-14)
10/29       Black on Both Sides (pp.17-54)
10/31       Black on Both Sides (55-97)
            *Prospectus due**
11/2        Black on Both Sides (pp. 101-136)
11/5        Black on Both Sides (pp.139-175)
11/7        Black on Both Sides (pp. 177-198)
11/9        Writing day, No Class
11/12       Like Son (pp.9-36)
11/14       Like Son (pp. 37-73)
11/16       Like Son (pp. 74-102)
            Essay #2 Due in Class.
11/19       Like Son (pp.103-140)
11/21-11/23 Thanksgiving Break, no class


11/26     Like Son (pp.141-171)
11/28     Like Son (pp.172-210)
11/30     Like Son (pp.211-266)
12/3      Peer Review
12/5      Presentations
12/7      Presentations
12/10     Presentations
FINAL PAPERS ARE DUE IN CLASS. NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED.
