                                        THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                       STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 COURSE/UNIQUE NUMBER: 88795/SW N393T28                      INSTRUCTORS: MONICA FAULKNER, PH.D
 SEMESTER: SUMMER 2019                                       OFFICE NUMBER: HARGIS 1.2018
 MEETING TIME: MW 1:30-4:00PM                                OFFICE PHONE: (512) 471-7191
 MEETING PLACE:                                              OFFICE HOURS: BY APPOINTMENT
                                                             EMAILS: MFAULKNER@AUSTIN.UTEXAS.EDU
                                               PROGRAM EVALUATION
I. Standardized Course Description
Social work program evaluation involves the application of social research methodologies to the
conceptualization, design, planning, administration, implementation, effectiveness, and utility of human services
programs and policies. This course will introduce students to the different types of program evaluation, including
formative evaluation (e.g. needs assessment, implementation assessment, process evaluation) and summative
evaluation (e.g. impact assessment, outcomes assessment, and cost analysis). The course will cover experimental,
quasi-experimental, and non- experimental study designs, including the strengths and limitations of each. Some
review of relevant data analytic methods will be presented. The influence of the historical, cultural, and political
context of evaluation research will be examined.
II. Standardized Course Objectives
By the end of the course the student will be able to:
    1. Demonstrate knowledge of the various purposes of program evaluation.
    2. Demonstrate knowledge of the history of program evaluation.
    3. Demonstrate an understanding of the impact of the political context on evaluation research.
    4. Demonstrate an understanding of the potential effects of the cultural context in which the program or policy
        takes place.
    5. Demonstrate an understanding of the iterative process of program evaluation and the participatory role of
        the stakeholders.
    6. Demonstrate knowledge of basic models of program evaluation (i.e. experimental, quasi-experimental, and
        non-experimental study designs).
    7. Demonstrate knowledge of the threats to validity associated with each study design.
    8. Demonstrate knowledge of the role of qualitative research methods in program evaluation.
    9. Demonstrate the ability to conceptualize evaluation questions and to develop appropriate objectives and
        valid indicators (measures) to answer the evaluation questions.
    10. Demonstrate an understanding of the sources of program evaluation data depending on the purpose of the
        evaluation.
    11. Demonstrate a working knowledge of general linear model methods for the analysis of evaluation
        outcomes.
    12. Apply knowledge of program evaluation models and principles by designing an evaluation of a program.
III.     Teaching Methods
This class is conducted using a variety of teaching methods such as lectures, videos, guest speakers, experiential
activities and group discussions.
     •   Lecture. It is assumed that students have read materials and completed any worksheet assignments before
         class. Thus, lecture is limited and will highlight important concepts, but it will not replace student reading.
     •   Group activities. To facilitate learning, students may be asked to work in small groups to complete
         activities related to the course content. In these instances, students may be encouraged to work with
         different classmates to vary interactions.
                                                                                                  Program Evaluation - 1


   •   Paired activities. To facilitate learning, students may be asked to work in pairs to complete activities
       and/or discuss concepts. In these instances, students may be encouraged to work with different classmates
       to vary interactions.
   •   Instructor feedback. Because learning is dependent on making mistakes, students will receive feedback
       from the instructor on each part of their program evaluation assignment. Students are expected to
       incorporate feedback into their subsequent drafts.
   •    Guest speakers. Several guest speakers will share their expertise with the class. Students are expected to
       be respectful of guest speakers by arriving to class on time and refraining from any technology use while
       guest speakers are presenting. Failure to display professional behavior in the presence of a guest speaker
       will result in up to five points being deducted from the student’s final grade.
   •   Non-profit leaders. For the program evaluation plan, students will be working directly with non-profit
       leaders. Students are expected to be respectful of these professionals’ time and expertise. Emails and
       phone calls made to professionals outside of class must demonstrate high levels of professionalism. Failure
       to display professional behavior will result in up to five points being deducted from the student’s final
       grade.
   •   Individual consultations. The instructor is available for individual consultations by appointment. For the
       final program evaluation draft, all students are encouraged to meet individually with the instructor. Sign
       up times for that meeting will be available on Canvas.
   •   Program evaluation team. Students will be assigned to a program evaluation team based on their choice
       of program evaluation plan topic. Teams will consist of 4 to 5 individuals. In the real world, program
       evaluations are typically conducted by teams. The team will work together in class on various parts of
       the project.
IV. Required Text and Materials
    a. Books
           •   Grinell, R.M., Gabor, P. A., & Unrau, Y.A. (2016). Program Evaluation for Social Workers (7th
               ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
    b. Additionals materials
    Additional materials are available on UT Canvas. Several multimedia resources have been selected to
    complement the textbook including podcasts, TedTalks and brief video presentations.
           • 118 | Making Data Visual with Miriah Meyer and Danyel Fisher. (n.d.). Retrieved June 4, 2018,
               from http://datastori.es/118-making-data-visual-with-miriah-meyer-and-danyel-fisher/
           •   Goldacre, B. (n.d.). Battling bad science. Retrieved from
               https://www.ted.com/talks/ben_goldacre_battling_bad_science
           •   Evergreen, S. (2017, April 20). Retrieved June 4, 2018, from
               http://stephanieevergreen.com/handouts/
           •   Singer, J. (2011, March 9). The Process of Evidence-Based Practice: Interview with Danielle E.
               Parrish, Ph.D. Retrieved from http://socialworkpodcast.blogspot.com/2011/03/process-of-
               evidence-based-practice.html
           •   Pucked in the Head. (n.d.). SMART goals - a work in progress. Retrieved from
               https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GeSnHb1AKhA
           •   Using logic models, a key building block of results-focused programs: An interview with Tom
               Chapel, Chief Evaluation Officer, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Episode #55.
               (2014, July 18). Retrieved June 4, 2018, from http://govinnovator.com/tom_chapel/
                                                                                             Program Evaluation - 2


V.  Course Requirements
 Assignment                                                                                      Possible points
          Quizzes (2 exams worth 15 points each; 30% of grade total)                                    30
          Students will complete two online quizzes. Quiz #1 will cover all reading content
          prior to the quiz due date. Quiz #2 is not cumulative and covers all reading content
          for the second part of class. Students may use any materials available to complete
          the quiz. There is no time limit for quizzes and quizzes can only be attempted once.
          Worksheets (10 worksheets at 2 points each; 30% of grade)                                     20
          Students will complete 10 worksheets that provide opportunities to apply the
          weekly readings to practice activities. Each worksheet has instructions for
          completion. These worksheets should be printed and brought to class for use in
          class. If a student will be missing class, they may email the worksheet to the
          professor by 1:30 pm of the class date. These worksheets are graded as completion
          grades. Students receive 3 points for completing the worksheet.
          Program Evaluation Plan (50% of grade)
          Students will create a program evaluation plan for a local nonprofit. Two nonprofits
          have agreed to work with the class. Students will select their nonprofit during the
          second class. Program evaluation plans will provide a framework that nonprofits
          can use to implement an evaluation. Students will write their own plan, but will be
          assigned a learning community to provide support throughout the semester.
          Students will turn in drafts of their program evaluation plan (part 1, part 2, draft)
          and receive a completion grade of 5 points. The final draft will be assigned a letter
          grade. Detailed instructions are provided in the program evaluation assignment
          description on Canvas.
                                                                      Part 1 completion points          5
                                                                      Part 2 completion points          5
                                                                       Draft completion points          5
                                                                                    Final draft         35
                                                                                                       100
VI. Grades
GRADUATE GRADING SCALE
       94.0 and Above               A
       90.0 to 93.999              A-
       87.0 to 89.999              B+
       84.0 to 86.999              B
       80.0 to 83.999              B-
       77.0 to 79.999              C+
       74.0 to 76.999              C
       70.0 to 73.999              C-
       67.0 to 69.999              D+
       64.0 to 66.999              D
       60.0 to 63.999              D-
       Below 60.0                   F
                                                                                             Program Evaluation - 3


VII. Class Policies
   1. Class Attendance. Any class material missed due to a class absence is the students’ sole responsibility.
   2. Class participation. Students are expected to complete the readings prior to class, and should be well
       prepared to participate in discussions and experiential learning assignments. Failure to demonstrate
       through discussions that one has completed the readings will be considered in assigning the class
       participation grade.
   3. General assignment requirements. Students should follow specific instructions for each assignment. In
       general, references/sources used in papers must be in APA format and be academic/scholarly sources. If
       questions about the credibility of a reference arise, consult with the instructor. The instructor is also
       available by email to answer questions about assignments. Students should submit questions or requests
       for clarifications at least 24 hours before an assignment is due. If an assignment is due in less than 24
       hours, the instructor cannot guarantee a timely response.
   4. Assignment due dates. Students will be penalized for late assignments by subtracting 5% of the potential
       points for the assignment for each calendar day that an assignment is late. UT does not allow Incompletes
       (grade of X) to provide additional time to complete assignment. Students will be informed of any changes
       in assignments, due dates, and other class content. If an assignment is due on a date the student cannot
       attend class or during a time when a student is having difficulties printing a paper, papers may be emailed
       to the professor by the start of that day’s class.
   5. Use of technology in class. Use of laptops, phones and similar electronic devices in class is prohibited
       except for use during approved times. Computers may only be used for taking notes or relevant in class
       activities. When working in learning communities, students are encouraged to bring laptops to use. Any
       inappropriate use of computers for emailing or internet usage is not permitted. Professional conduct
       includes respectful and meaningful efforts to participate in group projects.
VIII. University Policies
   1. The university of Texas honor code. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
       discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
       university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
       toward peers and community.
   2. Professional conduct and civility in the classroom. The professor expects students to act as professionals
       in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class
       discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
       individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity,
       gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations,
       among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual
       respect. Social Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging
       and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not
       include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment we will be
       exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by
       others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
       professionalism.
   3. Unanticipated distress. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to course
       readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the professor.
       The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments
       and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If
       counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
       Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
                                                                                                Program Evaluation - 4


4. Policy on social media and professional communication. Public social networks are not private. Even
   when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist among
   the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such forums, please
   assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented
   on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional
   reputations and prospective careers.
   Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms of
   electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived
   by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to
   minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training.
   Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
   and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
   image.
   Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are obliged
   to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should not be
   referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the
   identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must
   critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional
   relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
   Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
   Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as
   well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the
   university community, and the broader area communities.
5. Policy on scholastic dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
   subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
   the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
   University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the
   student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
   Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
6. Use of course materials. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to exams, quizzes,
   and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized duplication of the course
   materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action being taken against the
   student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific, express approval of the
   professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
   which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading
   class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or future
   students.
7. Documented disability statement. Any student who requires special accommodations must obtain a letter
   that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of
   Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or
   hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so
   that needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of
   any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
   visit:http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                                                                           Program Evaluation - 5


8. Religious holidays. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending absence at
    least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must miss a
    class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, the professor
    will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
    absence.
9. Title IX reporting. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the University of
    Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from discriminatory
    conduct based on gender. Faculty, field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory
    roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
    violence, stalking, interpersonal violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report
    such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s
    Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Liaison for the SHSSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students,
    faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to obtain information. Further
    information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found
    at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
10. Campus carry policy. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
    here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links
    menu on the School’s website.
11. Classroom confidentiality. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal matters is
    considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is protected by
    regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this
    information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of
    confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of
    academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work
    Education.
12. Use of e-mail for official correspondence to students. Email is recognized as an official mode of
    university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email for university and
    course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university
    informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and
    frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
    communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
    instructions for updating their e-mail address at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-
    mail-student-notification-policy.
13. Safety. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that involve
    working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present some risks.
    Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to
    be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students
    should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
14. Behavior concerns advice line (bcal). If students are worried about someone who is acting differently,
    they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns about another
    individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of
    Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
    and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
    visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                                           Program Evaluation - 6


    15. Emergency evacuation policy. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate
        and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
        following policies regarding evacuation:
        • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
            exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
        • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of class.
        • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
        • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
            Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX.     Course Schedule
 Week    Class   Date       Topic                  Objectives                            Before class
 1       1       6/10  Course         • Describe course requirements         READ: Text Ch. 1, 2, 3
                       overview       • Explain why program evaluation is
                 Mon                                                        LISTEN: Podcast: evidence based practice
                                        necessary
                                      • Recall program evaluation process     DO: Worksheet 1: Student survey
                                      • Understand stakeholder
                                        motivations
         2       6/12  Ethics,        • Defend positions on ethical issues
                 Wed   standards &    • Compare program evaluation            READ: Text Ch. 4, 5, 6
                       cultural         standards
                       competence                                             LISTEN: Ted Talk: Battling Bad Science
                                      • Formulate strategies for ensuring
                                        evaluations are culturally             DO: Worksheet 2: Program website
                                        competent                              review
                                                                                DO: Worksheet 3: Bad science example
 2       3       6/17  Logic Models   • Create SMART objectives
                 Mon                  • Create logic model based on           READ: Text Ch. 7, 8
                                        objectives
                                                                             LISTEN: Podcast on logic models
                                                                             LISTEN: Video clip on SMART goals
                                                                              DO: Worksheet 4: Logic Model
         4       6/19  Surveys        • Construct survey to measure client
                 Wed                    outcomes                               READ: Text Toolkit L, M
                                                                              DO: Worksheet 5: Survey
 3       5       6/24  Program visit- • Apply feedback to logic model &       DO: Worksheet 6: Agency questions
                 Mon   Austin Angels    survey
         6       6/26  Program visit- • Apply feedback to logic model &        Quiz #1 complete
                 Wed   Spirit Reins     survey
                                                                                              Program Evaluation - 7


Week Class Date      Topic                   Objectives                            Before class
4    7     7/1  Needs           • Explain the use of needs             READ: Text Ch. 9,10
           Mon  assessment        assessments
                                                                       DO: Part 1: Program evaluation plan
                                • Describe considerations for
                                  designing needs assessment
           7/3  No class
           Wed
5    8     7/8  Process         • Demonstrate understanding of         READ: Text Ch. 11
           Mon  evaluation        process evaluation
                                                                        DO: Worksheet 7: Fidelity monitoring
                                • Construct interview guides            tool
                                • Construct fidelity measures
     9     7/10 Outcome         • Demonstrate understanding of         READ: Text Ch. 12, Toolkit H, I, E
           Wed  evaluation        outcome evaluation
                                                                        DO: Worksheet 8: Research design
                                • Explain methods for conducting
                                  outcome evaluation
6    10    7/15 Cost evaluation • Demonstrate understanding of cost    READ: Text Ch. 13
           Mon                    evaluation
                                                                       DO: Part 2: Program evaluation plan
                                • Explain methods for developing
     11    7/17 Budgeting &     • Understand tools needed for project  READ: Toolkit C, D, F, G
           Wed  project           management
                management                                              DO: Worksheet 9: Budget
                                • Understand budget needed for
                                  project
                                • Develop budget for project
7    12    7/22 Data analysis & • Create graph from data              LISTEN: Podcast on data visualization
           Mon  Data            • Create chart from data
                visualization                                            DO: Worksheet 10: infographic ideas
     13    7/24 Disseminating   • Create dissemination plan            READ: Review design handouts & design
           Wed  findings        • Develop skills for designing         makeovers
                                  consumable products
                                                                       READ: Ch. 13,14
                                                                       DO: Part 3: Full program evaluation plan
                                                                       draft
8    14    7/29 Paper           Individual consultations              SIGN UP: Sign up for individual paper
           Mon  consultations                                         consultation
                                                                                         Program Evaluation - 8


 Week    Class   Date      Topic                     Objectives                       Before class
                7/31        Turn final program evaluation plan in on Canvas by 5pm.
                Wed
                            Quiz #2
X.      Bibliography
Grinell, R.M., Gabor, P. A., & Unrau, Y.A. (2016). Program Evaluation for Social Workers (7th ed.). New
        York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Goldacre, B. (n.d.). Battling bad science. Retrieved from
        https://www.ted.com/talks/ben_goldacre_battling_bad_science
Evergreen, S. (2017, April 20). Retrieved June 4, 2018, 26from http://stephanieevergreen.com/handouts/
Meyer, M. and Fisher, D. (n.d.). 118 | Making Data Visual Retrieved June 4, 2018, from http://datastori.es/118-
        making-data-visual-with-miriah-meyer-and-danyel-fisher/
Singer, J. (2011, March 9). The Process of Evidence-Based Practice: Interview with Danielle E. Parrish, Ph.D.
        Retrieved from http://socialworkpodcast.blogspot.com/2011/03/process-of-evidence-based-practice.html
Pucked in the Head. (n.d.). SMART goals - a work in progress. Retrieved from
        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GeSnHb1AKhA
Using logic models, a key building block of results-focused programs: An interview with Tom Chapel, Chief
        Evaluation Officer, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention - Episode #55. (2014, July 18).
        Retrieved June 4, 2018, from http://govinnovator.com/tom_chapel/
                                                                                          Program Evaluation - 9
