                                   R S 319 • Introduction to Islam
                                          #43255 • Fall 2018
                        (also listed as ANS 301M #32282, ISL 310 #41285)
                                      (Flags: “Global Cultures”)
Instructor:              Prof. Azfar Moin
Teaching Assistants: Mr. Alex Kreger
                         Mr. Josh Urich
Course Aims: This course provides an introduction to the religion of Islam. It is designed for
students with a general interest in the Islamic world, in religion, or in history. We will examine
the theology, history, and main social and legal institutions of Islam. Islam, as a major system of
belief in the world, is experienced by Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Consequently, besides
studying the basic tenets and texts of the religion, this course will focus on the variety of ways in
which Muslims and non-Muslims have understood and interpreted Islam. We will review the
debates surrounding the life of the prophet of Islam, Islamic pre-modern and modern history, the
Islamic concept of God and society, the role of women, and finally, Islamic government and
movements. The course is designed for students with a general interest in the Islamic world,
religions, or history.
Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students should be able to relate an informed and critical history Islam;
students should also be able to describe the key institutions and traditions of Islam; finally,
students should also be able to discuss contemporary political developments in the Muslim
world.
Global Cultures Flag
Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the
United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group,
past or present.
Prerequisites:
None
Format and Procedure:
This is primarily a lecture class with some time dedicated in class each week for group
discussion and in-class exercises. It requires critical readings of assigned texts before class as


well as active, informed participation in class discussions. Students must bring readings to class
along with notes and questions.
Required Texts
    1.  Karen Armstrong, Muhammad: A Prophet for Our Time (HarperOne, New York: 2006)
    2.  Gary Wills, What the Quran Meant and Why it Matters (Viking Press, New York: 2017)
    3.  Karen Armstrong, Islam: A Short History (Modern Library, New York: 2002)
    4.  Mahmood Mamdani, Good Muslim, Bad Muslim: America, the Cold War and the Roots
        of Terror (Three Leaves Press, New York: 2005)
Grading
    •   Attendance and participation (based on in-class exercises) 15%
    •   Quiz: 5%
    •   Essay (4 pages) 20%
    •   Mid-term 20%
    •   Final exam 40%
 Attendance
    •   Attendance is mandatory. You are expected to come to class regularly with the assigned
        readings done in advance and prepared for class discussion. Being late to class and
        leaving early counts as an absence. A student with more than six absences may be given a
        formal “Absence-Failing” notice. In short, poor attendance will impact your grade.
    •   When you know you won’t be in class on a given day because of illness or some other
        reason, you should be sure to ask a student who takes good notes whether you can have a
        copy of that day’s notes. Religious holidays sometimes conflict with class and required
        work. See the policy at the end of the syllabus for “Religious Holy Days.”
Participation
From time to time, I will hand out short exercises in class that will be graded on a participation
basis. Taken together, these assignments will make up the attendance and participation grade of
15%.
Written Assignments:
    •   Late essays will result in the loss of 5% of paper grade for each day they are late. No
        paper will be accepted if more than four days late.
    •   All written assignments will be graded on clarity and style as well as argument and
        analysis.


    •   Assignments are due at the beginning of the class, and must be uploaded to Canvas.
        Please make sure your papers are double-spaced, numbered, in Times New Roman font
        12 with one inch margins.
    •   References and citations in written work must adhere to the Chicago Manual of Style
        http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html
Grade ranges:
Papers will be graded using a plus/minus scheme with the default cutoffs in Canvas with the
following standards.
        A: Excellent! (Unusual understanding and performance, with exceptional nuance.)
        B: Good. (Normal understanding and performance. Solid work.)
        C: Some problems. (Acceptable but needs more accuracy or greater depth.)
        D: Major problems. (Lack of effort and understanding.)
        F: Not acceptable university work
Cell phone/Laptop use
- Laptops or other web-enabled devices such as iPads, tablets, smart-phones are not permitted
unless allowed explicitly by the instructor (typically, allowances will be made for participation
exercises).
- Cell phones must be switched off or set to silent mode.


Expected Schedule of Classes
(Note: Readings marked with “*” will be available from the course website)
Date          Topic/Theme                  Reading                            Assignment
Aug      Th   Introduction to the course
30
                                Part I: The Foundational Story
Sep 4    T    Why study Islam today?       Wills, Qur’an, Ch. 3, 54-62
                                           Armstrong, Muhammad, Intro., 20-
                                           30
Sep 6    Th   Mecca                        Armstrong, Muhammad, Ch. 1, 21-
                                           52
                                           Wills, Qur’an, Ch. 4, 65-82
Sep 11   T    Jahiliyyah                   Armstrong, Muhammad, Ch. 2, 53-
                                           88
                                           Wills, Qur’an, Ch. 5, 83-92
Sep 13   Th   Western stereotypes about    Documentary: “Orientalism”         Quiz
              the “East”                   https://utexas.kanopy.com/video/ed
                                           ward-said-orientalism
Sep 18   T    Hijrah                       Armstrong, Muhammad, Ch. 3, 89-    Essay
                                           124                                Assigned
                                           Wills, Qur’an, Ch. 6, 93-111
Sep 20   Th   Jihad                        Armstrong, Muhammad, Ch. 4, 125-
                                           164
                                           Wills, Qur’an, Ch. 8, 130-145
Sep 25   T    Salam                        Armstrong, Muhammad, Ch. 5, 165-
                                           214
Sep 27   Th   Women and the veil           Wills, Qur’an, Ch. 11-13, 187-211  Essay Due
                               Part II: History and Institutions
Oct 2    T    After Muhammad               Armstrong, Islam, 23-37
Oct 4    Th   Caliphate and Sharia         Armstrong, Islam, 41-53


                                    Wills, Qur’an, Ch. 9, 146-63
Oct 9  T  Sunni and Shi‘a           Armstrong, Islam, 53-77
Oct 11 Th Persians and Turks        Armstrong, Islam, 81-96
                                    Selections from Nizam al-Mulk,
                                    Book of Government*
Oct 16 T  Mongols                   Armstrong, Islam, 96-111
Oct 18 Th (Mid-term review)
Oct 23 T  Mid-term                  (please bring blue-books)            In-class
                                                                         Mid-Term
                                                                         Exam
Oct 25 Th An Age of Saints          Armstrong, Islam, 115-117
                                    Moin, “The ‘Ulama’ as Ritual
                                    Specialists,” In The Wiley-Blackwell
                                    History of Islam, 377-81*
Oct 30 T  Shi‘i Imperialism         Armstrong, Islam, 117-124
                                    Moin, “The ‘Ulama’ as Ritual
                                    Specialists,” 385-87*
Nov 1  Th Sunni and Sufi            Armstrong, Islam, 124-138
          Imperialism               Moin, “The ‘Ulama’ as Ritual
                                    Specialists,” 382-85, 87-90*
Nov 6  T  The Alevis of Turkey      Guest Lecture
                                    Reading TBA
                  Part III: Modern Geopolitics and Political Islam
Nov 8  Th Reaction to Western       Armstrong, Islam, 141-156
          Imperialism
Nov    T  Nationalism and           Armstrong, Islam, 156-176
13        Democracy
Nov    Th Post-Colonial Islam       Armstrong, Islam, 176-187
15                                  Mamdani, Good Muslim, Bad
                                    Muslim, 3-16 (Introduction)
Nov    T  The Cold War and          Documentary: Among the Believers
20        Political Islam           Mamdani, Good Muslim, Bad


                                      Muslim, 17-62 (Chapter One)
Nov    Th Thanks Giving Break
22
Nov    T  The Cold War and            Mamdani, Good Muslim, Bad
27        Political Islam (continued) Muslim, 119-177 (Chapter Three –
                                      note: Chapter Two is optional)
Nov    Th After 9/11                  Mamdani, Good Muslim, Bad
29                                    Muslim, 178-228 (Chapter Four)
Dec 4  T  The Way Forward             Mamdani, Good Muslim, Bad
                                      Muslim, 229-260 (Conclusion)
Dec 6  Th Review for final exam       All readings up to Dec 1
Dec 15 Sa                             7:00 pm-10:00 pm                 Final Exam


Important University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code and Academic Integrity:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community. If you are uncertain about what constitutes plagiarism, or other violations, please
feel free to ask me. Students who violate the University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possible failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. The policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information,
you can talk with me or visit the Student Judicial Services Web site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sis.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-
mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Accommodations: Documented Disability Statement
If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss the accommodations
you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing
accommodations you will need. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)


If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
-      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires
exiting and assembling outside.
  -     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when ent ering the
building.
  -     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.
  -     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
  -     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
office.
