The University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Spring 2019
ARC 327R/386M Studies in Light and Materials
COURSE OVERVIEW
An oft-repeated cliché is that architects do not design buildings, they design “space.” Architects
and Interior Designers may draw surfaces and objects, but their ability to knowingly imbue those
surfaces with territory and effect supposedly differentiates architecture from quotidian building.
Presumptively, the more gifted the designer, the more cerebral the effects. And even though we
cannot trace a line of causation from the objective precision of the geometrically constructed
surface to the subjective perception of the imagined space, we unconditionally accept that the
surface is the progenitor--the author--of the effects that determine perception.
In order to bring a more direct relationship between surfaces and space we have turned ever
more to the idea of the active surface, the smart façade, the intelligent building. We know that
effect cannot be accidental, incidental or simply the product of creative genius.
We hope that the intangible effects we so desire will appear if we can simply assign the
responsibility for producing those effects to the same surfaces that we have always made, it is
just that now our smart surfaces provide so many functional alternatives that surely one of those
alternatives will create that elusive imagined environment. Smartness, however, is not manifest in
the material choice, but in the instrumentality of the material. What we have not done well in our
rush to activate every surface is actually imagine the intended environment. The objective of this
seminar then is to understand and design for effect. Fundamental to this will be developing an
understanding of the contingency of perceptual effects as instrumentalized, yet differentiated,
from the constituency of material surfaces.
Materiality resides in an artifact, as substance and properties, and in its realization, as function
and image. Materiality is therefore constituent in that it can be defined, specified, produced and
controlled. Our normative means of design privileges materiality: we create, situate and
represent surfaces, and we presume that those surfaces are the determinant of how we perceive
the spatial environment. Materiality is, however, just a subordinate player in perception.
Perception is driven by local, discrete, and transient energy exchanges between the human body
and its immediate surroundings. The surfaces of the building might provide an armature for these
exchanges, they might provide a context for the exchanges, but they do not generate them. The
architecture of a perceptual environment is instead an architecture of contingency. Not geometry
and surface, but heat and light. Not form and materials, but sensuality and tactility. A contingent
architecture emerges through the interaction of the body and responds to each body with
behaviors that are specific to that moment in time and to that given individual. The objective
totality of a geometrically derived architecture gives way to subjective discretion when the
contingencies are designed.
In their seminal essay “Transparency: Literal and Phenomenal” of 1964, Colin Rowe and Robert
Slutzky differentiated literal transparency as being a “physical fact” such as that associated with
material properties, whereas phenomenal transparency was more difficult to define, as it was
ambiguous, such as due to the conditions produced by overlapping or interpenetrating entities.
We might consider that the terms we are using this semester--constituent and contingent--could
be directly substituted for literal and phenomenal, but this would be incorrect, as what Rowe and
Slutsky consider to be physical fact is also phenomenal or contingent, and those conditions that
they consider to be ambiguous do indeed have physical facts or constituent properties
underpinning their results. They have oversimplified the literal and over-mystified the
phenomenal.
We typically think of two boundaries in architecture: the literal or physical boundary between
exterior and interior, and the figural or “phenomenal” boundary between public and private.
Paradoxically, however, the architectural manifestation of both boundaries tends to be quite
similar. Interior and exterior, or public and private are typically represented by distinct zones in
plan or section, and their boundaries are treated as discontinuities with the exception of a
“threshold condition” which serves more as a gate than it does as a transition. The interior and


the private thereby become defensible zones. Exterior and the public become that which is the
indefinite “other.”
In architecture, boundaries demarcate and establish difference; as a result, the architectural
boundary is definite and didactic. In thermodynamics, boundaries negotiate and mediate
difference; as a result, the thermodynamic boundary is dynamic and transient. Can we design an
architectural boundary that behaves thermodynamically? Essentially, we want to create active
zones of negotiation to mediate between static architectural conditions.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
The primary objective is to establish a framework for a more strategic instrumentalization of
materials and technologies into the design process in which architects and interior designers are
able to fully exploit new developments without the constraints of empiricism. This course will re-
open the question of light in architecture. Rather than “training” the class participants in the
application of strategies and techniques accepted by practice, this course will begin to redefine
the problem. Among the widely-held assumptions and practices that will be questioned are: the
privileging of the envelope as the boundary between daylight supply and its interior utilization, the
use of planar glazing as the mediating material, and the integration of exterior view and interior
luminosity as a composite function. Fundamental to challenging these assumptions is an
understanding of the physical behavior and properties of light, and necessary for developing a
response is the ability to manipulate those behaviors and properties. Recognizing that much of
this knowledge is not inherent to our profession, we will turn to those disciplines in which the
knowledge is housed.
Instead of a descriptive survey of advancements in materials and technologies, the course will
extract the persistent behaviors of these materials, essentially using them to invert our normative
approach to technology in design. These behaviors will serve to query the fundamental purpose
of many of our building technologies so that rather than searching for the means to optimize
performance, we will re-open the question as to what phenomena we wish to act on, and how
they can manipulated. The phenomena that matter are not those of the building environment, but
those that produce the perception of that environment. The materials and technologies become
our tools, not our object, in redesigning the sensual experience of the human body.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This seminar will overview the basic characteristics and families of “phenomenological” materials,
with a special focus on materials and technologies that have a relationship to light and vision. We
will examine, in depth, materials and technologies such as LEDs, smart glazing, displays and
interactive surfaces and explore some of the contemporary experiments taking place in the
architecture profession. Throughout the semester, we will catalog the relevant behaviors and
begin to develop a mapping between behaviors and phenomena. Each student will be required to
be able to coherently discuss material fundamentals and comprehensively analyze current
applications. There will be weekly brief exercises, and three major assignments, including a
precedent analysis and materials demonstration assignment, leading up to the final project.
Final Project: For the final project of the seminar, each student will develop and ‘build’ a material
installation to be located on different sites in our buildings. The installations, which may be either
physical or computational, will each negotiate a specific boundary condition. Although the
installation will be constructed as a constituent material system, it must be capable of creating
multiple contingent environments. These environments will be contingent upon both the physical
environment--for example the position of the sun--as well as the physiological condition--for
example contrast in the retinal receptor field. The ultimate objective of the final project is to
produce a single (and minimal) physical intervention with multiple perceptual manifestations.


COURSE REQUIREMENTS
This course is a seminar meeting only once per week, therefore regular attendance and
participation are necessary, as well as timely completion of all exercises, assignments and
presentations. Students should expect to present prepared material and/or participate every
week. There will be a final project/mockup review in April. There will be a local field trip to the
Ellsworth Kelly Installation at the Blanton that will occur on a day other than scheduled for our
class meeting, and there may also be some reshuffling of the sequence due to administrative
conflicts. A limited number of smart / high-performance materials and light technologies will be
available for student use, but they must be returned at the culmination of the course.
The course grade will be determined as follows:
     •   20% course participation and exercises
     •   50% student presentations
     •   30% final project/installation
All aspects must be completed to the instructor’s satisfaction for the student to pass the course.
No late assignments will be accepted without a written medical excuse or documentation from
Student Services. All assignments must be performed individually unless the Instructor explicitly
provides instruction as to whether one is eligible to work with a partner.
COURSE INFORMATION
Instructor:               Michelle Addington, Henry M. Rockwell Professor of Architecture
                          Contact: addington@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant:       Georges Fares georgesfares@utexas.edu
Course Time/Place:        Most meetings to take place in room WMB 3.108 on Tuesdays from 1:00
                          pm to 4:00 pm. Due to the timing of administrative commitments and of a
                          field trip, a few classes may have to be rescheduled.
Course references:        The following book serves as a basis for much of the course and is
                          recommended, however, PDF files of the relevant chapters will be
                          available for free on the course site.
                          Addington, D. Michelle and Daniel Schodek, Smart Materials and
                          Technologies for the Architecture and Design Professions (Oxford:
                          Architectural Press, 2004)
COURSE SCHEDULE
22 January
         Introduction to course
                  Course premise
                  Overview of course structure
29 January
         Introduction to materials/phenomena/behaviors
                  Designer’s experiments
5 February
         Student Presentations / dislocated surfaces


12 February
         Behavior / Phenomena
                 Light and Vision
19 February
         No class
26 February
         Behavior / Phenomena
                 The physics of light
                 Material interactions
5 March
         Student Presentations / precedent analyses
12 March
         Behavior / Phenomena
                 Natural phenomena
19 March
         No class: Mid-term week
26 March
         Behavior / Phenomena
                 Sources
2 April
         Student presentations / window installations
9 April
         Materials / Primer
                 High performance materials
                 Property changing materials
                 Chromatic materials
16 April
         Materials / Primer
                 Energy exchanging materials/technologies
                 Light-emitting materials/technologies
23 April
         Applications/Installations
30 April
         Project presentations
7 May
         Course Wrap-up
