                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                             Department of Kinesiology & Health Education
                                                Summer 2019
                                              KIN f349 #74600
                              HISTORY OF SPORT AND PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
                               Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday 10a-12:30p
                                            Location: GDC 2.410
                                     This Course Carries Three Flags:
                           Writing, Global Cultures, and Independent Inquiry
Instructor: Kim Beckwith, Ph.D.
Office: (North End Zone) NEZ 5.700 in the H.J. Lutcher Stark Center
Office Hours: WTh 12:30-3, and by appointment. Open Door Policy – I’m on campus a lot so come on
by, or call to make sure I’m in the office, if you want to chat.
Telephone; Office: 512-471-3205; Cell: 512-560-2522
Email: kbeckwith@austin.utexas.edu
Required Texts
1. Don G. Kyle, Sport and Spectacle in the Ancient World, 2nd ed. (Wiley-Blackwell Publishing, 2016)
        ISBN: 978-1-118-61356-6 (1st edition will also work.)
2. Readings posted on Canvas.
Course Objectives:
KIN f349 carries three undergraduate competency flags: writing, global culture, and independent
inquiry. It takes a multi-cultural approach to the study of sports and emphasizes the contributions of
diverse peoples to the development of our American sport history. The course is particularly focused
on the rise of sport in ancient Greece and Rome and how those civilizations shaped the modern
world of sport. It is hoped that the course will enhance students’ knowledge & understanding of the
following:
      1. The meaning of history, why it matters, and how to “do” historical analysis.
      2. The origins of sport and sport traditions in Ancient Greece and Rome and how those
          cultures influenced modern sports and the Olympic movement.
      3. The evolution and unique features of sport in American society.
      4. The role that gender, ethnicity, and socio-economic class have played in determining
          people’s sporting and exercise practices.


Grading and Assignments:
Ancient Culture Bid Book & Presentation (30%) – Information on Canvas.
      Document – (15% = 9% individual, 6% group)
      Presentation – (15%)
Research Paper (40%) (At least 2500 words [9-10 pages] not including picture captions or
foot/endnotes, 12-point type in Times New Roman or Arial font, 1 ¼ inch margins, double-spaced,
stapled).
      Research Proposal (5%)
      Annotated Bibliography of Primary and Secondary Materials (5%)
      First Draft (5%)
      Oral Presentation with PowerPoint/Prezi (5%)
      Final Manuscript (20%)
Peer Review Assessment of Other Student’s First Draft (5%)
Final Examination (25%)
Extra Credit: Attendance/In-Class Activities (up to 2%) These points will be calculated according to
scores accumulated in various class activities and the percentage of class days you attend.
Proposed Schedule:
    Week 1. Thursday 6-6-2018
                 a. Review of syllabus
                 b. Discuss Bid Book Project & Research Project
                 c. Introduction to the course
                 d. The meaning of history and why it matters
                 e. Writing history
                 f. What is Sport ?
                 g. Reading: Kyle, Introduction
    Week 2: Tuesday 6-11-2018
                 a. Ancient Sport: Egypt, Mesopotamia & Crete
                 b. Ancient Greece & Ancient Olympics
                 c. Reading: Kyle, Chapters 1 & 2
               Wednesday 6-12-2018
                 a. Film, “The First Olympics”
                 b. Reading: Kyle, Chapters 3-6
                 c. Group Work for Bid Presentations – visit Stark Center for resources
                Thursday 6-13-2018 PAPER PROPOSAL DUE
                 a. Ancient Olympics Continued and Greek Women in Sport
                 b. Reading: Kyle, Chapters 9 & 11
                 c. The Etruscans & Romans
                 d. Reading: Kyle, Chapters 13-15
                                                    2


Week 3: Tuesday 6-18-2018
             a. Film, “True Story of Gladiators”
             b. Reading: Kyle, Conclusion
             c. European Sport in the Middle Ages & Renaissance
             d. Readings: Olivova, “From the Arts of Chivalry to Gymnastics” article (on Canvas)
                            Hardy, “The Medieval Tournament” article (on Canvas)
             e. Mayan Ball Games and Other Early Influences on American Sport
             f. Readings: Explore - http://www.mesoballgame.org
                           Spears & Swanson, Chapter 2, “Peoples that Influenced…” (on Canvas).
         Wednesday 6-19-2018 BID BOOK DOCUMENT DUE
             a. American Colonial Sport
             b. Readings: Riess – Colonial Sport-Chapter 2 Major Problems … (on Canvas)
             c. Early 19th Century Sport
             d. Readings: Gorn, “Gouge and Bite, Pull Hair and Scratch…” (on Canvas)
                           Reiss – Bachelor Subculture-Chapter 3 Major Problems… (on Canvas)
         Thursday 6-20-2018        BID BOOK PRESENTATIONS
             a. Ancient Cultures Bid Book Presentations
             b. 19th Century & Emergence of Team Sports
             c. Film: Ken Burns, Baseball, Inning 1
Week 4: Tuesday 6-25-2018          ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY DUE
             a. Team Sports and the Late 19th & Early 20th Centuries
             b. Film: Excerpts from: “It Started with a Peach Basket”
             c. Readings: Gorn & Goldstein – Sports with a Mission…” – Chap. 4
           Wednesday: 6-26-2018
             a. Rise of Pro Sports and College Football
             b. Readings: TBA
             c. History of Sport and Media
             d. Readings: TBA
           Thursday: 6-27-2018
             a. Footnotes/Endnotes Lesson
             b. Writing Workshop?
             c. TBA
Week 5: Tuesday: 7-2-2018          FIRST DRAFT DUE on Canvas by 5pm (Peer Reviews will be assigned
             a. The Modern Olympics                                 at 5:30pm so don’t be late!)
             b. Readings: Review Kyle Info on Modern Olympics
                 Spears & Swanson, Chapter 9, “The Olympic Games” (available on Canvas).
             c. Salute ?- Film on 1968 Olympic Games and the Black Power Salute
       Wednesday 7-3-2018 PEER REVIEWS DUE – ON CANVAS
               a. Race and Sport History
               b. Readings: TBA
               c. Women and Sport
               d. Readings: TBA
       Thursday 7-4-2018           Fourth of July Holiday – no class
                                                  3


     Week 6: Tuesday 7-9-2018
                    TBA Catch Up?
                    Review Activity?
               Wednesday 7-10-2018
                  FINAL EXAM
               Thursday 7-11-2018
                  Class Presentations
               Saturday 7-13-FINAL COPY OF TERM PAPER DUE. Submit on Canvas by 5pm
ASSIGNMENTS:
Ancient Culture Bid Book & Presentation (30%) Due Wednesday & Thursday, June 19 & 20
See assignment document.
Independent History Research Project – 40% of grade (More detailed info on Canvas)
Students will complete a major historical research project during the course of the semester related
to the field of sport and physical activity. The end result will be a historical essay of at least 2500
words, approximately 9-10 pages of text, derived primarily from primary source material. Each
student will then present his research to the class using PowerPoint/Prezi to illustrate their major
findings. Although it is expected that many of these projects will be based on the archival collections
of the Stark Center here on campus, students are also encouraged to explore other archives and
think about using different media such as photography, film, and even architecture as sites for sport
history. Students will be free to explore any topic they wish in the field of sport history as long as
they can justify to the faculty that they will be working with a significant collection of primary source
materials. Primary source research is the foundation of the field of sport history and so this research
activity if fully pertinent to the discipline.
The research project is broken into five units.
 1) Research Topic/Proposal and Primary Source Annotations. (5%) The student's first task will be to
find a research topic of interest and to prepare a description of the contents of the primary source
materials they want to use for their research project. This could include interviews, newspaper and
magazine articles, and, of course, scrapbooks, personal papers, photographs, and other primary
documents. At least one meeting with Kim Beckwith and/or Cindy Slater (Head Librarian at the Stark
Center is required.) Due Thursday, June 13
2) Annotated Bibliography (5%) Students will then submit an annotated bibliography of all primary
and secondary sources related to their project. For example, if I am writing a paper on my
grandmother’s participation in Iowa basketball in the early 1900s then I’ll need to research women's
basketball in Iowa 1910-1930; I would need references to help me understand women's basketball
within the broader context of women's sport; also references about gender relations and possibly
references related to Iowa in the 1920s and 30s. The aim of the annotated bibliography helps you to
interrogate your primary sources and to be aware of what has been previously published in the area.
Due Tuesday, June 25
                                                     4


3) First Draft. (5%) The first draft must be at least 2000 words (~7-8 pages) and must contain a thesis
statement, foot/endnotes, conclusion and flow logically from point to point. These will be read and
marked by a classmate on Canvas. Separate grades will be given for your draft as it appears on this
date and for the work you do as a reviewer of someone else’s work. Due Tuesday, July 2
4) Seven-minute (?), in-class oral presentation with PowerPoint/Prezi (5%) Thursday, Due July 11
5) Final Manuscript (20%) Due July 13 on Canvas by 5pm.
I will be glad to work with you throughout the preparation of your paper to make it the best that it
can be. It is important for you to begin work as soon as possible and do something toward the paper
every day. Historical research takes time!
Peer Review Assessment (5%) Papers (first drafts) will be randomly assigned on Canvas shortly after
the First Draft due date/time. Students will read and offer feedback of their peer’s paper by
completing a worksheet and a rubric. If you are late submitting your First Draft you may not be able
to participate in the Peer Review assignment.
                                                           
UT Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, PCL 2.330,
512-471-6222: http://uwc.utexas.edu/). The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free,
individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in
basis. Any undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any writing
project. They work with students from every department on campus, for both academic and non-
academic writing. Whether you are writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an
application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants will be happy to work with you. Their services are
not just for writing with "problems." Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of
a successful writing project. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing.
The assistance they provide is intended to foster independence. Each student determines how to use
the consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that
preserve the integrity of your work. Check out their website for free Handouts to help with many
writing issues from brainstorming an idea, to organizing your project, to grammar and punctuation,
to Chicago Style template help, to myths about college writing, to explanations of primary vs
secondary sources, to many other topics!
University Policies
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to
uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
More information concerning UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Academic Dishonesty and the Vexing Problem of Plagiarism: One problem with writing history is that a
significant portion of the “data” of your paper will come from written sources. A photograph, a statistical
table or a chart are generally things you have to describe in your own words but when discussing a newspaper
or magazine article it is easy to lift language more or less verbatim. Because of this it is especially important to
                                                          5


avoid inadvertent plagiarism. One general rule of thumb is to never string together more than five words from
someone else’s writing without putting it in quotes and attributing the source. However, as you’ll see,
historians love footnotes…the more the merrier. So, don’t feel like too many footnotes indicate a problem in
your paper. On the contrary, most historical papers will have 60 to 150 footnotes -- so be safe, not sorry. I
WILL NEVER PENALIZE YOU FOR TOO MANY FOOTNOTES.
Plagiarism and other acts of academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course and will be subject to
penalty in accordance with University policy. The following discussion of plagiarism may be helpful: it appears
at: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/
        Plagiarism can occur with all types of media—scholarly or non-academic, published or unpublished—
         written publications, Internet sources, oral presentations, illustrations, computer code, scientific data
         or analyses, music, art, and other forms of expression. (See Section 11-400(d) of the Institutional Rules
         on Student Services and Activities for the University's official definition of plagiarism.)
        Borrowed material from written works can include entire papers, one or more paragraphs, single
         phrases, or any other excerpts from a variety of sources such as books, journal articles, magazines,
         downloaded Internet documents, purchased papers from commercial writing services, papers
         obtained from other students (including homework assignments), etc.
        As a general rule, the use of any borrowed material results in plagiarism if the original source is not
         properly acknowledged. So, you can be held accountable for plagiarizing material in either a final
         submission of an assignment or a draft that is being submitted to an instructor for review, comments,
         and/or approval.
Using verbatim material (e.g., exact words) without proper attribution (or credit) constitutes the most blatant
form of plagiarism. However, other types of material can be plagiarized as well, such as ideas drawn from an
original source or even its structure (e.g., sentence construction or line of argument).
        Improper or insufficient paraphrasing often accounts for this type of plagiarism. (See additional
         information on paraphrasing.)
Plagiarism can be committed intentionally or unintentionally.
      Strictly speaking, any use of material from another source without proper attribution constitutes
         plagiarism, regardless why that occurred, and any such conduct violates accepted standards of
         academic integrity.
      Some students deliberately plagiarize, often rationalizing this misconduct with a variety of excuses:
         falling behind and succumbing to the pressures of meeting deadlines; feeling overworked and wishing
         to reduce their workloads; compensating for actual (or perceived) academic or language deficiencies;
         and/or justifying plagiarism on other grounds.
      But some students commit plagiarism without intending to do so, often stumbling into negligent
         plagiarism as a result of sloppy note taking, insufficient paraphrasing, and/or ineffective proofreading.
         Those problems, however, neither justify nor excuse this breach of academic standards. By
         misunderstanding the meaning of plagiarism and/or failing to cite sources accurately, you are much
         more likely to commit this violation. Avoiding that outcome requires, at a minimum, a clear
         understanding of plagiarism and the appropriate techniques for scholarly attribution. (See related
         information on paraphrasing; note taking and proofreading; and acknowledging and citing sources.)
By merely changing a few words or rearranging several words or sentences, you are not paraphrasing. Making
minor revisions to borrowed text amounts to plagiarism.
                                                          6


         Even if properly cited, a "paraphrase" that is too similar to the original source's wording and/or
          structure is, in fact, plagiarized. (See additional information on paraphrasing.)
Remember, your instructors should be able to clearly identify which materials (e.g., words and ideas) are your
own and which originated with other sources.
         That cannot be accomplished without proper attribution. You must give credit where it is due,
          acknowledging the sources of any borrowed passages, ideas, or other types of materials, and
          enclosing any verbatim excerpts with quotation marks (using block indentation for longer passages).
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of
the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds,
identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult,
if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I
promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students
with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating
well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help
you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
      depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
      http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
       Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
       Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
                                                             7


      of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
      coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
      please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students,
TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Emergency Evacuations: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
      the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
      class.
     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
      building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
      Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                           8
