                                      THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                     STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
                                             PROGRAM EVALUATION
 Course Number:            SW 393T                    Instructor’s name:      S. Rivaux, Ph.D.
 Unique Number:            87660                      Office Number:          Online and SSW 3.104A
 Semester:                 Summer 2020                Office Phone:           (512) 698.3831
 Meeting Time:             M/W 1:30-4 PM              Office Hours:           W 12:15-1:15 & by appointment
 Meeting Place:            Online                     Instructor’s e-mail:    s_rivaux@austin.utexas.edu
 I. Course Description
Program evaluation for the social worker involves the application of social research methodologies to
the assessment of the conceptualization, design, planning, administration, implementation,
effectiveness, and utility of human services programs and policies. This course will introduce students
to the different types of program evaluation, including formative evaluation (e.g. needs assessment,
implementation assessment, process evaluation) and summative evaluation (e.g. impact assessment,
outcomes assessment, and cost analysis). The course will cover experimental, quasi-experimental,
and non-experimental study designs, including the strengths and limitations of each. Relevant data
analytic methods will be presented. The influence of the historical, cultural, and political context of
evaluation research will be examined.
 II. Course Objectives
 Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
 1. Demonstrate knowledge of the various purposes of program evaluation.
 2. Demonstrate knowledge of the history of program evaluation.
 3. Demonstrate an understanding of the impact of the political context on evaluation research.
 4. Demonstrate an understanding of the potential effects of the cultural context in which the program or
 policy takes place.
 5. Demonstrate an understanding of the iterative process of program evaluation and the participatory role
 of the stakeholders.
 6. Demonstrate knowledge of basic models of program evaluation (i.e. experimental, quasi-experimental,
 and non-experimental study designs).
 7. Demonstrate knowledge of the threats to validity associated with each study design.
 8. Demonstrate knowledge of the role of qualitative research methods in program evaluation.
 9. Demonstrate the ability to conceptualize evaluation questions and to develop appropriate objectives and
 valid indicators (measures) to answer the evaluation questions.
 10. Demonstrate an understanding of the sources of program evaluation data depending on the purpose of
 the evaluation.
 11. Demonstrate a working knowledge of general linear model methods for the analysis of evaluation
 outcomes.
 12. Apply knowledge of program evaluation models and principles by designing an evaluation of a program.
 III. Teaching Methods
 The primary means of instruction will be informal lectures, in-class exercises in small groups, and class
 discussions about the assigned reading. Students will be expected to have done the assigned reading
 before class, to actively participate in class, and to collaborate with one another. Guest lectures may be
 included to supplement course content.


The instructor is available for individual and group consultations during office hours and by appointment.
Students are encouraged to take advantage of the opportunity for one-to-one time with the instructor.
Additionally, the instructor strongly encourages evaluation proposal team members to arrange a group
meeting time with the instructor to discuss their projects.
IV. Required Text and Material
Required text: Royse, D., Thyer, B. A., & Padgett, D. K. (2016). Program evaluation: An Introduction.
Boston, MA: Cengage.
The book is available in multiple formats: 1. Cengage Unlimited, unlimited electronic access to this and
other publisher texts, 2. purchase in new hardcopy, or 3. rent in hardcopy or eBook format.
https://www.cengage.com/c/program-evaluation-an-introduction-to-an-evidence-based-approach-6e-
royse/
Statistics review: Basic understanding of statistical concepts is required for this class. Students are not
required to use any specific text, though the instructor can offer recommendations. Additionally, there are
many online texts, study aids, and simulations available. The more useful online resources I’ve found are:
    Rice: http://onlinestatbook.com/2/
    UCLA: http://wiki.stat.ucla.edu/socr/index.php/EBook
    BMJ: http://www.bmj.com/about-bmj/resources-readers/publications/statistics-square-one
    StatSoft: http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Elementary-Statistics-Concepts/button/1
Other required readings will be posted on Canvas under “course documents.” Students are responsible for
checking the Canvas course site regularly for additional readings and for having studied readings prior to
the class for which they are assigned. Note that students are responsible for the material in the assigned
readings whether or not the material is discussed in class.
Websites relevant to this course
American Evaluation Association (2004). Guiding principles for evaluators. Retrieved from
    http://www.eval.org
CDC Evaluation Framework and Resources. http://www.cdc.gov/eval
Sources for meta-analyses and systematic reviews of behavioral interventions
    http://www.campbellcollaboration.org (meta analysis of the effects of interventions in the social,
         behavioral, crime and justice, and educational arenas)
    http://www.cochrane.org (meta analysis of the effects of health and mental health interventions)
    http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/pg/prac_guide.cfm (practice guidelines for psychiatrists for
         each psychiatric/mental/cognitive disorders)
    http://evidencebasedprograms.org: Social programs that work
Social Work Librarian
     Elle Covington: (512) 495-4386; elle.covington@austin.utexas.edu
V. Course Requirements
Course requirements and grade assignment: Two exams (40%), applied skills exercises and short quizzes
(30%), one program evaluation proposal (20%), class participation/attendance (10%), and providing
documentation of completed CITI training.
    Exams (40%): Two exams (mid-term and final, 20% each) will assist the instructor in evaluating students’
    grasp of the course substantive material. Exams will cover all materials assigned and/or discussed in this
    course.


Applied skills exercises and short quizzes (30%): Short quizzes will help both students and the professor
assess understanding of class content and the course pace. Exercises will provide opportunities to practice
skills relevant to social service program evaluation. Final write-up of each exercise will be due to the
instructor by email prior to the next class session. Possible exercise topics include: analyzing case studies,
critiquing evaluations, developing logic models, developing measures, data analysis/presentation, and
work on a faculty member’s current program evaluation project. However, based on student need and
available opportunities, alternate topics may be addressed.
Class attendance and participation (10%): It is important that social work practitioners take responsibility
for their own continued learning and act in a professional manner. Thus, students are expected to do
assigned readings before the class meeting for which they are assigned, to compile questions regarding
the material for class discussion, and to actively participate throughout class meetings.
Students are expected to attend all classes and to arrive punctually. Coming late and/or leaving early by
more than 15 minutes will be considered a “missed” class unless that student provides a reasonable
reason for doing so and discusses with instructor in advance. It is expected students will attend all
classes if at all possible, but students are permitted one excused absence in the event of unexpected
emergencies, illness, medical appointments, university-sanctioned events, or religious holidays. To have
a permitted miss, you must email the instructor before that class period. Medical documentation will
be required to avoid losing grade points for more than one absence. Missing more than one class will
result in a 2% per class deduction from the student’s final grade. Please inform the professor if you will
be late or not attend class.
In the event a class must be cancelled, students will be provided an assignment to help them work with
the material for that day. Conscientious completion of such assignments will count as attendance for
that class. Assignments that are not completed or are poorly completed will be considered an
unexcused absence.
Program evaluation proposal (20% total): Since most program evaluations are developed using a team
approach, the program evaluation proposal will be a group project. The project will be divided into several
mini-assignments so that students may obtain instructor and colleague feedback to develop the final
project proposal. The proposal will include an introduction, a short literature review, a logic model, a
detailed description of proposed evaluation methods, an assessment of the proposal’s methodological
strengths and limits, a timeline, and a proposed budget. The groups will present the final proposal to the
class.
Grading for this project will be as follows:
     Draft proposal sections (5%): Each team will write a draft proposal for evaluating a particular agency
         or program that is of interest to team members or they may choose to submit a draft proposal for
         one of the instructor’s research projects. The overall purpose of the evaluation proposal is for
         students to practice writing a rigorous yet feasible, scientifically valid, and relevant evaluation
         plan. Specific goals of this assignment are to: a) Familiarize the student with the evaluation
         research literature, and theoretical frameworks of program evaluation; b) Allow the student to
         generate evaluation questions that are relevant to the stakeholders, answerable given the
         operationalization of the target variables and the available and potential data sources, and
         conducive to scientifically solid research design, c) Allow student to develop a logic model
         showing how program inputs will relate to outputs, outcomes, and goals, d) Allow the student to
         describe the methods of data collection and the strategy for analyses that optimally suit the
         chosen evaluation questions, setting, data, and target population, e) Allow the student to draft
         program management tools to accompany the proposal. Note that we will likely review sections


              of project proposals as a class so that students gain experience in both critiquing evaluation
              proposals and in providing useful critique to colleagues.
           Final proposal (15%): Teams will submit a revised proposal that addresses all feedback received on
              the draft proposal. Should students have a sound reason for NOT addressing some piece of
              feedback, students are expected to address this as they would in the “real world” – that is, rather
              than just ignore feedback, they must develop an appropriately detailed commentary about why
              addressing the feedback would be unwarranted and discuss this with the instructor PRIOR to
              submitting the final project.
           Assessment of contributions (ungraded, but required): Since group members will rely on each other
              to get a good grade on this project, it is very important that group members contribute actively
              and equally. Thus, with submission of the final paper, each student must also send the instructor a
              paragraph describing the contributions of each group member (themselves included) and
              assessing each member’s performance in producing the paper and presentation. Should any
              individual not share equally in the workload, the instructor may assign a grade commensurate with
              the individual’s contributions. Students are responsible for talking to the instructor if group
              members are not participating equally in the project.
      Human subjects protections training (ungraded, but a score of at least 80% is required for credit): Most
      social science research uses information about human subjects. Due to the potential for abuses in the
      research context, federal and university rules govern how research on human subjects can be conducted.
      All University research about human subjects must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB)
      before starting to ensure that the study minimizes risk to human subjects (beneficence), ensures all
      subjects consent to participate with full information about the project and its risks (autonomy), and
      promotes equitable conduct of research (justice). Students are expected to show documentation that
      they’ve completed the human subjects protection course, CITI Training for Social/Behavioral Researchers
      or a commensurate NIH course. The CITI course can be accessed at:
      https://research.utexas.edu/ors/human-subjects/training/instructions-for-registering-for-human-
      subjects-research-training/
VI. Grading
      Accumulated points and grading scale
      94.0 and above A                        90.0 to 93.999      A-
      87.0 to 89.999        B+                84.0 to 86.999      B
      80.0 to 83.999        B-                77.0 to 79.999      C+
      74.0 to 76.999        C                 70.0 to 73.999      C-
      67.0 to 66.999        D+                64.0 to 66.999      D
      60.0 to 63.999        D-                Below 60.0          F
      Grades will NOT be rounded up.
VII. Class Policies
   Canvas: The instructor uses Canvas (a web-based, course-managementsystem with password-protected
   access) as the primary means of communicating with students. All course materials will be posted on the
   course’s Canvas site. Canvas may also be used to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to
   give online quizzes or surveys. Students are responsible for checking this site regularly for class
   announcements and for new postings. Support in using Canvas can be obtained from the ITS Help Desk by
   calling 475-9400 between 8AM-6PM on Monday through Friday. Please plan accordingly.
   Late Assignment Policies: Except in the case of extreme emergencies, and then only with prior permission


   from the professor, late assignments will not be accepted without penalty. Students will lose 3 points for
   each day that an assignment is late. This includes ungraded, but required, assignments. Should a student
   need to miss an in-class assignment or short quiz, they should negotiate a make-up assignment with the
   instructor in advance. If any due date is a problem, then the student must contact the professor and
   negotiate another due date at least 48 hours PRIOR to the date specified in the course syllabus.
   Incompletes: Students are expected to complete all course work by the last day of class and to complete all
   assignments by the dates due. Only in emergency situations will an incomplete grade be given for a course
   and only when, prior to the emergency, the student has been in attendance and has done satisfactory work.
   If an incomplete grade should be assigned, there will be a written agreement with the instructor about
   when and how the work will be completed.
   Computer and Other Electronic Device Use Policy: Students are expected to use laptops and handheld
   computers in class for class-related purposes only. To engage in other types of computer use and/or
   electronics use (e.g., accepting or making phone calls, texting, surfing the net, etc.) is unprofessional and
   disruptive to the course. Thus, students who violate this policy may be asked to leave the classroom.
   Feedback on Learning: During this course the professor will ask students to provide feedback on their
   learning in informal as well as formal ways. It is very important for the professor to know the students’
   reactions to what is taking place in class, so students are encouraged to inform the professor on how her
   teaching strategies are helping or hindering student learning, ensuring that together the professor and
   students can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
   Course and Instructor Evaluations: At the end of the semester, I will use the standard Course Instructor
   Survey (CIS) provided by the University of Texas at Austin. The CIS offers provides a systematic, campus-
   wide method of evaluating courses and instructors. I hope that every student will complete the CIS.
   Although important, these evaluations are after-the-fact. Therefore, I strongly encourage you to provide
   input and feedback regarding the course during the semester so that together we can make this course of
   maximum benefit to you!
VIII. University Policies
   The University of Texas Honor Code. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
   discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university
   is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers
   and community.
   Documented Disability Statement. Any student who requires special accommodations must obtain a
   letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of
   Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard
   of hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that
   needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any
   testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
   visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
   Professional conduct and civility in the classroom. The professor expects students to act as professionals
   in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class
   discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
   individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race,


ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual
orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive
engagement and mutual respect. This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and
dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with
complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas and
opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the
professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
Unanticipated distress. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to course
readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the professor.
The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments
and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If
counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
Policy on Social Media and Professional Communication. Public social networks are not private. Even
when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist among
the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such forums, please
assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to,
commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to
professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms of
electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived by
clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to
minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training.
Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are obliged
to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should not be
referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the
identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must
critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional
relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as
well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the
university community, and the broader area communities.
Policy on scholastic dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer


to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Use of Course Materials. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to exams, quizzes,
and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized duplication of the course
materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action being taken against the
student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific, express approval of the
professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading
class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or future
students.
Classroom Confidentiality. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal matters is
considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is protected by
regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this
information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of
confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of
academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence. Email is recognized as an official mode of university
correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email for university and course-
related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university informed
about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but
at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may
be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail address
at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holidays. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must miss a class,
examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, the professor will give
the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX Reporting. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the University of
Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from discriminatory
conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field instructors, staff, and/or teaching
assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students
who report such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the
University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX, may
also be found at https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
Campus Carry Policy. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu on
the School’s website.
Safety. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that involve
working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present some risks.
Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to


be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students
should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL). If students have concerns about their behavioral health, or if they
are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is provided through a partnership between
the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate
and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
·      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that the
        nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
·      If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of class.
·      In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
·      Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
        Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.


IX. Course Schedule
  The anticipated schedule of activities for this course is below. Reading due dates are the class for which
  the reading is listed. The instructor reserves the option to modify the schedule if deemed necessary.
  References to chapters are from the course textbook. Additional readings will be posted on Canvas.
 Date        Description                                              Prepare for class with
 Class 1     Introduction to course                                   Royse, Thyer, & Padgett - Ch 1
 6/8         Review syllabus
             Discuss group project and assign groups
             Intro discussion of program evaluation
 Class 2     Discuss ethical issues in program evaluation             Royse, Thyer, & Padgett – Ch 1 & 2
 6/10        Discuss Institutional Review Board and human             “Class 2” readings from Canvas
             subjects protections training
             Discuss CITI training requirement
             Brief review of basic stats/research concepts
             Documentation of CITI training completion due
 Class 3     Discuss needs assessment                                 Royse, Thyer, & Padgett - Ch 3 & 5
 6/15        Discuss formative and process evaluation                 “Class 3” readings from Canvas
             Lab One Due: Analysis of a Research Example
 Class 4     Discuss qualitative and mixed methods in evaluation      Royse, Thyer, & Padgett - Ch 4
 6/17        Lab Two Due: Logic Model Development                     “Class 4” readings from Canvas
 Class 5     Discuss single-system research designs                   Royse, Thyer, & Padgett - Ch 6 & 7
 6/22        Discuss client satisfaction studies                      “Class 5” readings from Canvas
 Class 6     Review sampling and research designs (This should        Royse, Thyer, & Padgett - Ch 8 & 9
 6/24        be a review from your Research Methods course.)          “Class 6” readings from Canvas
             Review for Exam One
             Proposal section draft due: Logic Model
 Class 7     Exam One                                                 Study for mid-term quiz
 6/29        Review proposals                                         Prepare questions regarding proposals
 Class 8     Review exam one                                          Royse, Thyer, & Padgett - Ch 10
 7/1         Discuss cost analyses                                    “Class 8” readings from Canvas
             Discuss proposal issues
             Proposal section draft due: Method / Approach
 Class 9     Discuss measurement tools, measurement                   Royse, Thyer, & Padgett – Ch 11 & 12
 7/6         strategies, etc.                                         “Class 9” readings from Canvas
             Lab Three Due:                                           Review statistics
 Class 10    Budgets, timelines, and other project                    “Class 10” readings from Canvas
 7/8         management tools
 Class 11    Discuss pragmatic and feasibility issues in              Royse, Thyer, & Padgett – Ch 13
 7/13        program evaluation                                       “Class 11” readings from Canvas
             Begin discussing data analysis                           Review statistics
             Lab Four Due: Measure Development
 Class 12    Discuss data analysis and using data to                  Online stats content
 7/15        make decisions / inform program planning                 “Class 12” readings from Canvas
             Complete proposal draft due                              Review statistics


 Class 13    Disseminating evaluation findings                        Royse, Thyer, & Padgett - Ch 14
 7/20                                                                 “Class 13” readings from Canvas
 Class 14    Review for second exam
 7/22        Set appointment with instructor to discuss team
             proposal project
             Lab Five Due: Data Analysis
 Class 15 Second Exam
 7/27        Discuss proposals
 7/30        Final proposals due by 5PM
X. Bibliography
American Evaluation Association (2004). Guiding principles for evaluators. Retrieved from:
    http://www.eval.org
American Psychiatric Association. Practice Guidelines for Psychiatrists. Available:
    http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/pg/prac_guide.cfm
Campbell Collaboration. http://www.campbellcollaboration.org
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Program Performance and Evaluation Office. Evaluation
    Framework and Resources. Available from: http://www.cdc.gov/eval
Cochrane. http://www.cochrane.org
Dombrowski, S. C. (2020). The Dark History of IQ tests. TED-Ed. Available
    https://www.ted.com/talks/stefan_c_dombrowski_the_dark_history_of_iq_tests
Evergreen Data. Collection of Data Visualization Tools. Available:
    http://stephanieevergreen.com/handouts/
Goldacre, B. (2011). Battling Bad Science. TEDGlobal. Available:
    https://www.ted.com/talks/ben_goldacre_battling_bad_science
Grant Development Support Unit, Ohio State University. Logic models. Available: https://grants.cfaes.ohio-
    state.edu/logic-models
Grinnell, Gabor, & Unrau (2012). Program Evaluation for Social Workers: Foundations of Evidence-Based
    Programs. Oxford University Press
Newcomer, K.E., Hatry, H.P., & Wholey, J.S. (Eds.) (2015). Handbook of Practical Program Evaluation,
    Fourth Ed. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/book/10.1002/9781119171386
Roberts, D. (2015). The Problem with Race-Based Medicine. TEDMED. Available:
    https://www.ted.com/talks/dorothy_roberts_the_problem_with_race_based_medicine
Royse, D., Thyer, B. A., & Padgett, D. K. (2016). Program evaluation: An Introduction. Boston, MA; Cengage.
Social Programs that Work: http://evidencebasedprograms.org
