                                      African-American Politics
                                        GOV 370K/AFR 374D
                                     Unique Number 38620/30740
                                                Fall 2018
                                      TuTh 9:30 am to 11:00 am
                                               UTC 3.132
Professor
Professor Tasha S. Philpot
tphilpot@austin.utexas.edu
4.140 Batts Hall
512-232-3681
Office Hours: TuTh 2:00 pm to 3:30 pm
Description
This course focuses upon the evolution, nature, and role of African-American politics within the
American Political System. The concern is with African Americans as actors, creators and
initiators in the political process. Specifically, this course will examine various political
controversies that surround the role of race in American society and how these controversies
affect public opinion, political institutions, political behavior, and salient public policy debates.
This course will assess and evaluate the contemporary influence of race in each of these domains
while also exploring their historical antecedents.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that
has experienced persistent marginalization.
Prerequisites
Six semester hours of lower-division coursework in government.
Required Text Books
There are two required text books for this course, which are available at the University Co-op:
Walton, Hanes, Jr., Robert C. Smith, and Sherri L. Wallace. 2017. American Politics and the
African American Quest for Universal Freedom. 8th Edition. London: Routledge.
Philpot, Tasha S., and Ismail K. White, eds. 2010. African-American Political Psychology:
Identity, Opinion, and Action in the Post-Civil Rights Era. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
(This book is available electronically through the library website for free.)
                                                     1


Supplementary Readings
Readings not found in the required texts can be accessed through Canvas (canvas.utexas.edu) in
the Supplementary Readings folder in the Files section.
Grading
Your grade will be based on three exams and several pop quizzes/in-class assignments. The
format for the three exams will be multiple choice and will cover the lectures, films (all films on
the syllabus will be screened during class), and readings. Exams will NOT be cumulative.
Quizzes will be given at random and at any time during lecture. Frequently, I give quizzes at the
beginning of class so be on time. If you miss a quiz because of tardiness, you CANNOT make it
up. Each quiz/in-class assignment will be worth 5 points each. You will receive one point for
just handing in a quiz/in-class assignment. Credit for the remaining 4 points is determined by the
quality of your work. Each student can miss one quiz without it counting against his/her grade.
Your quiz grade is a weighted average (see below), with a maximum of 25 points. In the case of
a conflict, please notify me ahead of time so that we can make alternative arrangements. Without
prior notification and proper documentation, missed quizzes, assignments and exams cannot be
made up. NO EXCEPTIONS. The weight of each assignment in determining your final grade is
as follows (PLEASE NOTE THAT ONLY FINAL GRADES AT .5 OR HIGHER WILL BE
ROUNDED UP TO THE NEAREST WHOLE NUMBER.):
Exam 1                                 25%
Exam 2                                 25%
Exam 3                                 25%
Quizzes and in-class assignments       25%
A       93-100             B+      87-89              C+     77-79               D      60-69
A-      90-92              B       83-86              C      73-76               F      0-59
                           B-      80-82              C-     70-72
Note about Electronic Devices
Electronic devices (phones, laptops, tablets, mp3 players, etc.) may be used during class for
academic purposes only. Students disrupting the class because of their use of electronic devices
for non-academic purposes will be asked to leave class. Under NO circumstances may
electronic devices be used during an exam. Students using electronic devices during an exam
will be given a zero grade for that exam.
Website
For class information and assignments please see the Canvas site at canvas.utexas.edu. Class
notes WILL NOT be on Canvas.
E-mail
                                                 2


No assignment is to be e-mailed to me. Also, I regularly check my e-mail, but sometimes I am
unable to respond quickly. Please allow one to two days for an e-mail response. In addition,
please limit your e-mails to questions about class topics. Any grievances involving the class must
be handled during my office hours. Please exercise proper e-mail etiquette (for etiquette tips see
https://www.netmanners.com/e-mail-etiquette-tips/). Finally, make sure to check the syllabus or
Canvas first before sending an e-mail. In many cases they will answer your question.
Excused Absences
An absence from class will only be excused if proper documentation is presented. In the case of
an illness you will need to produce a note from the doctor stating that you could not attend class
that day. Generic UHS slips will not be accepted. In all other cases you will need to provide
documentation from Student Emergency Services. In the case of planned activities, the
documentation must be presented to me at least a week before your scheduled absence. I will not
accept a planned activity as a valid excuse for an absence after the fact. In the case of
unexpected circumstances, the documentation must be turned in within a week of your return.
Expectations
Meeting the goals of the class requires three things—attendance, preparation and
professionalism.
Attendance: Although attendance is not mandatory, it is expected. Therefore, I find it
unnecessary to formally take attendance. Nevertheless, missing class will greatly affect your
grade. First, I frequently give pop quizzes and in-class assignments. Students that miss a quiz
will receive a zero. Second, exams are based on a combination of the course readings, class
lectures, and supplementary media presentations.
Preparation: Doing well in this class necessitates that students are informed and prepared.
Therefore, you will be expected to complete the readings prior to the first day we are scheduled
to cover that topic. This course covers a large amount of material in a short amount of time. If
you do not keep up with the readings, your grade will reflect it.
Professionalism: Remember that this is an academic environment. Therefore, I ask that you
minimize unnecessary disruptions. This includes (but it is not limited to) side conversations, cell
phone calls, bringing pets to class1, and the consumption of tobacco products2. I also ask that
you be proactive if any conflict occurs. This means notifying me ahead of time if you are unable
to meet the requirements of the course.
Ground Rules
Because this course will sometimes deal with sensitive material, it is imperative that we set a
series of ground rules.
1
  The Elliott Rule
2
  The Mock-Hall Rule.
                                                  3


    1. Respect others. There will be times when you disagree with an idea that has been
        presented to the class. Although you have the right to disagree with someone, you must
        remember to challenge the idea and not the person.
    2. Listen attentively. The purpose of this course is to present and discuss different ideas. In
        order to reap the benefits of such an exchange, you must be willing to pay attention to
        what others have to say.
    3. Think before you speak. Refrain from making broad, general, and/or unsubstantiated
        comments. Make sure that you use evidence and provide a rationale for your statements.
    4. Maintain the dignity of the academic environment. Your ideas should be presented using
        Standard English.
    5. Raise your hand. This helps to maintain order in the classroom and helps to ensure that
        everyone has a chance to talk.
    6. Be courteous. Refrain from interrupting or engaging in private conversation while others
        are speaking. Also, limit disruptive behavior, such as newspaper reading, personal
        grooming, etc.
Procedures for Dealing with Grade/Evaluation Concerns
Grade/evaluation concerns will only be considered if the following procedure is followed:
All grade complaints must be TYPED and must clearly express the student’s specific concerns.
These written statements must be accompanied by citations of support from course materials, i.e.
readings, textbook, and/or lecture notes, in order to ensure accuracy. Written statements will not
be considered until one week AFTER the assignment is returned to students. This allows the
student time to reread his/her answers and think carefully about what improvements could have
been made. Grievances will not be considered once two weeks have passed. For example, if I
return a graded assignment on Monday, the student must submit a complaint BEFORE the
Friday of the following week. Once class is over on that Friday, no complaints will be considered
for that assignment. Since class time is limited, I will only deal with questions or concerns during
scheduled office hours. Finally, submitting a grade grievance will result in a complete re-grade
of the assignment.
University Code of Conduct
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.”
Student Honor Code
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.”
Academic Dishonesty
                                                  4


According to the Institutional Rules, scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to,
cheating, plagiarism, collusion, and falsifying academic records. In the event that a student
violates the University policy on scholastic dishonesty, he or she will be subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Day Observance
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
In the event of a fire or other emergency, it may be necessary to evacuate a building rapidly.
Upon the activation of a fire alarm or the announcement of an emergency in a university
building, all occupants of the building are required to evacuate and assemble outside. Once
evacuated, no one may re-enter the building without instruction to do so from the Austin Fire
Department, University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
office. Students should familiarize themselves with all the exit doors of each room and building
they occupy at the university, and should remember that the nearest exit routes may not be the
same as the way they typically enter buildings. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall
inform their instructors in writing during the first week of class. Faculty members must then
provide this information to the Fire Prevention Services office by fax (512-232-2759), with
“Attn. Mr. Roosevelt Easley” written in the subject line. Information regarding emergency
evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Outline of Course Topics and Readings
I.      America’s Dilemma: Introduction to Race in the United States
Reading:        Myrdal, Gunnar. 1944. An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern
                Democracy. New York: Harper & Bros. Introduction.
                                                    5


               McIntosh, Peggy. 1988. “White privilege and male privilege: A personal account
               of coming to see correspondences through work in Women’s Studies.” Wellesley
               College Center for Research on Women, Working Paper No. 189
Video:         The Matrix (excerpt)
Assignment: Bring in a recent news story that deals with some aspect of contemporary African-
               American politics. Be prepared to discuss and to turn in the news story at the end
               of class.
II.    Black Political Thought
Reading:       Barker, Lucius, Mack Jones, and Katherine Tate. 1998. African Americans and
               the American Political System. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. Chapters
               1-3.
               Obama, Barack. 2008. “A More Perfect Union.”
               King, Martin Luther, Jr. 1963. “Letter from Birmingham Jail.”
               Combahee River Collective. 1978. “A Black feminist statement.”
III.   An Experiment in Democracy: The American Political System
Reading:       Walton and Smith, Chapters 1, 2, and 13
               Madison, James. 1787. “The Same Subject Continued: The Union as a Safeguard
               against Domestic Faction and Insurrection.”
               https://www.congress.gov/resources/display/content/The+Federalist+Papers#The
               FederalistPapers-10
               Madison, James. 1788. “The Apportionment of Members among the States.”
               https://www.congress.gov/resources/display/content/The+Federalist+Papers#The
               FederalistPapers-54
               Madison, James. 1788. “The Particular Structure of the New Government and
               the Distribution of Power among Its Different Parts.”
               https://www.congress.gov/resources/display/content/The+Federalist+Papers#The
               FederalistPapers-47
               Gressman, Eugene. 1952. "The unhappy history of civil rights legislation."
               Michigan Law Review 50 (8):1323-58.
IV.    Say It Loud…: The Origins and Maintenance of Black Identity
Reading:       Philpot and White, Chapters 5
                                               6


             Ture, Kwame and Charles Hamilton. 1992 (1967). Black Power: The Politics of
             Liberation. New York: Vintage Books. Chapter Two.
             Dawson, Michael C. 1994. Behind the Mule: Race and Class in African-
             American Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Chapter One.
             Shingles, Richard. 1981. “Black consciousness and political participation: The
             missing link.” American Political Science Review 75(1): 76-91.
Video:       Black Is…Black Ain’t
V.     Complicating Black Identity: Gender and Sexuality
Reading:     Cohen, Cathy J. 1997. “Punks, bulldaggers, and welfare queens: The radical
             potential of queer politics?” GLQ: Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 3(4): 437-
             468.
             Harris-Perry, Melissa. 2011. Sister Citizen: Shame, Stereotypes and Black
             Women in America. New Haven: Yale University Press. Introduction, Chapters 1
             and 2.
VI.    Linking the People to the Politics: Race and Political Parties
Reading:     Walton and Smith, Chapter 8
             Philpot and White, Chapter 10
             Philpot, Tasha S. 2007. Race, Republicans, and the Return of the Party of
             Lincoln. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. Introduction, Chapters 2
             and 5.
VII.   What’s Going On: Black Public Opinion
Reading:     Walton and Smith, Chapter 3-5
             Philpot and White, Chapters 4, 8, and 9
             Harris-Lacewell, Melissa V. 2004. Barbershops, Bibles, and BET: Everyday
             Talk and Black Political Thought. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
             Chapter One.
Video:       Barbershop (excerpt)
VIII. Who Will Lead?: Elections and Participation
                                               7


Reading:       Walton and Smith, Chapters 6, 7, and 9
               Philpot and White, Chapters 6, 11
               Ture, Kwame and Charles Hamilton. 1992 (1967). Black Power: The Politics of
               Liberation. New York: Vintage Books. Chapter Three.
               Philpot, Tasha S., Daron R. Shaw and Ernest B. McGowen. 2009. “Winning the
               race: Black voter turnout in the 2008 presidential election.” Public Opinion
               Quarterly 73 (5): 995-1022.
Video:         Eyes on the Prize #9
IX.    Having Our Say: Race and Representation
Readings:      Walton and Smith, Chapter 10
               Swain, Carol M. 1993. Black Faces, Black Interests: The Representation of
               African Americans in Congress. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Chapters
               One and Ten.
               Tate, Katherine. 2001. “The political representation of Blacks in Congress: Does
               race matter?” Legislative Studies Quarterly 26 (4): 623-638.
Video:         Fahrenheit 9/11 (excerpt)
X.     A Matter of Justice: Race, Crime and the Criminal Justice System
Reading:       Walton and Smith, Chapter 12
               Finzen, Margaret E. 2005. “Systems of oppression: The collateral consequences
               of incarceration and their effects on Black communities.” Georgetown Journal of
               Poverty Law & Policy XII (2): 299-324.
Video:         Ku Klux Klan: A Secret History
XI.    Hail to the Chief: Race and the Executive
Reading:       Walton and Smith, Chapters 11
               Walters, Ron. 2007. “Barack Obama and the politics of Blackness.” Journal of
               Black Studies 38(1): 7-29.
               Winant, Howard. 2009. “Just do it: Notes on politics and race at the dawn of the
               Obama Presidency.” Du Bois Review 6 (1): 49-70.
                                                  8


XII.  The Dream Actualized: Race and Public Policy
Reading:    Walton and Smith, Chapters 14, 15
            Dawson, Michael C., and Rovana Popoff. 2004. “Reparations: Justice and greed
            in Black and White.” Dubois Review 1(1):47-91.
            Payne, Richard J. and Eddie Ganaway. 1980. “The influence of Black
            Americans on U.S. policy towards Southern Africa.” African Affairs 79 (317):
            585-598.
                                           9


                            Course Schedule at a Glance
August 30 – September 6                America’s Dilemma
September 4                            Professor Philpot’s Birthday
September 6                            Assignment 1 Due
September 11 – September 13            Black Political Thought
September 18 – September 20            An Experiment in Democracy
September 25 – September 27            Say It Loud…
October 2 – October 4                  Complicating Black Identity
October 9                              Exam 1
October 11 – October 16                Linking the People to the Politics
October 18 – October 23                What’s Going On
October 23                             Assignment 2 Due
October 25 – October 30                Who Will Lead?
November 1 – November 6                Having Our Say
November 8                             Exam 2
November 13 – November 15              A Matter of Justice
November 20 – November 27              Hail to the Chief
November 22                            Thanksgiving Break—No Class
November 29                            The Dream Actualized
December 4                             Wrap-up, Review, and Conclusion
December 6                             Exam 3
                                        10
