ANT 324L: Sonic Ethnography
Marina Peterson
marina.peterson@austin.utexas.edu
OH: M 1-3 and by appt. (SAC 5.148)
Course description
Sonic ethnography starts with listening, and listening to how people listen. Listening is a practice that people
do as a way of being in and knowing the world – it is something in which we are all expert, even if not always
acknowledged. Thus sonic ethnography investigates ways in which people orient themselves via the aural,
how expertise is enacted through listening, and how sociabilities emerge around attunement to sound. At the
same time, sound it is neither separable from other senses nor an object in and of itself. Instead, sound is, as
anthropologist Steven Feld suggests, a way of being in and knowing the world.
Themes of listening, silence, noise, sound worlds, and technology will organize discussion of topics that
include the history of recorded sound in anthropology, acoustics and environmental sound, the global
circulation of media, and the politics of song. Class meetings will be spent on discussion of readings, listening,
fieldtrips, guest lectures, audio workshops, and writing. The course pays particular attention to concerns of
writing sound, writing with sound, and writing about sound. Writing sound is approached as a practice, with
modes of inscription that might include writing or audio recording. With an emphasis on developing ways of
using written language to address sound as an ethnographic concern, we will also attend to the breadth of the
meaning of “phonography” by listening to ethnographic recordings and creating short audio pieces at the end
of the semester.
Course objectives
     •    Develop skills in ethnographic listening
     •    Become versant in topics in the anthropology of sound
     •    Learn research methods in sonic ethnography
     •    Explore diverse ways of writing sound
     •    Acquire basic field recording skills
Course requirements
Participation and attendance [10%]
This course will be run in a seminar format, with class sessions consisting of discussion of readings, listening
material, and sonic investigations. As such, it depends on the participation of all. Be versant with the assigned
readings and other material, and be prepared to engage in productive discussion. Bring the readings to class as
you will need to be able to refer to them. We will maintain an ethos of respect in all interactions. The class
will be a welcoming and safe place for all people regardless of race, gender, class, and sexual orientation.
If you must miss class please let me know in advance, or as soon as possible. It is especially important that
you attend all fieldtrips. Absences will be considered excused for religious holidays, illness, or extenuating
circumstances due to an emergency. More than 1 unexcused absence will affect your grade.
Reading responses [15%]
Readings are drawn from Keywords in Sound, Theorizing Sound Writing, and articles and chapters (on Canvas) that
demonstrate modes of writing sound ethnographically and/or provide material that supports our sonic
ethnographic investigations. Thorough engagement with the readings is crucial for the success of the course.
In order to facilitate active discussion on days focusing on readings, students will write responses to the
readings for that day. These should be posted to Canvas 1 hour before class begins. The class will be divided
in 2 groups that will alternate posting and responding to the reading responses.


Your 1-2 paragraph (200-400 word) reading response should include the following:
     • Main point/s of the reading with a quote from the text that best captures this
     • Key concept/s or terms used and their meaning, as you understand it
     • Something that was particularly interesting, curious, or confusing to you
     • The significance of the text for sonic ethnography (or a more specific prompt, to be provided)
     • Questions raised by the readings, posed as discussion questions for the class
When there are multiple readings, aim to read across them, drawing out a shared theme and addressing
commonalities and differences between the texts. Your responses should demonstrate that you have read all
assigned readings, that you have a good understanding of the argument or focus of the text/s, and that you
put thought into developing a discussion question.
“Writing sound” entries [30%]
There are 10 ethnographic listening events during the course of the semester. Following each fieldtrip,
workshop, or listening session you will write up your notes as an entry that incorporates modes of “writing
sound.” Specific prompts will be provided for the listening events. Each submitted entry should be a
thoughtfully revised version of your notes from the listening event. Class time will be provided for
workshopping preliminary drafts. The 500-word entry is due on Canvas 1 week after the listening event.
Midterm [10%]
Your midterm consists of the first five “writing sound” entries, revised following their workshopping in class.
These should be accompanied by a 3-4 page reflection piece, in which you can expand on your listening
experience, discuss the process of writing sound, and address challenges or questions that the investigations
raised; it explain how you revised your entries and substantively engage with at least 2 class readings.
          1. Soundwalk #1
          2. Soundwalk #2
          3. “A Village Soundscape”
          4. Sonic archive
          5. Anechoic chamber
Final project [10%]
The final is the full portfolio of all 10 “writing sound” essays, reworked incorporating feedback. The final
reflection should include discussion of your revision process, along with substantive engagement with
relevant class readings. 7-10 are responses to and engagements with material from guest lectures, drawing out
themes from readings and elaborating on what they offer for sonic ethnography.
          1-5.
          6. Noise measurement
          7. Language, voice, and signification (Shipley)
          8. Politics of song (Thompson)
          9. Arab experimentalism (Kalash)
          10. Electromagnetic detector walk
Phonography project [15%]
The last weeks of class will shift from “writing sound” to “writing with sound.” Following a field recording
and editing workshop, you will create a 3-minute sound piece, “writing sound” with a microphone and
recording device or other mode of technological transduction. These will be presented during the last week of
class, and submitted along with a written reflection that explains and theorizes the audio work you are doing.
Peer reviews [10%]
Peer reviews are a crucial component of writing and editing. Class time will be dedicated to workshopping
“writing sound” entries, with peer review instructions provided. These will be turned in and evaluated on the
basis of their depth and thoughtfulness.
Extra credit [5%]: attend a lecture or workshop in the Listen: A Sound Studies Lecture Series and submit a review
that draws out resonances with class readings.
                                                                                                                2


Readings
The following books have been ordered at The Co-op:
Novak, David and Matt Sakakeeny, eds. 2015. Keywords in Sound. Durham: Duke University Press.
Kapchan, Deborah, ed. 2017. Theorizing Sound Writing. Middlebury, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
Other assigned readings are available as PDFs or links on Canvas
Grade scale used for this course:
           Grade             Cutoff
           A                 94%
           A-                90%
           B+                87%
           B                 84%
           B-                80%
           C+                77%
           C                 74%
           C-                70%
           D                 65%
           F                 <65%
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that
you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding
UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                                                                               3


WEEK                          DATE READINGS                                LISTENING          DUE
LISTENING
                                                                           FIELDTRIP:
                                                                           Soundwalk #1,
1. Writing sound               1/22                                        Listening
                                    "Listening" and “Phonography,” in                         • Reading response: list ways of
                                    Keywords in Sound                                         writing sound from the readings
                                    “Traffic Patterns” in Theorizing Sound                    • Soundwalk #1 notes for
                               1/24 Writing                                                   workshopping
                                    “Acoustemology” in Keywords in
                                    Sound
                                    "Waterfalls of Sound," by Steven Feld
2. Acoustemology               1/29 "Sounding Bodies," by Tom Rice                            Reading response A
                                    “From Ethnomusicology to Echo-
                                    Muse-Ecology: Reading R. Murray
                                    Schafer in the Papua New
                                    Guinea Rainforest,” by Steven Feld
                                    "Doing Anthropology in Sound," by      LISTEN: “A Village
                               1/31 Feld and Brenneis                      Soundscape”        Soundwalk 1 revised entry
                                    “On Alternating Sounds,” by Franz
                                    Boas
                                    “Listening Acts,” in Theorizing Sound
                                    Writing
3. On listening to how others       "The Recording Studio as Fetish," by
listen                          2/5 Louise Meintjes                                           Reading response B
                                                                           FIELDTRIP:
                                                                           Soundwalk #2,
                                                                           Listening to how
                                2/7                                        people listen      "A Village Soundscape" entry
                                    “Echo,” in Keywords in Sound
                                    "An Archival Dilemma: The
                                    Densmore Cylinder Recording            FIELDTRIP: Harry
4. Collecting sounds           2/12 Speeds"                                Ransom Center      Reading response A
                                    “Performers and the Phonograph,” by
                                    Erica Brady
                                    Modernity’s Ear, Epilogue, by
                               2/14 Roshanak Kheshti                                          Soundwalk 2 entry
SILENCE
                                    “Acoustics” and “Silence” in Keywords
                                    in Sound "Sounds of Modernity," by
5. Composing silence           2/19 Emily Thompson                                            Reading response B
                                                                           FIELDTRIP:
                                                                           Anechoic chamber
                               2/21                                        fieldtrip          Sonic archive entry
                                    “Let Your Words Be Few,” by
                                    Richard Bauman                                            Midterm listening portfolio to
                                    “The Echo,” by Macario Garcia                             workshop (include anechoic
6. Sensing silence             2/26 "One Square Inch of Silence"                              chamber entry)
                               2/28                                        SCREENING: Silence
NOISE
                                    “Noise” and “Music” in Keywords in
                                    Sound
7. Urban noise                  3/5 Japanoise, Ch. 1, by David Novak                          Reading response A
                                                                                                                     4


                               “Sounding Austin: Live Music, Race,
                               and the Selling of a City,” O’Meara
                               and Tretter
                           3/7 City of Austin Noise Ordinance          Guest lecture TBD   Midterm listening portfolio
                               "A Booming Business," by Karin
8. Measuring noise        3/12 Bijsterveld                                                 Reading response B
                                                                       FIELDTRIP: noise
                          3/14                                         measurement
SPRING BREAK
SOUND WORLDS
                               “Acoustic Palimpsests” in Theorizing
9                         3/26 Sound Writing                                               Reading response A
Language, voice, and                                                   SCREENING: Make
signification             3/28                                         It Sweet            Noise measurement entry
                               “Language” in Keywords in Sound
                               "Parody After Identity" and
                               "Transnational Circulation and Digital
                               Fatigue in Ghana's Azonto Dance         GUEST LECTURE:
10                         4/2 Craze," by Jesse Shipley                Jesse Shipley
                               “Voice” in Keywords in Sound
                               “Underground Rock Music and
                               Democratization in Indonesia,” by
                               Jeremy Wallach
                               “Living the Punk Lifestyle in Jakarta,”
Politics of song           4/4 by Jeremy Wallach                                           Reading response B
                               "Sexual Slander and the 1965/66 Mass
                               Killings in Indonesia," by Saskia
                               Wieringa
                               “When a history seminar becomes         GUEST LECTURE: Language, voice, and
11                         4/9 toxic,” by Saskia Wieringa              Rachel Thompson     signification entry
                               "A Look at Lightning" and "Sonic
                               Cosmopolitanisms" in The Arab Avant-
Arab experimentalism      4/11 Garde                                                       Reading response A
                                                                       GUEST LECTURE:
12                        4/16 "5 questions for Dirar Kalash"          Dirar Kalash        Politics of song entry
TECHNOLOGIES OF
LISTENING
                               "Techniques of Inattention," by Brian
                               Larkin
                               "Ubiquitous Listening," by Anahib
                          4/18 Kassabian                                                   Reading response B
                               “Transduction” and “Deafness,” in
                               Keywords in Sound
                               "Do Signals Have Politics?" by Mara     INTERVIEW: Day
13. Transducing sound     4/23 Mills                                   of music            Arab experimentalism entry
                                                                       FIELDTRIP:
                                                                       Electomagnetism
                          4/25                                         listening
                                                                       Phonography
14. Writing with sound    4/30                                         workshop
                           5/2                                         Field recording day Electromagnetic listening entry
15. Final presentations,                                                                   Phonography project, final
wrapping up              5/7-9                                                             portfolio
                                                                                                                  5


Resources
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
• The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning.
o Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
o Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
o Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
o Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
o Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                                 6
