                            ‫‪The University of Texas at Austin‬‬
                        ‫‪Department of Middle Eastern Studies‬‬
                   ‫‪ARA 621L Intensive Arabic IV Spring 2020‬‬
                                      ‫اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ ‪/‬اﻟﺴﻨﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻧﯿﺔ‬
                                  ‫أھﻼً وﺳﮭﻼً ﺑﻜﻢ إﻟﻰ اﻟﺼﻒ اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ‬
                                                                                      ‫أ ‪.‬اﻟﻜﺘﺐ واﻟﻤﻮاد اﻟﺪراﺳﯿﺔ‪:‬‬
                                           ‫ﻛﺘﺎب اﻟﻜﺘﺎب اﻟﺠﺰء اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ– اﻟﻄﺒﻌﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺜﺔ‪.‬‬         ‫•‬
            ‫اﻟﺘﺴﺠﯿﻞ ﻓﻲ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ اﻟﻜﺘﺎب‪http://www.alkitaabtextbook.com :‬‬                          ‫•‬
                       ‫ﯾﻤﻜﻦ اﺳﺘﺨﺪام ھﺬا اﻟﻘﺎﻣﻮس ‪arabicdictionary.byu.edu‬‬                     ‫•‬
                                                                        ‫ﻣﻮﻗﻊ "ﻛﺎﻧﻔﺲ"‬         ‫•‬
                                  ‫ﻣﻮاﻗﻊ اﻷﺧﺒﺎر ﺑﺎﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ وﻣﻮاﻗﻊ اﻟﺘﻮاﺻﻞ اﻻﺟﺘﻤﺎﻋﻲ‬              ‫•‬
                                                                                            ‫ب ‪.‬أھﺪاف اﻟﻔﺼﻞ‪:‬‬
‫اﻟﻮﺻﻮل اﻟﻰ اﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮى اﻟﻤﺘﻮﺳﻂ اﻟﻌﺎﻟﻲ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﻔﺎءة ‪ proficiency‬اﻟﻠﻐﻮﯾﺔ‪ .‬ﯾﻤﻜﻨﻜﻢ اﻟﺘﻌﺮف‬              ‫•‬
‫ﻋﻠﻰ ﻛﻞ اﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮﯾﺎت ﻋﻠﻰ ھﺬا اﻟﻤﻮﻗﻊ )اﻗﺮأوا اﻟﻘﺴﻢ اﻟﺨﺎص ﺑﺎﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮى اﻟﻤﺘﻮﺳﻂ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﻼم واﻟﻘﺮاءة واﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع‬
                                                                                               ‫واﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ(‪:‬‬
  ‫‪https://www.actfl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/public/ACTFLProficiencyGuidelines2012_FINAL.pdf‬‬
                           ‫اﻟﻜﻼم واﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻟﻐﺔ ﺳﻠﯿﻤﺔ وﻣﻔﮭﻮﻣﺔ ﺑﺪون ﻣﺸﺎﻛﻞ اﻟﻘﻮاﻋﺪ‬            ‫•‬
‫ﻗﺮاءة ﻣﻘﺎﻻت ﻓﻲ ﻣﻮاﺿﯿﻊ درﺳﻨﺎھﺎ وﻧﺪرﺳﮭﺎ واﺳﺘﻌﻤﺎل إﺳﺘﺮاﺗﯿﺠﯿﺎت ﻛﺜﯿﺮة ﺗﺴﺎﻋﺪﻧﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ‬                 ‫•‬
                                                                                                    ‫اﻟﻔﮭﻢ‬
                                                         ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع واﻟﻔﮭﻢ اﻟﻌﺎم واﻟﺪﻗﯿﻖ‬        ‫•‬
                               ‫اﻟﺘﻌﺮف أﻛﺜﺮ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺟﻮاﻧﺐ ﺛﻘﺎﻓﯿﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌﺎﻟﻢ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﻲ ﻣﺜﻞ‪:‬‬            ‫•‬
                                                                 ‫اﻟﻤﻌﺎﯾﺪة ﻋﻠﻰ اﻵﺧﺮﯾﻦ‬         ‫•‬
                                                           ‫اﻟﻌﻼﻗﺎت ﺑﯿﻦ اﻵﺑﺎء واﻷﺑﻨﺎء‬         ‫•‬
                                                              ‫أﺳﺒﺎب اﻟﮭﺠﺮة وﻣﺸﺎﻛﻠﮭﺎ‬          ‫•‬
                                                               ‫اﻟﺴﻔﺮ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬      ‫•‬
                                                           ‫اﻷﻋﯿﺎد اﻟﺪﯾﻨﯿﺔ وﻏﯿﺮ اﻟﺪﯾﻨﯿﺔ‬       ‫•‬
                                         ‫ج ‪.‬اﻟﺘﻮﻗﻌﺎت ﻣﻦ اﻟﻄﻼب ﻓﻲ ھﺬا اﻟﻔﺼﻞ) ‪: ( expectations‬‬
                          ‫اﻟﻜﻼم ﺑﺎﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ ﻓﻘﻂ ﻣﻨﺬ دﺧﻮل اﻟﺼﻒ ﺣﺘﻰ اﻟﺨﺮوج ﻣﻨﮫ‬              ‫•‬


                                          ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد اﻟﻤﻤﺘﺎز ﻓﻲ اﻟﺒﯿﺖ ﻗﺒﻞ ﻛﻞ ﺻﻒ‬          •
                             ‫ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺔ اﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت ﺑﺄﻓﻀﻞ ﺷﻜﻞ وﺗﻘﺪﯾﻤﮭﺎ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻮﻗﺖ اﻟﻤﺤﺪد‬         •
                                      ‫ﺗﺼﺤﯿﺢ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺎت وﺗﺴﻠﯿﻤﮭﺎ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻮﻗﺖ اﻟﻤﺤﺪد‬          •
                      ‫اﺳﺘﺨﺪام اﻟﻜﻠﻤﺎت اﻟﺠﺪﯾﺪة واﻟﻘﻮاﻋﺪ اﻟﺠﺪﯾﺪة ﻓﻲ اﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت واﻟﻜﻼم‬      •
                                  ‫اﻻﻟﺘﺰام ﺑﺎﻟﻌﻼﻗﺔ اﻟﺼﺤﯿﺔ ﻟﺒﯿﺌﺔ اﻟﺼﻒ ﻣﻊ اﻟﺰﻣﻼء‬          •
                                                                                    :‫اﻟﺪرﺟﺎت اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﯿﺔ‬. ‫د‬
                                                                       ‫ اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺼﻒ‬:%15
                                                                                  ‫ اﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت‬:%20
                                                                                  ‫ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺎت‬:%15
                                                                     ‫ اﻻﺧﺘﺒﺎرات ﻋﻠﻰ ﻛﺎﻧﻔﺲ‬:%10
                                                                                         ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت‬15%:
                                                                                               ‫ اﻟﺘﻘﺪﯾﻢ‬:%5
                                                                                     ‫ اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﺸﻔﮭﻲ‬:%5
                                                                                   ‫ اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﻲ‬:%15
                                                                              :‫ﻣﻌﻠﻮﻣﺎت ﻋﻦ اﻟﺪرﺟﺎت‬. ‫ھـ‬
                                                                 ٪       :‫اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺼﻒ‬
We will all speak only Arabic from the time we enter the classroom unless
explicit permission is given to use English. Use of English without permission will
lower your participation grade by at least 1 point for the day. Laptops and cell
phones not permitted in class unless specifically permitted for a particular activity.
        Stay focused on the task at hand. If you run out of things to say, raise your
        hand.
Your pronunciation and grammatical accuracy when speaking will be noted,
and you must work actively at maintaining/improving them.
Please do your best to inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as
possible before the class you will miss. This helps considerably in planning for daily
class activities. If you’re having a bad day for any reason and are not prepared, come
to class anyway, and let us know at the start of class. Your participation grade will
be rewarded for honesty and penalized for dishonesty.


Attendance Policies:
If you are absent from class you will receive a “0” for that day’s participation. Your
lowest 3 grades for participation will be dropped when calculating your final grade
at the end of the semester.
More than ten absences—whatever the reason—will result in an "F" for the
course. This is a department policy and no exceptions will be made.
Please inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as possible before—not
after—the class you will miss. The absence will not be excused but informing your
instructor of an absence helps considerably in planning for daily class activities.
   Tardiness Policy
Arriving late to class is disruptive, so please make every effort to be in class and
ready to start working when class begins. Participation points will be deducted for
tardiness. If you arrive more than 20 mins. late for class you will receive a “0”
for that day’s class participation and it will count as an absence in applying the
absence policy. For each 5 minutes that you are late, 1 points will be deducted
from your participation grade.
                                                                         ٪      : ‫اﻟﻮاﺟﺐ‬


You know that daily homework and preparation for class is essential and will
require 2-3 focused hours outside of class for every class period. If you find yourself
regularly exceeding these time expectations, please let us know. Assignments are to
be turned in at the beginning of class. Late assignments will not be accepted.
On each homework assignment, please write your name and HW number and
please double-space (write on every other line) your homework assignments.
Practicing vocabulary out loud in context, including verb conjugations in all
tenses and using plurals, is part of daily homework.
Homework assignments will be graded on a scale from 1 to 5. You earn full credit for
work that is on time, complete, creative, uses lots of vocabulary and especially
verbs, and displays your best effort. We reserve the right not to accept sloppy or
careless work and to make you redo it before grading it.
       Your lowest 3 homework grades will be dropped for purposes of grade
       calculation.
We encourage you to study and brainstorm together while doing homework
assignments, but participation must be equal, and each student must hand in
her/his own paper. Copying homework someone else did is a violation of the
Honor Code.
Note that the assigned homework at the companion website is required
homework. Failure to complete the online portion(s) of the homework will result in
points being deducted from your homework grade.
IMPORTANT: Using the answer key of Al-Kitaab in doing homework
assignments is a violation of the UT Honor Code and will be treated
accordingly.
                                                               ٪     :‫اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺎت وﺗﺼﺤﯿﺤﮭﺎ‬
Writing is essential not only for activating vocabulary and structure, it is also an
important strategy for improving your speaking proficiency as well, IF you pay
attention to accuracy and push yourself to use a wide range of vocabulary and
grammatical constructions.
You will do 2 types of writing: an informal blog (approximately 2 to 3 blogs), and
formal essays and their corrections (approximately 6 essays)
Submission of essays: Essays will be only accepted they are submitted on time, on
paper, and in class. Essays submitted via email will NOT be accepted or corrected.


All drafts should be typed in large font with double spacing so your instructor can
make comments. Please include a word count on all of your essays.
                                                                           ٪       ‫اﻻﺧﺘﺒﺎرات ﻋﻠﻰ ﻛﺎﻧﻔﺲ‬
You will take a number of online quizzes this semester. These quizzes may take a
variety of shapes- fill in the blank, simple translation, and they will not be
announced ahead of time. You are responsible for keeping up with and reviewing
vocabulary and grammar on a regular basis and should expect a quiz on any given
class period. Because quizzes will be taken online, you must have a laptop or tablet
with you daily. No make-ups on quizzes will be allowed.
                                                                                          ٪     ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت‬
We plan to have 4 tests this semester. Exact tests dates will be announced on your
homework schedule. If you think you will miss a test, contact your instructor as
soon as possible. Requests for make-ups will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
                                                                                                ٪ ‫اﻟﺘﻘﺪﯾﻢ‬
Skit: You and a partner will prepare one skit (8-10 minutes) and present it in class
together. Further information about the skit's format and evaluation will be
provided soon.
                                                                                      ٪ ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﺸﻔﮭﻲ‬
Each student will have an oral interview in Arabic in the model of an OPI with the
instructor in the instructor's office (each individual interview will be no more than
30-minutes in length). The instructor will provide all the information about the
interview and how to prepare for it, and how it will be evaluated, at least two weeks
in advance. https://www.languagetesting.com/oral-proficiency-interview-opi
                                                                                   ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﻲ‬
   The final exam will be administered during the final exams period in May. You are
               expected to take the final during the uniform scheduled time. It will be
     comprehensive and it will test your overall proficiency and accuracy in all skills.
                           Correction Code for ‫اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ واﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت‬
                                                             ( ‫م = اﻟﻤﺸﻜﻠﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﻠﻤﺔ ) ﻏﯿﺮ ﻣﻨﺎﺳﺒﺔ‬
                                                                            ‫و = اﻟﻮزن ﻏﯿﺮ ﺻﺤﯿﺢ‬
                                      )‫ﺟﻤﻊ‬/‫ ﻣﻔﺮد‬،‫ﻣﺆﻧﺚ‬/‫ ﻣﺬﻛﺮ‬،‫ ال‬:‫ق = ﻣﺸﻜﻠﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘﻮا ِﻋﺪ )ﻣﺜﻼ‬
                                                                         ‫ك = ﻣﺸﻜﻠﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺔ اﻟﻜﻠﻤﺔ‬
                                                                    ‫ح ج = ﺣﺮف اﻟﺠ ّﺮ ﻏﯿﺮ ﺻﺤﯿﺢ‬
                                                             connector)) ‫ر = ﺗﺤﺘﺎج اﻟﻰ اﻟﺮﱠﺑﻂ‬
                              ‫ ﺗﻜﻠﻢ ﻣﻊ أﺳﺘﺎذ أو ﻣﻌﯿﺪ ﻋﻨﮭﺎ‬،‫(= ﻟﻢ ﻧﻔﮭﻢ اﻟﻔﻜﺮة‬squiggly line) \


Academic Integrity:
All students 1) with an Arabic-speaking parent or 2) who have had schooling in an
Arabic-speaking country or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic
other than at UT prior to enrollment in this course must take the departmental
placement examination for Arabic before beginning their study of Arabic at UT.
Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Number/Letter Grade Equivalents
Number       Letter   Number      Letter    Number      Letter   Number       Letter
94 – 100     A        87 - 89.9   B+        77 – 79.9   C+       67 – 69.9    D+
                      84 - 86.9   B         74 – 76.9   C        64 – 66.9    D
90 – 93.9    A-       80 – 83.9   B-        70 – 73.9   C-       60 – 63.9    D-
(Below 60% = F)
Grades on the border between two letter grades (89.9 for example) may or may not
be rounded up to the next higher letter grade. This is at the instructor's discretion
and will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Exam grades are usually a good indicator of how you will do on the final and of your
overall ability to use the material we are studying. If you are not doing well on
quizzes/tests, talk to your instructor to get suggestions for strategies to improve
your performance.
In order to continue to the next level of Arabic, you must have a grade of C or better.
If you take the course Pass/Fail, you may not register for the next level of Arabic. No
Incompletes will be given for this course. Auditing is not permitted.
This syllabus is subject to change. However, any changes will be brought to the
attention of students in writing via e-mail communication and also verbally in class.
The following are important UT policies and regulations that apply to this
course:


UT Honor Code: The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any
assignment or exam that is not your own, or that you did not participate fully in
doing, is a violation of that code. If you have any questions about the Honor Code,
please ask.
Religious Holidays: A student who misses classes or other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the
instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be
made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Disabilities and Accommodations
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning
environment consistent with university policy and federal and state law. Please let
me know if you experience any barriers to learning so I can work with you to ensure
you have equal opportunity to participate fully in this course. If you are a student
with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need accommodations,
please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Please refer to SSD’s
website for contact and more information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If
you are already registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to
me as early as possible in the semester so we can discuss your approved
accommodations and needs in this course.
Use of Canvas: This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system
in which a password-protected site is created for each course. You are responsible
for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements.
Canvas is available at http://courses.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS
Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students: All students should
become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular
basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing
that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be
checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy
and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is
acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The
University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


Q drop Policy: The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course
drops for academic reasons to six (6). Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall
2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any
course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education,
unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation: The following are recommendations regarding emergency
evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
               •       Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin
        campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated.
        Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
               •       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and
        building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be
        the one you used when entering the building.
               •       Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their
        instructor in writing during the first week of class.
               •       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty
        or class instructors.
               •       Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the
        following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
        Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
               •       Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes
        and emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Prohibition of Sexual Discrimination, LGBTQ Discrimination, Sexual
Harassment, Sexual Assault, Sexual Misconduct, Interpersonal Violence, and
Stalking
It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin (“University”) to provide an
educational and working environment for its students, faculty, and staff that is free
from sex and gender discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual
misconduct, interpersonal violence (including domestic violence and dating
violence), and stalking. In accordance with federal and state law, the University
prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex and gender and prohibits sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence, and stalking.
The full policy statement on this issue can be found here:
https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/prohibition-sexual-discrimination-
sexual-harassment-sexual-assault-sexual-misconduct
Students in need of assistance for this type of issue or any other personal
emergency or crisis should the Police and the Dean of Students via these
resources and links:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/resourceslinks.php


Campus Carry:
                •      The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore,
       if you ever see a gun, do not attempt to question or approach the carrier, but
       immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to handle this situation.
                •      There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of
       handguns is prohibited, including some portions of residence halls. Individuals with
       a license to carry are responsible for knowing the locations that exclude concealed
       handguns and to plan their daily activities carefully.
                •      License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person
       at all times while on campus. "About" the person means that a license holder may
       carry a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or
       handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without
       materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area
       and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
                •      All license holders must think through the activities of their day.
       There may be times when the consequence of your activities may preclude carrying
       on a given day. For example, if you are going to a Rec Sports area, have a class that
       requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact with other students, you might
       expose the handgun. Remember that there is no storage on campus except in a
       privately owned vehicle.
                •      Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law,
       and we understand those passions. However, regardless of your opinion about the
       legislation, you are required to follow the laws laid out by the State of Texas, and the
       policies of The University of Texas at Austin. We also ask that everyone show
       respect toward other members of the university community who have different
       views.
A Final Note: Principles for In-Class Work
There can be no language without community. In our class community, respect for
each other at all times will ensure a positive and fruitful learning experience. We
will spend at least 75% of class time in small group or pair activities so that each
one of you gets the maximum possible time to participate and practice. During
these activities, the instructor plays the role of personal trainer. Learning a
language is a lot like going to the gym: the personal trainer guides you, but you have
to do the work to get the benefit.
Please keep in mind the following principles for group work:
                •      Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from
       them: each of you can learn with and from everyone else.
                •      Work with different people on a regular basis.
                •      Come prepared. Don’t be someone who slows down colleagues
       by not being able to fully participate in the work. If you are not prepared for
       class let your instructor know beforehand and s/he will arrange for you to
       learn by listening on that day.


         •     Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to finish. Most
activities are designed to elicit creative play with vocabulary and structures
on which we are working.
         •     If you do the minimum, you will get only minimum benefit and
may slow your colleagues’ progress as well. Take advantage of class time by
pushing yourself to be creative and say and write as much as you can.
    !ً ‫ﻧﺘﻤﻨﻰ ﻟﻜﻢ ﺟﻤﯿﻌﺎ ً ﻓﺼﻼً دراﺳﯿﺎ ً ﻣﻔﯿﺪاً وﻣﻤﺘﻌﺎ‬
