                        PSY 333D: Introduction to Developmental Psychology (#83105)
                                       On Demand Version, Summer 2019
Instructor: Dr. Jessica Church-Lang
Office Hours: Tuesdays 10am-12pm or by appointment
Email: church@austin.utexas.edu
Please note that this is the Online Course (SMOC) version of the PSY333D course. Unlike almost all other
courses offered at the University of Texas, you will be viewing this class online (from the comfort of your
own home, library, or cafe) rather than in-person. This course will release weekly sets of videos “modules” for
you to watch on your own schedule. It is very important that you treat logging into the course website the
way you would treat attending a traditional course held in a classroom. A substantial component of your
grade will be determined by your completion of online exams, as well as your participation in Canvas
assignments. You will be able to email the TAs or professors any questions you have as you complete the
course.
Course Objectives:
    1. To introduce you to the field of developmental psychology.
    2. To provide you with the skills and information necessary to be a critical consumer of research and media
         reports regarding children and their development.
    3. To help you apply research in developmental psychology to real world concerns and your own
         experiences.
Course Overview: The primary goal of this course is to examine the cognitive, social, and emotional growth of
children, and the various factors (e.g., genetics, parenting, peer groups, schooling, culture, and the media) that
influence development. Prominent theories of child development and research methods used in developmental
psychology are reviewed. Specific topics covered include: social relationships, morality, language and literacy,
perceptual and motor systems, cognitive foundations of physics and math, and intelligence. The implications of
course content for child-rearing, education, and social policy will also be considered. Throughout the course,
you will be encouraged to consider both theoretical and practical questions, with a strong emphasis on how
research data can inform answers to those questions.
***PLEASE NOTE: You cannot receive credit for both PSY 304 and PSY 333D. If you have already
taken PSY304, you should drop this course now!
If you are not on the roster but think you should be, go to the Undergraduate Office (BUR 230) to ask why. The
last day to add/drop without penalty or special dispensation is June 7th. Students "late-added" will require the
Dean's signature.
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1253020. You can enter directly at this URL or through Canvas
(https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you will need your UT EID and
password. Once you reach the class website, you can navigate your way to other areas.
                                                           1


Please make sure that you view these before the first day of class.
Some of the most important features of the canvas website include:
      1. Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, information regarding technical
         questions and other important information. On the left-hand side of each page of the Canvas course site
         are navigation tabs to all parts of the website, including the Syllabus.
      2. Assignments – The Response Assignments can be uploaded here.
      3. Modules – The Modules page includes links to the Assignments, Readings, Lecture Videos and other
         course documents. PDF versions of the lecture slides will also be posted.
      4. Piazza – A valuable discussion board for asking class questions about course logistics and content.
         Participation point discussions will take place here.
Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled laptop or
desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should have enough battery
life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:
       ○    Ram: at least 2 GB (Windows check here. Mac check here.)
       ○ Modern and updated operating system (Windows check here. Mac check here.)
       ○ Browsers: Chrome is highly recommended; if using Safari or Firefox be prepared to use Chrome as a
            backup. Check your browser here.
       ○ 5 Mbps internet connection speed. Check this here.
       ○ Adobe Flash enabled and up to date. Download and install here.
       ○ Webcam and functioning microphone. Check that your equipment meets the requirements for online
           exam proctoring by visiting http://www.proctoru.com/testitout/.
There are multiple computer labs on campus for your use if you do not have a personal computer or laptop with
access to a reliable internet connection (See http://www.utexas.edu/its/campus-labs/). If you do not have an
internet-enabled device, some inexpensive ones are available at local stores or on the internet.
Course communication: Even though this is an online course, you are always encouraged to communicate
with the TAs and Professor. If you would like to speak in person, come to office hours or send an email to set
up an appointment. Do not use Canvas messaging. If you have a specific, personal or grade-related question,
please email your TA at onlinepsy333dta@austin.utexas.edu or your professor at church@austin.utexas.edu
Please note that all online interactions in Canvas will be saved and stored. All information will be kept for
educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other researchers will involve de-
identifying the data, including the removal of names, UT EIDs, email addresses, or other information. To
further ensure that your information is secure, please do not include identifying information in your online
interactions with others.
The TAs and professor will often post announcements in Canvas. Click on “Account” and then the “Settings”
link in the upper-left corner of your Canvas page, to adjust your email address. You can also update your
notification preferences from the “Notifications” link also found in “Account.” This will allow you to receive
email updates whenever course Announcements are made, or when assignments and grades are posted.
For technical support, please email gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu or click on the “Help” button on the
Canvas home page.
                                                             2


For questions about the course material or logistics, you should use the Piazza discussion board. This is a
Q&A wiki platform that you can access from within Canvas (via a link on the left menu or the Home Page) or
directly at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1253020/external_tools/42002. There are also Android and
iPhone apps for Piazza. By posting questions here, everyone in the class will benefit from seeing the answers.
Although the TAs will be Monitoring Piazza to answer questions and contribute to discussions, you are also
encouraged to answer each other’s questions as much as possible.
Please allow 24 hours for a response from your TA or professor through email or Piazza
Please remain professional in all communications during and outside of class. We expect that you will treat
the teaching team and each other with the same respect and civility on line that you would if you were
conversing with them in person. Please refrain from using profanity or any euphemisms for profanity. Please do
not bait other commenters or personally attack them. Please do not use sarcasm in a way that can be
misinterpreted negatively. Please remain on topic. In short, please respect the right of your colleagues to ask
questions and discuss their opinions about the subject matter. If you are caught violating these ground rules, you
will be shut out of the online discussion board or Piazza thread and will be notified of your first offense. A
second offense will result in a 2-point reduction to your final class grade. A third offense will result in a 3-point
reduction to your final class grade and permanent exclusion from all future online discussions and piazza
access, restricting your ability to gain participation points.
Please do NOT use the Inbox feature within Canvas for any communication.
Course Requirements:
Readings: There is no textbook assigned for this course. Instead, you will be asked to read some articles from
academic journals and/or the popular press for each class. Links to, and/or pdfs of, the readings will be available
through Canvas. These can be read before or after the class that they are assigned for, but must be completed
before we move on to the material in the next lecture. Exams may refer to the readings.
Exams: The four exams will be offered on Friday, June 14th, Monday, June 24th, Tuesday, July 2nd, and
Thursday, July 11th; for each exam, students will sign up for a start time between 3pm and 8pm CDT.
Once you begin an exam, you will have 90 minutes to complete it. It is possible to earn a total of 160 exam
points (40 per exam). Your total exam grade will equal the sum of all four test scores.
Your exams for PSY333D will be taken online, in Canvas, and proctored by the testing company ProctorU in a
virtual face-to-face setting. This means you will be connected with a live person from one of their proctoring
centers from the time you start the test until you submit it. ProctorU will confirm your identity and monitor your
computer and work space while you are taking the exam. You must take your exam on the day and time it is
scheduled. You can take the exam from almost anywhere using a webcam, a microphone, and a high-
speed internet connection, as long as it is in a quiet, secure, and distraction-free setting. ProctorU is a
student-pay service.
You must schedule and pay for all four exam sessions by 5:00 P.M. on June 10. You will not be able to progress
to the Week 1 Module until you do so.
See specific instructions for signing up with ProctorU here, in the Pre-Class Activities Module.
Do I need a webcam?
Yes, you must have a functioning webcam for online proctoring with ProctorU. Minimum 640 x 480 resolution.
Recommended 1280 x 720 resolution. Your webcam or computer should also have a functioning microphone.
                                                           3


Check that your equipment meets the requirements for online exam proctoring by
visiting http://www.proctoru.com/testitout/.
How much will the exams cost?
If you make reservations within our prescribed deadline, the proctoring fee will be $19.75 per exam.
All exams will be multiple-choice or short answer in format, and your knowledge of all forms of course
material may be assessed. This includes any of the information from the readings, lectures and videos
presented. The exams will assess both conceptual knowledge and factual information. Exams are all closed-
book. Consulting printed, audio or other digital sources during the exam will be considered cheating. If you feel
that an exam question was unclear or contained an error, you should email the TAs at
onlinepsy333dta@austin.utexas.edu immediately after you have finished your exam to alert them to the
problem. If, in consultation with the professor, it is determined that a question should be dropped, the entire
class will be informed and everyone will receive credit for that question. This will result in the remaining
questions each being weighted somewhat more heavily for everyone. In no circumstances will this lower
anyone’s score. If the recalculation results in a lower score for you, then you will receive the higher original
score.
No make-up exams will be offered except in critical situations and/or medical or family emergencies (as
defined by Student Emergency Services at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php). Should you experience a personal
crisis of this nature, you must notify the professor at least one hour BEFORE the exam and must submit a ‘class
absence notification request form’ with supporting documentation to Student Emergency Services within 48
hours.
Response assignments: One will be due 6/20, and the other due 7/8. The prompts for each assignment will be
posted on Canvas. Response assignments will be submitted on Canvas. Please note that 1 full point (out of 12)
will be deducted from your writing assignment grade if it is turned in late. An additional 2 points will be
deducted for every 24 hours that the assignment is past due.
Response assignment 1: The assignment for 6/20 is to interview a parent. It can be your own parent, a spouse
if you are a parent, or a friend/colleague who is a parent. Additional details will be posted on Canvas. You
generate questions about a childhood milestone that occurs prior to age 6 (sleeping through the night, first
foods, first steps, first day of school, first word, etc.). You then discuss/analyze this milestone example in the
context of what has been discussed in class materials, and the average timeline for that milestone. Your
response assignment should be 1 page (single spaced) of reflection, and 2-3 pages of interview questions and
answers. You will be graded primarily on the quality of your ideas and your ability to integrate the information
presented in class and in the readings to the topic.
          A) Summarize the basic information about the parent and their child (genders, ages, # of other
              children, closeness of relationship, age of each for the event in question – Omit names – use initials
              or pseudonym)
          B) Provide interview questions and answers and a reflection [Interview q&a are 2-3 pages,
              Reflection/Analysis = 1 page single spaced, 1” margins] – Paper MUST have analysis beyond the
              interview for credit.
Response assignment 2: The topic for 7/8 is Toy Ads: Examples of Bias and Ads that do better. You will be
required to upload two images onto Padlet via Canvas along with a word document describing why the images
you selected fit the assignment. Find an example ad of a toy that demonstrates a gender or other type of bias
                                                             4


(and explain how). Find an example ad of a toy that goes against biases or otherwise works to appeal to all
children/families. Toys in ads should be designed for children less than age 10 years. You can take pictures of
ads from magazines or other sources, or upload pictures of toys from the internet. The write-up will be ½ -1
page, single spaced. Write-up should also refer to course materials and reflect on what aspects of child
development the toy is benefiting.
Participation: For each week of material, three discussion topics will open on Piazza. Engage with at least one
discussion topic each week for 2 points. You must respond prior to that week’s exam for credit. Credit will not
be given for limited comments like “I agree” or “same”. Credit will be given for thoughtful comments that
relate to class material, own experience, or your own additional research on the topic.
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an
archived database of published work and other submitted papers in this course to check for potential plagiarism.
Other methods may also be used to determine if paper or assignment is the student’s original work. Regardless
of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member, sometimes in consultation with Student Judicial
Services, will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized. You will receive a
zero on this assignment if it is discovered that your paper (or any non-referenced portion thereof) has been
plagiarized from another student or any other source.
The Undergraduate Writing Center (UWC) is an excellent resource for getting feedback on drafts of your papers
in advance. The UWC offers writing assistance by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Contact them by phone or
email (512) 471-6222; coordinator@uwc.utexas.edu. Also see http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/
Grading summary: It is possible to earn 200 total points for the course. Your points will continually be
updated and posted in Canvas’s grade center. Final grades including a decimal point of 0.5 or higher will be
rounded up. Final letter grades will be assigned according to the following scale:
        A = 93-100%        185-200 points
        A- = 90-92%        179-184 points
        B+ = 87-89%        173-178 points
        B = 83-86%         165-172 points
        B- = 80-82%        159-164 points
        C+ = 77-79%        153-158 points
        C = 73-76%         145-152 points
        C- = 70-72%        139-144 points
        D+ = 67-69%        133-138 points
        D = 63-66%         125-132 points
        D- = 60-62%        119-124 points
        F = <60%           118 points or less
Assignment                                                         Percentage of grade
Exams (4, at 40 points each = 160 points)                              80
Response assignments (2, at 12 points each = 24 points)                12
Piazza discussions (4, at 2 points each = 16 points)                   8
Total (200 points)                                                     100
Grading policy: No grade adjustments will be made in person. All challenges to exam questions (e.g., the
wording appears ambiguous to you or you don't understand why a certain answer option isn't also marked as
correct) or writing assignment grades must be submitted to the TA email onlinepsy333dta@austin.utexas.edu
with a clear explanation within 48 hours after grades are posted. There will be no exceptions to this rule.
                                                         5


Incomplete grades will be given in extremely rare and extraordinary circumstances. Per University policy, an
incomplete cannot be assigned simply to give a student the opportunity to improve their grade. Indeed,
incompletes are disallowed if a student does not have a passing grade on the work completed. Incompletes can
only be considered when a student hasn’t finished required assignments for a significant, documented reason
other than lack of effort (i.e., for any of the crisis/emergency situations listed at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php).
Policy on Academic Integrity: By taking this class, you agree to abide by the University of Texas regulations
concerning cheating. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. At a minimum,
this requires that you 1) acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts 2) complete
your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing them 3)
follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic discipline and 4)
avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
You will be required to sign an endorsement of the UT honor code at the start of each exam. Cheating on
writing assignments or exams undermines the opportunity to learn. Students who violate University rules on
academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and /
or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
In order to avoid inadvertently violating these rules, it is imperative that you do not share your UT EID with
anyone else and that you refrain from recording or sharing any quiz, exam, response assignment, or other
assessment material in any format. You must also not accept another student’s UTEID or consult any material
shared by another student who has taken this course, or its equivalent, in the past. If you observe others
cheating, you are honor bound to contact the TAs or professor.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line.
Students with disabilities: Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video
phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from
SSD. Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible.
Student disclosures of sexual violence. Federal law, Title IX, and UT policy prohibit discrimination,
harassment, and violence based on sex and gender, including sexual harassment, domestic violence, dating
violence, stalking, and/or any form of sex or gender discrimination. Faculty and staff on campus are considered
mandatory reporters. This means that if you disclose a personal experience as a UT student, the course
instructor and TAs are required to notify UT's Title IX Office. While we will protect your information to the
greatest extent we can, we are mandated to report sexual misconduct and crimes to help improve campus safety.
                                                            6


Course schedule and readings. The syllabus posted in Canvas should be considered the definitive current
version and should be checked regularly as it may change. It is your responsibility to keep track of any changes
to the schedule and/or assignments announced throughout the semester.
    DATE                   TOPIC                          READING
    WEEK 1: June 6th-      Day 1: Introduction and Key    http://www.ted.com/talks/alison_gopnik_what_
    June 13th              Themes                         do_babies_think.html; syllabus
                           Day 2: Methods and the         Chapter 1
                           Media
                           Day 3: Genetics and Family     Genetics chapter excerpt
                           Studies
                           Day 4: Building a Brain
                           Day 5: Pregnancy               Abbot, 2015
                           Day 6: Plasticity and Our      Perception chapter excerpt
                           Senses
                           Day 7: Learning to Move and
                           Moving to Learn
    FRIDAY JUNE 14th EXAM 1
    WEEK 2: June 17th-     Day 8: Nutrition and Sleep
    21st
                           Day 9: Piaget                  Piaget Simply Psychology article
                           Day 10: Vygotsky               Lev Vygotsky Simply Psychology article
                           Day 11: Pint-size physicists   Object Permanence
    June 20th              RESPONSE                       See syllabus and Canvas for details
                           ASSIGNMENT 1 DUE
                           Day 12: Baby Talk              Kuhl, 2004
                           Day 13: Baby Talk 2
                           Day 14: Reading and math       7 things about preschool math
    MONDAY JUNE            EXAM #2
    24th
    WEEK 3: June 24th-     Day 15: Self-control           Try to resist over-interpreting article
    July 1st
                           Day 16: Emotional regulation Teaching your child feeling article
                           Day 17: Childhood memories
                           & sense of self
                           Day 18: Attachment             The Strange Situation reading
                           Day 19: Mindreading minors
                           Day 20: Prosocial peewees      How do children decide what’s fair?
                                                        7


TUESDAY JULY      EXAM #3
2nd
WEEK 4: July 3rd- Day 21: Race and Gender        Children can ‘catch’ social bias
July 10th         Identities
                  Day 22: Promises and pitfalls  Screen Time Canadian Policy article
                  of children’s digital media
                  Day 23: The perpetual          Gershoff, 2013;
                  pursuit of perfect parenting
                  practices
                  Day 24: The dangers of
                  discipline & the perils of
                  praise
July 8th          RESPONSE                       See syllabus and Canvas for details
                  ASSIGNMENT 2 DUE
                  Day 25: Teenagers & Risk       Teenage Brain
                  Taking
                  Day 26: The Big Takeaways
THURSDAY JULY     EXAM #4
11th
                                               8
