HIS 364 G/ ANS 361/WGS 340: Gender in Modern India
(Unique Numbers # 39110/# 32225/ # 45600 respectively)
Instructor: Indrani Chatterjee
Class Times: Mon, Wed, 4 pm-5.30 pm
Classroom: GAR 1.126
Instructor’s Office: GAR 3.412
Instructor’s Office Hours: Wed. 1.10-2-30 pm/ appointment
Email: ichatterjee@austin.utexas.edu
        Description: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States.
You should therefore expect to stretch your mental horizons to comprehend the
coherence of practices, beliefs, and histories of non-US groups. This is a challenge that
needs to be met by each individual before they can become global citizens. Only by
learning about others can we better learn to reflect on our own cultures and enhance our
skills of critical thinking. (For definitions of ‘Critical Thinking’ and related tips, see
FAQs at the end of this syllabus)
        This is a two-part course. In PART I, students will read about the genesis of South
Asian ideas of gender by reading poetry, watching clips from films and listening to music
that will help them understand the broader social and political structures in which men
and women interacted with each other between the thirteenth and eighteenth centuries.
They will be expected to develop a basic understanding of the shifts that occurred in the
course of the eighteenth and nineteenth century, studied in PART II. In the latter
segment, students will evaluate how and whether these contradictory developments
empowered women from an emergent colonial middle class as they struggled to
overthrow colonialism and establish independent nation-states. This segment also
includes group activities by students which will require self-and-peer grading as well.
Grading: LETTER GRADES OF A, B, C, D, F will be given in this course in the
following fashion: total of 90-100= A; 80-89=B; 70-79=C; 60-69=D; Under 50 a Fail
or F.
Grades for the semester are calculated on the basis of Attendance (20), Class
Discussion and Preparedness (30), 2 essays for 30 marks each (50).
REQUIREMENTS:
Attendance (20): Students will be allowed no more than one professionally
undocumented absence. ‘Professional’ documentation refers to letters/notices from
state/federal/municipal and/or duly certified medical, police, judicial authority, company-
recruiters conducting business interviews on campus, directors of laboratories, organisers
of job-interviews and of companies conducting placement tests. Without these, absences
will adversely affect the final grade.
                                                 1


    Punctuality: It is important for each student to be present punctually at the start
of class and to stay till the end, unless you have taken prior permission from the
instructor to arrive late or depart early. Such permission should not be sought on a regular
basis, but for unavoidable situations and emergencies.
    Attendance is mental as well as physical: putting your body in a classroom and tuning
your mind out on to facebook/twitter/ apps is unprofessional conduct. It will be
penalized accordingly. Everybody is required to develop and demonstrate listening skills.
DO- look at the speaker, take notes, mention an idea that seems to interest you
afterwards, ask thoughtful questions if you need clarifications or further
development. DON’T – look bored or indifferent, look at your watch/phone/computer
screens, yawn, fall asleep, read other course-related books and papers or play games.
    All students have the right to learn in a supportive environment. All mobile
messaging devices (phones, etc) must be turned off and stored away during class. If this
includes your phone or laptop, the instructor retains the right to ask students to shut off
such a device. All disruptive or inconsiderate behaviors are deemed unprofessional
conduct for the purpose of the class. These will affect your grade adversely.
2) Reading-Discussion (30) and Writing (50): Most readings for this course will be
available on Canvas or online at University of Austin Library. Those that need to be
bought or rented are the following:
1) Geraldine Forbes, Women in Modern India (Cambridge University Press, 1999,
paperback).ISBN-10: 0521653770, ISBN-13: 978-1571310484
2) Thomas and Barbara Metcalf, A Concise History of India (Cambridge University
Press, 3rd edition only, 2012 paperback), ISBN-13 978-1-107-67218-5
3) Bapsi Sidhwa, Ice Candy Man/( older title) Cracking India (new title, Penguin Books,
1989, 1991, 2006). ISBN-10: 1571310487 and ISBN-13:978-1571310484
FOR MAPS and illustrations, visit http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps and
http://www.virginia.edu/soasia/resurces.htm and
http://dsal.uchicago.edu
http://www.columbia.edu/cu/lweb/indiv/southasia/curl
Students are expected to read the assigned texts ahead of the class, and be willing to
discuss their responses to these texts in class, sometimes as individual written reflections
and sometimes in group-based discussions and presentations (30 points). On the days
when the instructor lectures, a student may ask a question or comment at the end of the
class. On all other days, class is devoted to clarifying students’ questions and comments
on the readings.
The assessment of oral discussion shifts in its emphasis from the beginning to the
end of the semester. IN the beginning, a student’s ability to ask simple questions of why,
when, what coherently will be sufficient. By the end, a student’s ability to synthesize old
and new readings, to remember the beginning and be able to refer to it in discussion will
be more favorably assessed than simple why, how and what questions. There will also be
forms for self-and peer-reviews given to each of the 6 groups that will be formed for the
                                               2


conduct of Part II of the course. The instructor retains the final judgement on a student’s
progress from simple to complex comprehension, engagement with the materials and
demonstrated ability to learn new arguments and modes of thinking.
Please note that 1) all discussions of grades will only be done during office hours,
within seven days of the receipt of the grade. Such discussions will not be conducted
via email correspondence or on the telephone 2) that no person should expect to get
a final grade if they have not completed all segments of the course. 3) Those who
have attendance deficits can hope to earn EXTRA CREDITS (2 marks per event) if they
attend an event sponsored by the South Asia Institute at UT Austin, and present a page of
reportage and analysis on it to the professor the very next class. Each student can turn in a
maximum of 2 such reports for extra credit, for a maximum of 4 events. However, I
strongly urge students to attend both classes and seminars to get the full credit.
3) Special Accommodations: Students who need special accommodations should notify
the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with
Disabilities (SDD) Office. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be
provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY. I will
only accept SSD certificates for the first four weeks at the beginning of the semester. I
will not make any accommodations if students provide the letters after the mid-term point
of the semester.
 Schedule of Meetings and Readings:
PART I
Jan 23(Wed): Introductions. Instructor talks about the Syllabus and on the Map of
South Asia/India (Start learning the names of key Rivers, Oceans and mountains).
Jan 28: Instructor lectures on ‘What is History?’ When and why did History of women
and gender become significant? What is particular to History of Women in South Asia as
different from other women’s histories? How does learning about those women help us to
understand ‘modernity’?
Jan. 30: Modernity of Gender and Sexuality: Textual Evidence: Students Read 1)
Kamasutra, 94-130 and 131-160 (PDF on Canvas)
Feb 4: Read Ali, ‘Censured Sexual Acts in Medieval India’- (PDF on Canvas). Write 2
questions directly related to the reading on a piece of paper with your name on top and
bring it to class. Hand this paper to the instructor before the start of class.
Feb 6: Read Metcalf Concise History of India, pp 1-44: Instructor Lectures on the
Coming of Arab, Turk, Mongol and Persian to the Subcontinent 10th - 16th century.
February 11: Read 1) Ranjeeta Dutta, ‘The Guru’s Household’ (PDF on Canvas) and 2)
Afshan Bokhari, ‘Masculine Modes of Female Subjectivity’ (PDF on Canvas). Write 5
                                                3


lines connecting the two readings on a piece of paper with your name on top. Hand this
paper to the instructor before the start of class.
Feb 13: Students Read Metcalf Concise History of India pp. 44- 81
Feb 18: Read Sharmila Rege ‘Hegemonic Appropriation of Sexuality’ (PDF on Canvas).
Can you see the relationship between state-authority and the ways that intersectionality of
caste, gender, marital status, class and religion could shore up different kinds of
governments? Be prepared to discuss your views in class.
Feb 20: Students read Metcalfs pp. 81-91 AND Students Read Shweta S. Jha, ‘Tawaif as
Poet and Patron’(PDF on Canvas) and Indrani Chatterjee, ‘Monastic Commerce’ (PDF on
Canvas)
Feb 25: Read Metcalfs Concise History of India, 92- 155 + Veena Poonacha, ‘Redefining
Gender Relationships’ (PDF on Canvas). Write 5 sentences connecting one reading with
the other with your name on top. Hand this paper to the Instructor before the start of
class.
Feb 27: Students read Tarabai Shinde ‘Comparison of women and men’ (Stripurush
Tulana translated by Rosalind OHanlon) for discussion in class. What issues of caste,
gender and class norms does reading this tract raise for you? Be prepared to discuss in
class.
March 4: Read Janaki Nair, ‘Prohibited Marriage’ (PDF on Canvas). Write 5 sentences
connecting this reading with any previous reading that you have done in this course.
March 6: Students will write an in-class essay (30 points) in a blue-book on the
following question: How do you situate Stri Purush Tulana (Comparison of Men and
Women) in the larger context of 19th century cultural, legal and political changes that
impacted different classes and castes in the Indian subcontinent? Bring a Blue Book to
class.
March 8: ARUNDHATI KATJU Speaks on the Indian Supreme Court and decision on Sec
377. EXTRA CREDIT OPPORTUNITY FOR EVERYBODY.
PART II: Students Teach
March 11 Group 1: Students Teach Metcalfs pp 155-202
March 13: Group 2: Students Teach Geraldine Forbes, pp. 76- 156
March 25:Discussion combining both.
March 27: Group 3: Students Teach Metcalfs pp 203-230
                                                4


 April 1: Group 4: Students Teach Forbes 157-188 linking with Metcalfs
April 3: Group 5 teaches Bapsi Sidhwa, Ice-Candy Man/ Cracking India
April 8-10: Students watch film ‘Earth’ in class with an eye to identifying key
differences of interpretation between the novel and the film in discussion.
April 15: Group 6: Students teach Kamla Bhasin and Ritu Menon ‘Borders and
Boundaries’ (PDF on canvas) in class and tie it to their earlier readings
April 17: Read Vazira Zamindar The Long Partition (PDF on canvas)
April 22: Watch Khamosh Pani in class
April 24: Discussion on the many after-lives of Partition
April 29: Read Yasmin Saikia (PDF on canvas)
May 1: Read ‘Women and the Rise of the Hindu Right’ (PDF on Canvas)
May 6: Review of Class and Discussion of Finals
May 8: Write an essay in class assessing the long-lasting effects of colonialism and
nationalism for different groups of women in the subcontinent (30) Bring your own Blue
Books.
FAQs
1. What is critical thinking?
The critical thinker does not simply accept what she/he reads or hears and does not
simply make assertions, but bases arguments on evidence and sound reasoning. A way of
practising critical thinking is to ask yourself questions as you listen, read and study:
questions such as a) • What is really important here? b) How does this relate to what I
know already? C) • Is this really true? Can I check its accuracy? (A statement can be
clear but inaccurate, as in “Most Indians are less than 150cm in height.”) Critical thinking
includes such ‘higher-order’ thinking tasks as reasoning, problem-solving, analysis,
synthesis, and evaluation. The skills or tasks involved in critical thinking will vary, but
may include a) Developing a logical argument;
b) Identifying the flaws or weaknesses in an argument;
c) Making relevant connections or links across disciplines, or from theory to practice;
d) Analyzing the material in a range of sources and synthesizing it;
A critical thinker does not simply observe others thinking, but also her/himself thinking
and writing. No matter how brief your response, ask yourself questions such as a) Could I
have expressed this point in another (better) way? Have I elaborated sufficiently? b)
                                                5


Could I have been more specific? c) How is this related to the topic? Is it really relevant
to the question? How does this follow from what I said before? Does this contradict a
previous statement? When we think, we bring a variety of thoughts together in some
order. If the combination of these ideas is not mutually supportive, or does not make
sense, then the combination is not logical. D) Have I addressed the complexities of the
author/article’s questions, or have I just skated over the surface? E) Are there issues I
have omitted? Is there another way to look at this question? These questions apply sound
intellectual standards to your thinking. It involves self-evaluation, thinking about your
thinking, and being sure that you are not jumping to conclusions. You should be prepared
to consider all aspects of an issue before making up your mind, and to avoid letting
personal bias or prejudice interfere with your reasoning. Critical thinking is important for
most academic tasks, including reading, tutorial discussions, written assignments and
exam answers.
2) How do I come up with a question on a reading?
All historians are taught to ask ‘what’ ‘when’ ‘where’, ‘ how’ – and especially ‘why’-
questions. For those who have never taken a history class before, this is usually a good
place to begin. Keep notes of everything you read. Once you have practiced asking such
questions, the next set of bigger questions can follow, such as:
    •   What exactly is the subject or topic of the essay/article/book? (Try to summarize
        the piece in 2 short sentences)
    •   What is the thesis—or main argument—of the article, essay or book? (Having
        a summary of the article/book is a huge help at this stage) If the author wanted
        you to get one idea, what would it be? What has the article/book accomplished?
    •   Is the author arguing with other scholars in a bigger field? Does this change the
        field for you in some way? Does any of the author’s information (or conclusions)
        conflict with other books you’ve read, courses you’ve taken or just previous
        assumptions you had of the subject?
    •   How does the author support her/his argument? What evidence does he/she
        use to prove her point? Do you find that evidence convincing? Why or why not?
        How does the author structure her/his argument? What are the parts that make up
        the whole? Does the argument make sense? Does it persuade you? Why or why
        not?
    •   Would you recommend the chapter to a friend who is not in this class?
When writing an essay, begin with a well-organised Introduction identifying the task
before you. Have a Thesis Statement on the first page. Proceed to write out your
observations according to the questions you have been raising while reading.
3) Rubric that the Instructor Uses for assessing every student’s essay.
                   Excellent (A)     Good (B)          Not Great (C)      Needs Work      Poor (F)
                                                                          (D)
                                               6


Argument/      Strong thesis    Thesis is not   Thesis poorly   No thesis        No thesis and
Thesis (5/5 is is clearly       clear or        defined or      and/or           inconsistent
Excellent)     stated in first  difficult to    vague and       inconsistent     argumentation
               paragraph;       locate, or      inconsistently  argumentation
               argument is      inconsistently  supported
               consistently     supported
               supported
Understanding/ Informative      Demonstrates    Passive         Does not         Failure to
Content (5/5)  and original     significant     understanding   demonstrate      address the
is excellent   analysis         level of        with little     clear            sources or
               demonstrates     understanding   analysis;       understanding    prompt
               high level of    with some       mostly          or knowledge
               understanding    analysis        summarizes      of the material
               of multiple                      documents
               sources
Use of         Expert use of    Uses evidence   Some use of     Poor or          No use of
Evidence (5/5) evidence:        well to support evidence:       insufficient     evidence
               Sources are      thesis: Sources Sources are     use of
               selected,        are selected,   used but not    evidence:
               introduced,      introduced,     properly        Sources are
               contextualized,  contextualized, introduced,     used
               interpreted,     interpreted,    contextualized, inappropriately
               and cited        and cited       interpreted or  or without
               correctly.       adequately.     cited.          proper citation.
Organization/  Sophisticated    Functional      Confused or     Confused         Minimal
Style (2/2)    arrangement of   arrangement of  inconsistent    arrangement of   control of
               content          content         arrangement of  content          content
               supports         sustains a      content;        obscures         arrangement;
               argument;        logical order;  limited word    argument;        problematic
               writer’s voice   generic use of  choice and      problematic      word choices
               clear through    words and       control of      word choices;    and sentence
               illustrative use sentence        sentence        relies on        structures
               of language      structures      structure       quotations/
                                                                paraphrasing
                                                                with not
                                                                authorial voice
Grammar/       Evident          Sufficient      Limited         Minimal          Grammar and
Spelling and   control of       control of      control of      control of       usage errors
Usage (3/3)    grammar,         grammar,        grammar,        grammar,         impede clarity
               mechanics,       mechanics,      mechanics,      mechanics,
               spelling, usage  spelling, usage spelling, usage spelling, usage
               and sentence     and sentence    and sentence    and sentence
               formation.       formation.      formation—      formation—
                                                begins to       impedes
                                                affect clarity  clarity
                                           7


Please Use for Citations - The Chicago Manual of Style
       http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html
                                          8
