1 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                        Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
                                           PR 367/ADV 370J
                   INTEGRATED COMMUNICATION MANAGEMENT
                                      (Unique # 06030 & 06475)
                                MW 2:00 P.M.- 3:15 P.M. (PAR 306)
Instructor: Angeline Close Scheinbaum, Ph.D.
Email: angeline@austin.utexas.edu (note for class correspondence please go through Canvas
messaging)
Office Hours: W 12:30-1:30
Office: BMC 4.368 (4th floor of Belo Center for New Media)
Phone: (512) 788-2480
Teaching Assistant: Haley Guye
Email: guyeh13@utexas.edu (note for class correspondence please go through Canvas messaging)
Office Hours: M 12:00-1:30
Office: BMC Station #16 (4th floor of Belo Center for New Media)
Course Objectives and Materials
This writing-intensive course requires you to think critically and:
         1. Apply knowledge to assess problems, isolate key facts, and rank-order salient management
             issues.
         2. Think in a quantified and structured manner, following a structured decision-making process.
         3. Make decisions and create action plans appropriate to the situation under consideration.
         4. Efficiently and persuasively write up your analysis and sell your recommendations.
         5. Then, defend your case against criticism from your peers and others.
Students are expected to have successfully completed prerequisite courses and have a solid foundation in
marketing as well as the advertising and public relations functional areas. Students are required to
quickly identify and resolve any conflicts, fundamental inconsistencies, or background voids that exist.
Because the course requires a common advertising and public relations foundation, students are
responsible for timely background leveling. Advertising and PR management teams form the basis for a
significant portion of the course. The ability to work effectively and efficiently in a team is essential to
successfully completing this course.
Prerequisite:
Advertising 344K and 345J with a grade of at least C in each; and Marketing 320F or 337 with a grade
of at least C.
Required texts:
1. Murphy, John H., Cunningham, Isabella C.M., & Stavchansky de Lewis, Liza. (2011), Integrated
Brand Promotion Management: Text, Cases, and Exercises (1st edition). Kendall Hunt, ISBN
9780757577918. (note, this is the latest edition available; we will use this book mainly for the cases; to
bring the content up to date, we will have daily industry updates and blend with the social media aspect)
and


2 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                     Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
2. (to update the content into the social media aspect of ICM!) Angeline Close Scheinbaum (2018). The
Dark Side of Social Media: A Consumer Psychology Perspective ISBN 9781138052567
Canvas:
PLEASE USE CANVAS MESSAGING FOR CLASS COMMUNICATION AND CC THE TA. In this
class, Canvas will be used as the main class website. Be sure you have a valid email address connected
with Canvas to ensure receipt of communication concerning the course. It is your responsibility to check
Canvas regularly. http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Strategy:
     1. Use class discussions of the text, cases, and outside readings as a common framework for the
        study of advertising and public relations management.
     2. Use individual case analyses and individual assignments to demonstrate your writing skills and
        communication problem-solving abilities.
     3. Use management team case analyses and class presentations to approximate the work
        environment of a management position on the client or agency side.
Evaluation:
     1. Measure resourcefulness, organization, writing, and communicating skills with two writing
        assignments.
                -The writings are about ad agency websites and unethical advertising.
     2. Measure problem solving and writing skills with case brief assignments.
                -The core of this course revolves around case brief analyses. A premium is placed on the
                development of quantitative dimensions in support of case solutions.
     3. Measure management team performance based on management team analyses and presentations.
     4. Measure group contributions with a structured peer evaluation system.
                -You will assess the performance of your peers in measurable, precisely articulated terms,
                and begin your understanding of this difficult management task with this assignment.


3 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                  Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
Schedule
                                                                    Individual
                                                           Present
                                                   Chapter          Cases Due
 Date              Learning Objectives
                                                   Reading
                                                             ing
                                                                   from those
                                                                                   Current Event***
                                                           Team*
                                                                   in Team**
      Class introduction & Syllabus overview                                                 We will
      Current Event Overview                                                                 make a
  W   Dark Side of Social Media Overview            Ch. 1                                    current
                                                              -          -         -
 8/29 Meet teams (subject to change per                                                       event
      add/drop)                                                                             schedule
      Intro to Case Writing                                                                 posted as
                                                    Ch. 1                                 Google Doc
W 9/5 Case Writing; Giving effective presentations   &2       -          -         -       on Canvas
                                                                                          by week 2.
      Resume Due on Canvas                            -       -          -         -
      Advertising/PR Agency – Individual              -       -          -         -            -
  M
      Assignment Due
 9/10                                                 -       -          -         -
      Show exemplary agency work in Class
      Advertising/PR Agency – Individual
  W
      Assignment                                      -       -          -         -            -
 9/12
      Show exemplary agency work in Class
  M                                                 Ch. 3                                   Ad or PR
                                                              -          -
 9/17 Marketing                                                                             research
  W   Team Presentation – Home Depot
                                                      -       1       5&6                       -
 9/19 (Case 3.3)
  M   Advertising Research (Class lead by TA)
                                                    Ch. 4     -          -                  Ad or PR
 9/24
                                                                                            research
      Team Presentation – Diet & Exercise             -       2       3&4
  W
      Campaign Extension (Case 4.3)
 9/26                                                 -       -          -
  M                                                 Ch. 5                                  Integrated
 10/1 IBP Objectives                                                                          Brand
                                                                                           Promotion
  W
                                                      -       3       1&2
 10/3
      Team Presentation Don’t Mess with Texas
                                                              -          -
      (Case 4.1)                                      -
  M   Budgeting                                     Ch. 6
                                                              -          -                Budgeting/
 10/8
                                                                                         IBP Expenses
  W   Team Presentation – Business Suites (Case       -       4       5&6
10/10 6.2)
                                                    Ch. 7
  M                                                           -          -
10/15                                                                                     Creativity in
      Creative                                        -       -          -                  Ads or PR
  W   Team Presentation – Costa Del Mar                       5       3&4


4 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                     Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
10/17 (Case 7.2)
                                                         -  -              Media Issues
  M                                                Ch. 8
                                                         -  -              Media Issues
10/22 Media
  W   Team Presentation – Healthy Dog Gourmet            6 1&2             Media Issues
10/24 (Case 8.2)                                         -  -               Promotion
      Sales Promotion                             Ch. 10
                                                         -  -               Promotion
  M
10/29                                                    1  6
      Team Presentation – Bath So Nice (Case
  W   10.3)
10/31 (class lead by TA, presentation video taped    -   -  -
      as I am speaking at conference)                                         Public
  M   Public Relations                                                       Relations
                                                  Ch. 12
 11/5                                                    -  -
  W   Team Presentation – Whole Foods (Case
                                                         2  5
 11/7 12.3)
  M                                               Ch. 13
                                                         -  -
11/12 Event Marketing                                                         Event
                                                         -  -              Marketing &
  W   Team Presentation – Shiner Bock (Case                                Sponsorship
11/14 13.1)                                              3  4
                                                  Ch. 14
                                                  & Dark
  M
                                                   Side  -  -                Internet
11/19
      Online Consumer Behavior & Internet         Social                    Marketing
      The Dark Side of Social Media                Book
  M   Team Presentation – Gossip Girl                    4  3
11/26 (Case 14.1)                                        -  -
  W   Evaluating IBP Strategies                   Ch. 15
                                                         -  -                   IBP
11/28
      Team Presentation – MedNet.com (Case                                  Strategies
  M   15.1)                                          -   5  2
 12/3
      Ethics Marketing & Society/ The Dark Side
      of Social Media
  W
      Advertising Ethics – Individual Assignment
 12/5                                             Ch. 17
      Due                                                -  -
      Show your Unethical Ad/Social Media
                                                                              Ethics
      Content in Class
  M
12/10
      Team Presentation- Able Atwater and
                                                         6  1
      Combs (Case 17.2)


5 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                           Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
*A team case brief is due in class when your team falls in this column.
**An individual case brief is due in class when your team number is listed in this column. This is to be
worked on individually. Do not discuss these individual assignments with your team.
***A current event presentation is due in class with the corresponding topic you will be assigned to.
This is to be worked on individually.
Course Requirements and Assessment
                       - Individual case brief writing assignments (3)               30%
                       -Written team case analyses (2)                               15%
                       - Team case presentations & slide packet (2)                  15%
                       - Individual writing assignments (3):                         15%
                           - agency
                           - ethics
                           - industry update (current event presentation)
                       - Participation/professionalism/attendance                    20%
                       - Account team peer evaluation                                5%
                       Total                                                         100%
Thus, you will turn in: 3 individual written case analyses, contribute to 2 team written case analyses,
contribute to 2 team case presentations, an agency assignment, an ethics assignment, a current
marketing article and 5 discussion questions, and a peer evaluation of your account team.
Individual Case Brief Writing Assignments (3) – 30%:
This grade is based on your format, statement of the problem, list of critical factors, definition of
alternatives, a pro/con discussion, and conclusion/additional comments. The grade rubric is posted on
the class website. These are INDIVIDUAL. It is cheating to discuss these with team members. Doing so
is a direct violation of honor code and you will be turned in to the University.
Written Team Case Analyses (2) –15% &
Team Case Presentations & Slide Packet (2) – 15%: You are on agency account team (of approx. 4-7
team members depending on enrollment). The grade is evenly weighted between the team written case
analysis and team presentation. Your team turns in one written case analysis. The written team analysis
grade is based on the same standard for your individual case briefs (your format, statement of the
problem, list of critical factors, definition of alternatives, a pro/con discussion, and conclusion/additional
comments). This is the same grade rubric as for your individual cases. The presentation grade is based
on your: professionalism, introduction, teamwork, delivery, visual aides, statement of the
problem/critical factors, definition of alternatives, a pro/con discussion, conclusions, and how you
handle Q&A. The presentation grade rubric is posted on the class site. You must have the presentation
pulled up before the start of class. Bring your presentation on a jump drive. Failure to start on time as a
result of lack of preparedness results in loss of 5 points on the presentation.
Note: for full credit, you must turn in an electronic copy to Canvas by class start AND bring a paper
copy to class. If you fail to bring the paper copy at the start of class, it is a 5 point deduction.
Individual Writing Assignments (3)-15%


6 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                        Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
1: Individual Writing Assignment: Agency Assessment – 5%: Go through the websites of the top
grossing ad agencies in the U.S. After going through the "Agencies"
(http://angelineclose.com/category/teaching/advertising-management/ad-agencies-advertising-
management/) choose what you think is: 1) the most creative agency- give examples of a couple great
creative campaigns they did, 2) the most strategic agency with respect to media- give examples of a
couple of very strategic campaigns they did- say had a laser focus on digital strategy, had a great social
media strategy etc. with supporting examples, and 3) the agency you would most like to work for and
why. This needs to include a vision statement from the agency, their mission statement, or if that isn’t
available use a statement from their “about us” on their website. These should be three different
agencies. Support your choices with evidence and examples in a two page single-spaced 12pt. Times
New Roman report. Prepare for discussion in class and be prepared to show examples. Note- most
agencies are both advertising and PR. If you prefer one that is purely PR that is ok as long as it is a
very-well known firm that is top-grossing nationally or globally.
2- Individual Writing Assignment: Ad/PR Ethics – 5%: Find the most unethical or personally
offensive ad or PR execution you can (any format-DVD, video, print, newspaper, radio spot, photo of
billboard or outdoor advertising). Bring this in class, and be prepared to present this ad or PR execution
to the class and discuss. Type three reasons why it is unethical in your assessment (yet not illegal). The
ad or PR execution is to be turned in with 2 typed pages of why it is unethical based on these three
reasons, and include a suggestion for alternative creative strategy/copy/tactics. Then, conclude the paper
after thinking: Has an ad or PR execution ever enticed you to do something termed hedonic you
ordinarily would not do (i.e., gamble, drink, smoke, etc.)? Has an ad or PR execution ever enticed you to
do something termed beneficial you ordinarily would not do (i.e., vote, volunteer, etc.)? Which is easier
to entice in us-the good or the bad? How do advertisers use this knowledge in their copywriting/layout
strategy? This two-page short writing and thinking assignment is due in class on the assigned date at the
beginning of class and uploaded to canvas by the start of class.
To find the ad or PR execution, do not Google “unethical ad” or “unethical PR” because the point is for
you to think critically about something YOU believe isn’t right. I have done this search and it brings up
what others find unethical. You will be docked for originality if you bring in a top 3 hit under these
search terms. I want you to use critical thinking about advertising and PR in society first, and then
search with your appropriate terms. For instance, search terms could be: violence in video game ads, ads
exploiting vulnerable groups (poor, children, teens, elderly, handicapped), sexual exploitation,
alcohol/smoking/gambling etc. The grade is based not on your opinion, but how you support your claim
with evidence and reasoning. The grade also makes sure you address each part of each question. Critical
thinking is what I am looking for. A good debate sparked is appreciated. Not discussing your unethical
ad in class is a letter grade deduction.
Again, the above 2 assignments and the current event assignment are INDIVIDUAL assignments and
collaborating with anyone including your team is cheating and subject to University honor code
violation.
3- Individual Writing Assignment: Industry Update/Current Event Facilitation– 5% We keep it
current in this class. Lively participation on current topics is key to the success of this course. You are
assigned one day to pick an article (current- within a few months or so) from either Ad Age, AdWeek or
PR Week or other approved industry trade publication matching the week’s topic and lead a lively
discussion. Articles from non-approved sources may not count. On your day, you are responsible for


7 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                        Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
opening up your presentation on the classroom computer BEFORE class begins. You introduce the topic
and summarize the article (do not read the article verbatim). Come up with 3 interesting open-ended
discussion questions for the class.
This is not a paper or an essay; you turn in a power point deck on canvas. There should be 5 slides (1.
intro slide with your name and the topic assigned, 2. slide overviewing the article you read and any
hyperlink to any associated ad or image/video if applicable, which is often helpful, and 3 slides each
with one interesting, open-ended question for debate/discussion. It is due uploaded on canvas by the
start of class on your assigned day. Late assignments or uploads are docked 10 points per day late, even
if you already presented so be sure to remember to upload your ppt deck (as a ppt file NOT a pdf).
Your participation is a facilitator on the day you lead, and you will respond to questions from
your peers’ events during the semester. Thus, be ready to talk and share and express your informed
views all semester.
Attendance and Course Participation/Professionalism- 20% We notice attendance, and your team
members do too. It is each student’s responsibility to attend class but that is not enough. Participation is
a big part of this class, and attendance is the precursor to participation.
Example of Ways to Participate Well:
-Respond to a peer’s discussion question during his/her Current Event facilitation in a thoughtful manner
(often there is no right or wrong- just back up your opinion- “I think that virtual reality will be the next
big advancement in advertising because the article you summarized mentioned 20% of consumers are
excited about VR.”)
-Ask questions or give a support example case presentation Q&A periods (“I like how your solution B
suggested celebrity endorsement. What celebrity do you suggest the brand pair with and why?”)
-Elaborate on or even counter a peer’s or professor content (“Building on what Dr. Scheinbaum said
about the power of psychographics, I think that demographics are just as important…” or “I disagree
with Bill that mobile apps are crucial for brands because look at Brand Y who counters the example…”
-Examples of How Not to Participate Well: missing class, attending but not contributing, focusing on
personal technology/buried in a laptop and not on point, thinking that saying “something” is enough,
repeating what a peer said earlier without realizing it/nor building on it, regurgitating facts rather than
reflecting, making a comment on an unconnected tangent or unrelated topic to stated learning objective
that session, focusing on quantity of speaking not depth/quality of contribution, comparing times spoken
with others, saying things that suggest the assigned reading was not done, etc.
Examples of Professionalism:
To do well here, attend class, stay professional during class (i.e., not side conversations unrelated to the
course, playing on social media, texting, doing outside work for another course, use professional
demeanor with professor, TA and peers) and participate in class with informed opinions to deepen
discussion of learning objectives content. Please respect your classmates, TA’s and instructor. Be on
time – arriving late will cause disruption to everyone in the classroom. Laptops may be used for this
class referencing and note-taking purposes during market updates and for some parts of class. Laptops
must be shut/tablets put away during presentations. Cell phones must be on silent and put away. Talking
and other distracting behavior may result in students being asked to leave the classroom.


8 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                       Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
Account Team Peer Evaluation – 5%: You provide us with evaluations that will document specific
contributions to the projects for each team member and specific contributions that you made. The
students do not “set” these grades; you provide us information to make an informed grade that is based
on perspectives of your contributions from your peers.
Grade System:
Faculty members are free to develop their own methods of evaluating the performance of students in
their classes, but I am required to make the methods of evaluation to be used known in writing before
the end of the fourth class day each semester and the second class day each summer term. Thus, the
grading information is specified in advance here and will not change. Materials used in evaluating a
student’s performance must be collected by the instructor at or before the regularly scheduled final
examination. The following grades are used: A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-, D+, D, D-, and F. There is no
University scale for =/- grades (I determined what grade earns an A- versus an A, for example.)
Members of the faculty are not authorized, without the academic dean’s approval, to withhold a final
grade or to defer reporting a final grade at the end of the semester other than by the use of the symbol X.
If a grade is withheld without the dean’s approval, the grade may not be added to the official records
later without the written approval of the academic dean. After a grade has been reported to the registrar,
it may not be changed unless a proven, documented error was made by the instructor. You have one
week to review your exam in the TA or instructor’s office hours. To be fair, no grades are rounded.
                               Letter     GPA                  Scale
                               Grade      Grade
                               A           4.00     92.5-100
                               A-          3.67     89.5-92.49
                               B+          3.33     86.5-89.49
                               B           3.00     82.5-86.49
                               B-          2.67     79.5-82.49
                               C+          2.33     76.5-79.49
                               C           2.00     72.5-76.49
                               C-          1.67     69.5-72.49
                               D+          1.33     66.5-69.49
                               D           1.00     62.5-66.49
                               D-          0.67     59.5-62.49
                               F           0.00     <59.49
Student Responsibilities
Lecture Notes and Announcements:
You are responsible for all lecture notes, notes on screenings and guest lectures, and any administrative
announcements provided in lecture and on Canvas as official notices. If you miss a class, it is your
responsibility to get notes and find out what you missed from another student.
Assignments:
Enlisting aid from anyone outside the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty (please
see below). When an assignment says individual, that means only you do it and do not discuss it with
your team; that is cheating and will be subject to a 0. When an assignment says team, than it is for the


9 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                      Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
team to do together. Again, INDIVIDUAL ASSIGNMENTS ARE TO BE DONE WITHOUT
DISCUSSING THEM WITH ANYONE-NOT EVEN TEAM MEMBERS. COLLABORATION OR
COLLUSION IS AN ACADEMIC VIOLATION. ANY FACEBOOK GROUPS MUST INCLUDE
EITHER THE TA OR MYSELF TO PREVENT UNAUTHORIZED COLLUSION.
All assignments are to be typed and submitted to the correct place under the assignments in Canvas due
at class start of your assigned date. For the team papers and slide deck (in power point not PDF) also
bring 2 printed copies of each to class for the TA and I. This means a HARD copy of the team paper
and power point thumbnails (3 per page) must be turned in by the beginning of class IN ADDITION
to uploading them to canvas by class start; assignments submitted to canvas after class start on the
due date are scored 0. Forgetting to bring us hard copies (for the team cases and slides only) is a 10
point deduction presuming it has been uploaded on time. Submitting to the wrong place in Canvas is a
10 point deduction so pay attention to where you submit. One person for the team content will submit on
the team’s behalf, so make sure that person uploads correctly.
Communication & University Electronic Mail Notification Policy:
As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate in academia and industry, you must learn to use it
appropriately. People have been fired from their jobs for misuse of this communication tool. Thus, when
e-mailing me, address it formally. Communication between professors and students is professional in
nature, not informal. Write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss. We will generally return it
within 24 hours of receiving it on weekdays or by Monday evening if we receive it on the weekend.
Substantive questions are best addressed to Dr. Close, and administrative questions to the TA.
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html. In this course e-mail will be used as a means of
communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class work
and announcements.
UT Class Related Policies
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy:
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a work
assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an
opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of


10 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                       Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days
prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
Documented Disability Statement:
The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259,
471-6441 TTY. Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
letter from SSD.
     § Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     § Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for
         field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the
         given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     § Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
         phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
         http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
Q drop Policy:
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
         “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit
an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer
student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Additional information regarding
emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency


11 PR 367 ADV 370J Fall2018                                                        Close Scheinbaum 8/28/18
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that provides The University of Texas at Austin’s
faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their concerns about another individual’s behavior.
This service is a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). An individual can either call the line at 512-232-5050 or report their concerns
using the online submission form available at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step
in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything
else is getting in your way, there are options available for support. For immediate support:
-      Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
| 512-471- 3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-      CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- |CMA 4.134 | 512-471- 7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
  I truly hope you enjoy and learn a lot that will be relevant to your career in this course;
                                               hook ‘em horns!
