ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                           1
Barry
        ALD 321: Play in Early Development Summer 2019 (Session 1)
                                  Unique Number: 73655
                                       June 6 – July 11
                                      Monday – Friday
                                     1:00PM – 2:30PM
                                           SZB 526
               Welcome to ALD 321: Play in Early Childhood Development
This course is designed to examine play from a variety of political, anthropological,
sociological, educational and social justice perspectives. In an era where play is
increasingly disappearing in schools and neighborhoods, it is essential that those who care
about or for children have a deep understanding of the connections between play, learning,
healthy living and capability expansion. In this course, we critically evaluate research on
play and try to better understand the role of play in our lives and in the lives of children.
We investigate how society and culture shape the ways we think about play and how
much/what kind of access to play we have in our daily lives. We talk about play
experiences for children on the Autism spectrum as well as for children who have
experienced trauma. We address whether video games count as play and how to support
principles of play in an increasingly digital world.
There are two goals for this course. The first goal is to help each student value play for
children and for themselves and to understand a range of theory and evidence to advocate
for play. The second goal is for students to expand their capabilities to support children’s
play in ways that increase their agency rather than try simply to control them.
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing
you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project
related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
David Barry, Ed.M., Instructor                      Nnenna Odim, M.A., Teaching Assistant
Office: SZB 528D                                    Office: SZB 528D
Email: davepbarry@utexas.edu                        Email: nnenna.odim@utexas.edu
Office Hours: by appointment                        Office Hours: by appointment
Required Text
Course Reading Packet - ALD 321 can be purchased on first day of classes (Tuesday) or at
Canopy Course Notes at 510 W. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd.
If you are not able to by the Course Reading Packet on the first day of class, call or text
Jerome at Canopy Course Notes at 512-497-6662 to arrange getting it.
                                                                                              1


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                           2
Barry
Technology Etiquette
I expect that you will use your laptop/tablet/phone in appropriate ways and at appropriate
times. There are so many ways you *could* distract yourself in class – please don’t. Stay
with us. Posting on social media any pictures or quotes from students or teachers is
prohibited. Class should be a safe place for sharing ideas without worrying about people
posting it. If you are on social media or email instead of engaging in class, you will lose
participation points.
Course Assignments
I. Attendance (48 points) and Participation & Engagement (20 points)
Attendance and Participation & Engagement include coming prepared to class, reading the
assignments, and appropriately participating in class discussions and activities. Regular
attendance at all class meetings is a requirement of this course: you cannot learn if you are
not here. For each class session you miss, 2 points will be deducted from your total
points for the course. Each of you will be granted two Emergency Release (ER) days.
Your ER excuses you from two class sessions with no penalty. To use your ER, you must
notify the instructor and TA by email BEFORE class. If you do not contact the
instructor and TA before class, you ER will not count, and you will lose points. Save
your two ER’s for medical issues, family demands, car trouble, etc. All other absences are
unexcused and will affect your grade. Students will not be penalized for absences due to the
observance of religious holidays that fall on our scheduled class day. You must give advanced
notice of these absences. All other absences are unexcused and will affect your grade.
Sign-in sheets will be available for the first 10 minutes of class for you to mark your
attendance. If you are late and unable to sign, then please check in with your Instructor or
TA after the class to sign in.
II. Reading Reflections (52 points total)
On course days with assigned readings, you will post a reflection of the readings by
1:00PM on Canvas under the Discussion tab. To post, students will reply to the
discussion board created each week. Once your response is posted, you will be able to see
your other classmates’ responses as well. You are free to discuss and respond to one
another, but that is not a requirement. However, glancing over each other’s work may
enhance the conversation within class. Please see below for a few reflection guidelines:
1. Your post should be approximately 250 words (excluding your 2-3 questions- see
below).
2. Your writing should synthesize all the readings, not summarize. Be sure to discuss each
reading for or less equally.
3. Your reflection may include a few, some, or all of the following:
     • What was most compelling and striking to you in the readings? What makes you
       think more deeply in the reading in helpful and provocative ways?
                                                                                              2


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                           3
Barry
     •  What are the major arguments/thesis of each reading (what supporting evidence,
        facts, experiences, or data do the authors provide to support their arguments)? And,
        what are your reactions to the arguments? Are you convinced, why or why not?
     •  What are specific strengths and weaknesses of the authors’ ideas? How did the
        authors support or not support their argument? Were there any perspectives
        missing in the reading?
     •  How do the authors' perspectives compare and contrast across readings?
     •  How does the reading content relate to your own life experience and your research
        in education? Critically reflect on this question.
4. Finally, generate 2-3 robust questions from the readings that may be used for
discussion. Have a mix of larger questions that relate to the theme of the course, but also
specific questions that relate directly to what you read for that week. Include page numbers
and direct quotes where appropriate. These questions will guide discussions during class.
III. Opening Activity (10 points)
On class days with scheduled Opening Activities, a student or group of students will
prepare a 10-minute opening activity that relates to the topic we will be discussing.
The activity can be (and is not limited to) a game, video clip, discussion questions, etc. Be
creative! Students will sign-up for an opening activity the first week of class. The day
before you present, email your TA a paragraph about what you are going to do for
your opening activity and how it is connected to that week’s readings by 5:00PM.
Though these should be written collaboratively with your group members (if applicable),
please select one group member to send your group’s paragraph on behalf of the group (i.e.
only send Nnenna 1 paragraph per group).
III. Play Series
1. Generation Play (25 points)
     Data due in class Friday, June 14th; Reflection due at 1:00PM on canvas Monday, June
     17th)
For this project, you will be asked to complete an interview with one adult about his/ her
play memories (using guiding questions that we come up with in class) and one interview
with a child (ages 3-12) about his/her experiences and ideas about play. Students will
bring data to class (i.e. interviewees’ answers) on June 14th and write a 1-2 page (typed,
double spaced) reflection that draws upon course readings and interview data due on
canvas on Monday, June 17th at 1:00PM. Please attach your interview data to the end of
your reflection.
                                                                                              3


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                          4
Barry
  Generation Play Grading Guidelines          Point value
 Reflection describes your experience         12
 interviewing both the child and adult
 Reflection references at least 2 readings    6
 from class and connects them to the
 interviews.
 Reflection is proofread                      2
 Data is included at the end of reflection    5
See examples on Canvas under “Example Assignments” Module.
2. Observation of Play (25 points)
    Observation Notes due at 1:00PM in class on Friday, June 21st
    Paper due on canvas at 1:00PM on Monday, June 24th
Students will observe children (0-12 year-old) playing in a public space such as a park,
museum or school for one hour and then analyze their observations using at least two
theorists and/or readings from class in a 2-3 page (typed, double spaced) paper.
Possible areas of focus include the ways children engage in play, welcome or don’t welcome
others into their play, how physical materials and nature play a role in the play, how adults
interact with children during play, ways that certain things encourage and discourage play,
and how regulations/rules impact play.
*Be sure to be respectful of children. You do NOT have permission to film, take photos, or
interact with children – observe from a distance.
You can reach out to Amy Bryan, director of the UT Child Laboratory School to set up a time
to observe their summer camp, or Tracy Dyess at the UT Comal St. Childcare Center if you
would like to observe in either of these settings or would feel more comfortable doing so. If
you decide to do this, please ask them (don’t tell them) if you can set up a time to
observe in their center, reference that it is for this class, and tell them that Dave
Barry is your instructor (they both know me well).
Amy Bryan (UT lab school director): aebryan@utexas.edu
Tracy Dyess (Comal St. Childcare Center director): tracy.dyess@austin.utexas.edu
  Observation of Play Grading Guidelines         Point value
 Paper describes your experience observing       15
 children playing in detail
 Paper uses at least 2 readings from class       8
 and connects them to observations.
 Reflection is proofread and includes            2
 reference page
See example papers on Canvas under “Example Assignments” Module.
                                                                                             4


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                         5
Barry
3. Environment (re)Design for Play (25 points)
    Due in class OR on canvas Monday, July 1st a 1:00PM
Students will take a picture of place where children go but is not designed with
children in mind (waiting room, bank, hospital room, library, outdoor space, supermarket,
museum, hallway, etc.) and change the design to allow for play – this includes attention
to time and space as well as what people do, what is around for them and how it is
regulated. Students can map, draw arrows, stick pictures, create models or narratively
explain the readings/concepts/theorists/researchers (2 or more) that inspire each change.
  Environment (re)Design Grading Guidelines Point value
 Redesign includes at least 4 changes to the             12
 space and the rationale for each change is
 explained in 2-3 sentences.
 Each change made includes an additional 1-2             8
 sentences connecting the change to a reading or
 theory from class
 Reflection is proofread and includes reference          5
 page in APA format (see APA guidelines in
 modules)
See example papers on Canvas under “Example Assignments” Module.
4. Equity and Play (25 points)
    Due on Canvas on Monday, July 8th at 1:00PM
Create a written piece or some type of a visual/audio demonstration (e.g., poster, ppt
presentation, brochure, podcast, Op-Ed, video of yourself, etc.) that explains how
play and development are impacted by an equity issue. Some equity issues discussed in
class include, but are not limited to, race, class, ability, gender, sexuality, language or
immigration status. Select an equity issue and provide three related examples to
articulate how play is affected by that particular equity issue. You can draw
examples from legitimate news sources, articles, reports, or books (NOT from the
reading packet – though you may use the readings to support the examples you have
found from the other sources. One example can be your own experience. This project
will be the basis for the final Play Advocacy project. Please cite your sources according
to APA style (see APA guidelines module on canvas). See examples on Canvas.
                  Equity and Play                        Point value
 Equity issue is clearly articulated and                 11
 connected to children’s play and development
 3 or more examples/sources (from outside of             9
 class) are presented and clearly connected to
 the equity issue
 Product is proofread and includes reference             5
 page in APA format
                                                                                            5


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                         6
Barry
IV. Play Advocacy Project (70 points)
Coversheet, Reflection, and Proof of Advocacy due on canvas on Monday, July 15th at
1:00PM
This project is meant to demonstrate knowledge of the importance of play and your
committed effort to advocating on behalf of young children and is an extension of the
Equity and Play Project. Students will use their Equity and Play projects as an
advocacy tool to publicly advocate for the importance of play as it pertains to their
equity issue and play. This is meant to be a flexible but high-quality creative project and
requires students to actually advocate in some way (e.g. hanging up flyers, emailing a
toy manufacturing CEO, submitting an Op-Ed for publication, meeting with a principal to
discuss playground accessibility, etc.).
On Thursday, July 11th (our last day of class), you will informally describe in 5 minutes
or less your Play Advocacy Project. Prepare to discuss: what you are advocating for,
what you created to advocate with, and how you are advocating.
              Play Advocacy Project                       Point value
 Coversheet (available on canvas) is complete            10
 Product (i.e. Equity Project) is of high quality        15
 and changes have been made to reflect
 instructor’s feedback
 Reflection is of high quality, is proofread, and        30
 references 2 or more theories and 2 or more
 readings from class
 Proof of Advocacy is included (e.g. screen shot         15
 of social media campaign, link to website,
 photos of fliers in Dr.’s office, etc.)
                                 Assignments and Point Values
 Attendance                             48 points
                                        (24 class days x 2 points each class)
 Engaged Participation                  20 points
 Reflections                            52 points (13 reflections x 4 points each)
 Opening Activity                       10 points
 Play Series                            100 points
                                        (4 projects x 25 pts each)
 Play Advocacy Project                  70 points
 Total                                  300 Points
                                                                                            6


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                          7
Barry
Class Policies and Grading Criteria
    •  All papers, assignments, and projects must be completed and submitted through
       canvas or in person by the start of the class session on which they are due. The
       grade on any late work will be decreased by 5 percentage points for each day
       beyond the due date unless arrangements have been made with your Instructor and
       TA in advance.
    •  Any students with travelling schedules need to submit their schedules to their
       Instructor in the first week of class.
    •  If you leave class early, it will be counted as an absence and attendance points will
       be deducted unless previously cleared with the instructor and/or TA.
    •  Meeting the basic requirements of an assignment neither constitutes nor guarantees
       an A. Please refer to the University of Texas at Austin's grading system that defines
       the following letter grades: A (excellent); B (above average); C (average); D (pass); F
       (failure). In this class A= 93-100; A- =90-92; B+=87-89; B=83-86; B- =80-82; C+=77-
       79; C=73-76; C- =70-72: D=60-69; F= 59 or below
    •  Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
       disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
       dismissal from the University. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services web
       site at <http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/> for more information about
       scholastic dishonesty.
    •  Students with specific learning needs should meet with me within the first week of
       classes so that all necessary accommodations can be made. Students with
       disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
       Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-
       6259.
    •  Students may work in groups of 2-3 (but are not required to) on the following
       projects:
           o Opening Activities
           o Generation Play
           o Observation of Play
           o Environment (re)Design
           o Equity and Play and Play Advocacy Project (these two, if done in a group,
               must maintain the same group members)
    •  If you decide to work in a group on any of these projects, you will be required
       to submit a paragraph to your instructor about each group member’s role and
       contributions to the work submitted by the group. All group members will
       receive the same grade.
    •  Reading Reflections must be completed individually.
    •  This syllabus is a live document, and I reserve the right to make changes if the need
       to do so presents itself.
                                                                                             7


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                        8
Barry
Course Content and Organization
Thursday, June 6 Introduction to the Course – What is Play?
    •  Overview of the course
    •  Defining Play
    •  Reasons why children play
    •  Introduction to the Course Community
    •  Housekeeping - Remind: Texas email and Canvas, Weekly activity sign-ups
    •  Play Genealogy Maps
    •  Opening Activity sign up
    •  Proposed long class July 3rd (1:00 – 3:30) in exchange for no class Friday July 5th
    •  Discuss Reading
 READING (to be         Ambiguity of Play (Sutton Smith)
 done before class)     ** On Canvas
Friday, June 7: How do we listen carefully to young children?
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Principles for taking children seriously
    •  Importance of listening and observation when working with children
    •  Introduction to Generation Play project and creating questions
    •  Discuss Readings
 READINGS (to be       “We’re Many Members, but One Body”: Fostering a Healthy Self-
 done before class)    Identity and Agency in African American Boys (Wright, Counsell &
                       Tate)
                       On Listening to What the Children Say (Paley)
Monday, June 10 What does play have to do with development? Part One
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Piaget, Montessori, and Gopnik
    •  Discuss Readings
 READINGS (to be       Theories of Childhood – Piaget (Harhart)
 done before class)    Playful Learning and Montessori Education (Lillard)
                       Scientist in the crib (Gopnik, Meltzoff & Kuhl)
Tuesday, June 11 What does play have to do with development? Part Two
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Vygotsky and Erikson
    •  Discuss Readings
                                                                                           8


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                       9
Barry
 READINGS (to be Vygotskian and Post-Vygotskian Views on Children’s Play
 done before class) (Bodrova & Leong)
                      Play as the Precursor to Literacy Development (Genishi & Dyson)
Wednesday, June 12 What does play have to do with development? Part Three
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Discussion of Readings
    •  Culture(s) and Development
    •  Impact of cultures, nationalities, and experience on play
READINGS (to be Using Postcolonial Theory to Critically Reframe the Child Development
done before class) Narrative (Gupta)
                     Children’s Play as a Cultural Activity (Gaskins)
                     Preschool in Three Cultures Revisited (Tobin) Only skim this reading
Thursday, June 13 Theorist Review
    •  Theorist Review
    •  Theorist Activity – Ages & Stages/Context & Environment
Friday, June 14 Generation Play work day
    •  Due in Class: Generation Play Data
    •  Group sharing of Generation Play Data
    •  In-class work day on Generation Play reflection
    •  Q&A with Instructor and TA
Monday, June 17 How do agency and control impact play?
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Generation Play Reflection
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Introduce Observation of Play project – observation note (not reflection) must
       be completed by the beginning of class (1:00PM) on Friday, June 21st
    •  How agency works
    •  International development and children’s development
    •  Unequal access to play
 READINGS        Children’s Need to Know: Curiosity in Schools (Engel)
 (to be done     Making a Stink About the “Ideal” Classroom (Souto-Manning)
 before class)
                                                                                          9


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                               10
Barry
Tuesday, June 18 How do agency and control impact play?
    •  Opening Activity
    •  Discuss yesterday’s readings
Wednesday, June 19 How does policy and equity impact children’s play and development?
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Disappearance of play
    •  Advocacy for play and early childhood
 READINGS (to be       Is Kindergarten the New First Grade? ** On Canvas
 done before class)    NAEYC Policy Statements ** On Canvas
                       Inserting Child-Initiated Play into an American Urban School District
                       after a Decade of Scripted Curricula Complexities and Progress
                       (Nicholson, Bauer & Woolley)
Thursday, June 20 How do policy and equity impact children’s play and development?
    •  Opening Activity
    •  Discuss yesterday’s readings
    •  DAP changes over time – where did play go?
Friday, June 21 Observation of Play work day
    •  Due in class: Observation of Play observation notes (not reflection)
    •  Group sharing of Observation of Play experience
    •  In-class work day on Observation of Play reflection
    •  Q&A with Instructor and TA
Monday, June 24 How can technology limit or extend play?
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Observation of Play Paper
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Introduce Environment (re)Design Project
    •  Play vs. Entertainment
    •  Tech for young children
 READINGS (to be “I’m Just Playing Ipad” (Moore & Adair)
 done before class) Young people, online gaming culture, and education (Beavis)
 SKIM                 http://www.naeyc.org/files/naeyc/file/positions/PS_technology_WEB2.pdf (Links to
                      an external site.)
                                                                                                 10


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                  11
Barry
Tuesday, June 25 How can technology limit or extend play?
    •  Opening Activity
    •  Discuss yesterday’s readings
    •  Technology Apps activity
Wednesday, June 26 What is different about playing outdoors?
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Loose Parts Theory
    •  Privilege and outdoor play
 READINGS(to be       The Genius of Childhood: How nature nurtures creativity
 done before class) (Louv)
                      Unruly Raccoons and Troubled Educators: Nature/Culture
                      Divides
                      in a Childcare Centre (Pacini-Ketchabaw & Nxumalo)
                      While reading this article, make note of things outside your
                      comfort zone regarding safety but try not to linger on it to
                      take in the broader message of the reading.
 SKIM                 Quality Outdoor Spaces for Young Children (Spencer &
                      Wright)
Thursday, June 27 What is different about playing outdoors?
    •  Opening Activity
    •  Discuss yesterday’s readings
    •  Outdoor Field Trip
Friday, June 28 Environment (re)Design Project work day
    •  Group sharing of Environment (re)Design Project experience
    •  In-class work day on Environment (re)Design Project
    •  Q&A with Instructor and TA
Monday, July 1 Does gender affect how we play?
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Environment (re)Design Project (or bring to class if
       what you made is not digital)
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings on next
       page)
    •  Introduce Equity and Play project
    •  Internalized Gender Roles
    •  Queer Theory and Play
                                                                                     11


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                        12
Barry
 READINGS (to         How to play like a girl (LaFrance)
 be done before       Using Queer theory to rethink gender equity in early childhood
 class)               education (Blaise & Taylor)
Tuesday, July 2 Does gender affect how we play?
    •   Opening Activity
    •   Discuss yesterday’s readings
    •   Applying Queer Theory to children’s literature
Wednesday, July 3: What kinds of racial conversations happen during play?
    •   Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •   Proposed: Long class (1:00 – 3:30) in exchange for no class Friday
    •   Examples of racial conversations that happen during play
    •   Opening Activity
    •   Discuss Readings
 READINGS (to be The impact of race and culture on play in early
 done before class) childhood (Adair & Doucet)
                       How children learn about racism and enact anti-racism (Derman-
                       Sparks)
                       Fostering children’s caring and activism (Derman-Sparks)
  No Class Thursday July 4th and Friday July 5th (if July 3rd class has been extended)
                                Have a great long weekend J
Monday, July 8 How does play make sense for children with special needs/abilities?
    •   Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Equity and Play Project
    •   Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •   Introduce Play Advocacy Project
    •   Play and Autism
    •   Play for children with different abilities
    •   Opening Activity
    •   Discuss Readings
 READINGS (to be Emancipating play: Dis/abled children, development and
 done before class) deconstruction (Goodley & Runswick-Cole)
                        Preferred Play Activities of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder
                        in Naturalistic Settings (Doody & Mertz)
 SKIM                   Therapeutic Advantages of play (Goncu & Gaskins)
                                                                                          12


ALD 321 Summer 2019                                                                    13
Barry
Tuesday, July 9 Identities, Families, and Communities
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Family panel
    •  Identity development in young children
    •  Intersectionality and identity
    •  Opening Activity
    •  Discuss readings
READINGS (to be       Preschoolers’ funds of knowledge displayed through sociodramatic
done before class)    play episodes in a bilingual classroom (Riojas Cortes)
                      Learning to be a child (Brooker)
Wednesday, July 10 How can trauma affect children’s play and development?
    •  Due on canvas at 1:00PM: Reflection of Today’s Readings (see readings below)
    •  Trauma and resilience
    •  Opening Activity
    •  Discuss Readings
READINGS (to be Learning to laugh (Wright)
done before        Ordinary Magic: Lessons from Research on Resilience in Human
class)             Development (Masten)
Thursday, July 11 Review, Future Directions, and Play Advocacy Project Sharing
    •  Review of course
    •  Future directions
    •  Advocacy Project Sharing
    •  Course evaluations
                        Play Advocacy Projects are due on Canvas
                              on Monday July 15th at 1:00PM
                                                                                       13
