Spring 2020                                                                    Remoquillo 1
          AMS 311/AAS 310 : Gendering Asian America
                                      MWF 10 - 11 am
                                         BUR 436A
                              Instructor: Andi T. Remoquillo
                Office Hours: BUR 408; M/W 9 -10 am or by appointment.
                                    atremo@utexas.edu
Course Description:
In this course, students will study representations of gender and sexuality in Asian
America from the Chinese Exclusion Era to the 21st century. Students will be taught
how to study race and subject formation through an intersectional and transnational
feminist lens, which I emphasize in class to show a more complex understanding of how
race is always-already intersecting with gender, sexuality, and class. For Asians in
America, their belongingness and struggles with inclusion/exclusion have been heavily
dependent on racialized and gendered representations created by Euro-American dis-
courses.
 This course will (re)introduce students to key moments of Asian American history —
spanning from Chinese Exclusion, Japanese internment camps, the dropping of the
atomic bombs, the Vietnam War, and more — while focusing on how these historical
moments were represented to the American public. The final unit of the course will
focus on contemporary representations of Asian America, and how Asian Americans
today are mobilizing socio-politically in and outside of popular culture.
 Lastly, Gendering Asian America is conceptualized around the idea of home making/
   remaking. As we travel through history and study the intersections of gender and
 Asian American identity, we will also grapple over the ways in which “home” is imag-
                    ined, created, protected, maintained, and contested.


Spring 2020                                                                    Remoquillo 2
Writing Flag:
According to UT guidelines, courses with a Writing Flag must meet the three follow-
ing criteria:
• Students must write regularly and complete writing projects of quality.
• Students must receive feedback from the instructor to help them improve, and they
  must be given an opportunity for at least one revision.
• Students’ writing must make u pat least one-third of their total grade.
For more information, visit: https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/writing
Learning Objectives
• Become familiar with interdisciplinary methods and scholarship, as well as using a
  feminist intersectional lens when studying U.S. history.
• Learn how to make an argument in your writing, and think critically while sharpen-
  ing your analytical skills. In other words, you will not be solely graded on your ability
  to regurgitate lecture, but also on how you synthesize your own thoughts.
• Become more comfortable with public speaking skills through class participation.
• Become familiar with introductory concepts of transnational feminism when study-
  ing racial formation in the U.S.
Rather than taking racial and gender representations at face value, I urge students to
ask: how does time, place, gender, and sexuality shape our understandings of Asians in
America? How have gender and sexuality been used as a means to marginalize Asians/
Asian Americans, and how have individuals themselves engaged with these concepts
as tools for subject formation and national belongingness? These are the questions
that frame Gender in Asian America, and will guide students as they deconstruct the his-
tory of making Asian America.
Readings, Analytical Responses, Blog Posts, and the Final Research Paper:
Readings:
        Each meeting is heavily organized around assigned readings, therefore it is es-
        sential that students come to class fully prepared for discussions — this entails


Spring 2020                                                                     Remoquillo 3
        doing the readings and brining in hard copies to class. I tried my best to
        choose readings that can be accessed electronically through the UT library.
        APIA Women will need to be purchased/borrowed, and all other readings are on
        Canvas. While there are no in-class exams, if I sense that students are not doing
        the readings then I will begin assessing your attendance through pop quizzes
        on assigned readings. Therefore, it is in your best interest to do the readings,
        take notes, and come to class ready to have some engaging conversations!
Analytical Reading Responses:
        Students are expected to write three analytical reading responses and one final
        research paper. I will provide 5 opportunities to write a response — it’s up to
        you to decide when you’d like to write them. Responses are not simply sum-
        maries of the readings, but original analyses that discuss the readings in rela-
        tion to broader conversations on gender, sexuality, and Asian American identity
        formation. Responses are 3-5 double-spaced pages, and must be analyzing at
        least 2 of the readings from the current unit. For example, if you are writing a
        response for Unit 2, readings from Unit 1 are not permitted. Your responses
        must have: an original title, heading, numbered pages, proper citations, and a
        work cited page. Lastly, always proofread before turning in a final product.
        While I am always happy to answer questions regarding papers, I cannot read
        your papers before they are due. Therefore, in addition to utilizing my office
        hours, I heavily encourage students to use the UT Writing Center’s services.
        Appointments and helpful handouts can be accessed on their website: http://
        uwc.utexas.edu/.
        Revisions: you are allowed to revise and resubmit one analytical response pa-
        per. In order to do so, you must meet with me first about your paper so we can
        discuss my comments/edits made. Revisions must be submitted no later than
        one 1.5 weeks after papers are returned.
Attendance and Participation:
Attendance


Spring 2020                                                                    Remoquillo 4
        Each student is allowed two unexcused absences throughout the semester. If
        you have already used your unexcused absences, but have a family or personal
        emergency come up, please provide some sort of documentation.
Participation
        In addition to attending class regularly, you will also be expected to participate
        during in-class discussions. This is a seminar course, which means I will spend
        little time lecturing the class material and instead work as a leader and facilita-
        tor for classroom discussions that are very much dependent on students’ active
        engagement.
        I understand that speaking in front of people you don’t know can be a little
        uncomfortable — particularly when it’s on material you may not be familiar
        with. However, engaging with others in the classroom is one of the most salient
        ways to succeeding in any seminar course. Seminar-style classrooms are also
        meant to facilitate a community style of intellectual growth. If you are con-
        cerned about your ability to speak up during class but would still like to remain
        in the course, come talk to me during my office hours so we can figure some-
        thing out.
Electronics Policy
        Cellphones are prohibited at all times in class. If you need to take an emer-
        gency phone call, step out of the class and do so. Texting or accessing readings
        from cellphones will not be allowed.
        Laptops and tablets are not to be used in class unless you speak to me about
        special accommodations that you need.
Civility Code
While difference of opinion during certain topics is expected, the safety of everyone is
always the priority. Our classroom is a space that is meant for intellectual growth,


Spring 2020                                                                      Remoquillo 5
which can often times be difficult when we aren’t used to the material, or feel at odds
with it. However, I assure you that being critically engaged and open as possible can
only benefit you in this course. With that being said, if you ever feel uncomfortable I
urge you to let me know ASAP, either in class or during my office hours. While I al-
ways try my best to pay attention to the dynamics of a classroom and to take care of
the safety and well-being of each of your, it’s likely that I’ll miss a few things in a class
this large. Lastly, in accordance to UT policy, please ask me about my policy regarding
armaments in my office.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability that requires academic accommodations
should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) through the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement at: 471-6259 (voice), or 471-4641 (TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations. Please submit this official letter to me within
the first two weeks of class. If you require testing onsite at the SSD office, you will
need to fill out an SSD Test Reservation Form at least 10 business days before each
exam. You will need to provide me with the Instructor Portion of the form, as well. For
more information regarding onsite testing at SSD, please see:
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/adaptive-testing/ (Links to an external site.) Links to
an external site.
Grading
Attendance & Participation: 20%
Response Papers (3): 10% (30% overall)
Proposal and Bibliography: 15%
Paper Presentation: 5%
Final Paper: 30%
Required Texts:
• Asian/Pacific Islander Women: A Historical Anthology Edited by Shirley Hune and Gail
  M. Nomura (one copy on reserve at PCL)


Spring 2020                                                                   Remoquillo 6
• Rodriguez, Robyn. Migrants for Export: How the Philippine State Brokers Labor to the
  World (2010)
                                       SCHEDULE
                             *schedule is subject to change*
            Unit 1: Exclusionary Politics and The Making of Asian America
Week 1: Intro to Course
1/22: Syllabus day; discussion about interdisciplinary history.
1/24: Bring an article from a magazine, newspaper, or blog that is related to Asian
America. What is Orientalism?
Week 2: Combining Gender Studies and Asian American Studies
1/27: Read chapter (TBD) from Orientalism by Edward Said.
1/29: Read intro from Gary Okihiro’s Margins and Mainstreams [electronic copy at UT
library] and ch. 2 “Unlearning Orientalism” from APAI Women
1/31: Read Espiritu’s article, “Race, Gender, Class in the Lives of Asian Americans”
Week 3: Yellow Peril & Chinese Exclusion
2/3: Read “Fearing Yellow, imagining white: media analysis of the Chinese Exclusion
Act of 1882” by Sang Hea Kil (Canvas).
2/5: Ch. 4 ”Chinese Women during the Chinese Exclusion” from AIPA Women.
2/7: Read “Asian Women in Hawaii: Migration, Family, Work, and Identity” by Carol C.
Fan (Canvas). First analytical response opportunity due Friday in Class.
Week 4: Spatializing Race, Gender, and Vice
2/10: Read intro and first chapter of Chinatown Trunk Mystery (Canvas).
2/12: Read Ch. 9 “‘Ministering Angel of Chinatown’ Missionary Uplift, Modern Medi-
cine, and Asian American Women’s Strategies of Liminality” from APIA Women.
2/14: Read “Inside the Story of America’s 19th-Century Opiate Addiction” by Erick
Trickey https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/inside-story-americas-19th-century-opiate-


Spring 2020                                                                       Remoquillo 7
addiction-180967673/ and “Opium Dens Are a Terrible Theme for Bars” by Linda Poon
https://www.citylab.com/life/2017/05/the-opium-dens-of-chinatown/528108/
Week 5: Masculinity and the Rise of Imperialism
2/17: Read ch. 1 “Remaking Manhood through Race and ‘Civilization’ from Manliness
and Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and Race in the United States, 1880-1917 by
Gail Bederman [electronic copy at UT library].
2/19: Read “Sexuality, Medicine, and Imperialism” from Briggs’ Reproducing Empire
2/21: Read https://www.buzzfeed.com/inabarrameda/inglisera-philippines-american-colonial-
ism
                      Unit 2: Home, War, and Imagining the Other
Week 6: Reconceptualizing Homemaking and Domesticity
2/24: Read ch. 5 “Race, Ethnic Culture, and Gender in the Construction of Identities
among Second-Generation Chinese Americans” from Claiming America by Kevin Scott
Wong & Sucheng Chan [electronic copy of book UT library].
2/26: Read ch. 5 “Housewives, Men’s Villages, and Sexual Respectability” and ch. 6
“Redefining Traditional Gender Roles” from APIA Women. Second analytical response
opportunity due Friday in Class.
2/28: Reading TBD (Possible HRC visit)
Week 7: South Asian Immigrants
3/2: Read Introduction and selected chapter from Bengali Harlem and the Lost Histories
of South Asian America [electronic copy found at UT library]
3/4: Read ch. 21 “Opening Spaces: South Asian American Women Leaders in the Late
20th Century” from APIA Women.
3/6: Reading TBD
Week 8: Orientalism, World War Two, and the Atomic Age
3/9: Read chapter from War Without Mercy by John W. Dower [electronic copy @ UT
library]
3/11: Read chapter from Hiroshima in America By Robert J. Lifton (Canvas).


Spring 2020                                                                 Remoquillo 8
3/13: Read newspaper article on War Brides and “Like a Bamboo: Representations of a
Japanese War Bride” by Debbie Storrs(Canvas). Watch Fall Seven Times, Get Up Eight in
class.
Week 9: Spring Break
3/16-20: No class.
Week 10: Cold War Orientalism
3/23: Read intro and ch. 4 “Family Ties as Political Obligation" from Cold War Oriental-
ism by Christina Klein [electronic copy at UT library].
3/25: Read ch. 11 “Contested Beauty” from APA Women; other reading tbd.
3/27: Read “‘Mrs. K’: Oral History of a Korean Picture Bride” by Alice Y. Chai (Canvas).
         Unit 3: Rethinking the Connections Between Home and Movement
Week 11: The War in Vietnam and the Model Minority
3/30: Intro and chapter from Body Counts: The War in Vietnam and Militarized Refuge(es)
by Yen Le Espiritu (Canvas).
4/1: Read chapter from Nothing Ever Dies by Viet Thanh Nguyen (Canvas)
4/3: Read selected short story from The Refugees by Viet Thanh Nguyen (Canvas)
Week 12: Domestic Workers and Tourism in the age of Globalization
4/6: Read intro and chapter one from Migrants for Export
4/8: Read chapter from Migrants for Export.
4/10: Read chapter from Migrants for Export.
Week 13: Gendering Critical Refugee Studies
4/13: Read introduction and Ch. 1 from Unsettled: Cambodian Refugees in the New York
City Hyperghetto [electronic copy at UT library]
4/15: Read ch. 2 “Housed in the Hyperghetto” from Unsettled.
4/17: Read ch. 15 “Scarred Yet Undefeated: Hmong and Cambodian Women and Girls
in the US” from APAI Women and selected online articles on work and industry of SE
Asian refugee women.


Spring 2020                                                                   Remoquillo 9
Week 14: Asian America and Food Culture Today
4/20: Read “Dog Meat” from Ku, Robert. Dubious Gastronomy: The Cultural Politics of
Eating Asian in the USA. University of Hawaii Press (2013).
4/22: Watch episode of Parts Unknown in class.
4/24: Proposal for final paper due with rough bibliography. Bring in hard copies to dis-
cuss and workshop.
Week 15: Asian-Americans in Pop Culture Today
4/27: Debate day. Topic: Can a group of people reclaim racialized and gendered arche-
types as an act of resistance? Read chapter from Shimizu, Celine Parreñas. The Hyper-
sexuality of Race: Performing Asian/American femininity on screen and scene.Duke Universi-
ty Press (2007).
4/29: Read chapter from Shimizu, Celine Parreñas. The Hypersexuality of Race: Perform-
ing Asian/American femininity on screen and scene.Duke University Press (2007).
5/1: “From Forever Foreigners to Model Minority: Asian American Men in Sports” by
Yomee Lee (Canvas), and “Jeremy Lin says racist remarks he hear from opponents
were worse in NCAA than NBA” from ESPN: https://www.espn.com/nba/story/_/id/
19353394/jeremy-lin-brooklyn-nets-says-heard-racist-remarks-more-frequently-college-nba.
Week 16: Asian Americans Today (cont.)
5/4: Read “Bound by Expectation: The Racialized Sexuality of Porn Star Keni Styles”
5/6: Read https://www.vulture.com/2015/01/eddie-huang-fresh-oﬀ-the-boat-abc.html. Watch
episode of Fresh off the Boat in class.
5/8: Last day we meet in class — final presentations.
Monday, May 13th: Final papers due on Canvas by 11:59 pm.
