                         RHE 328 Magazine Writing & Publishing #83420
                                              Summer 2019
                                     PAR 308 M–F 8:30–9:45 a.m.
Tom Buckley                                                                      Office Hours:
Office: CAL 201                                                                  Tues. 10-11:30 a.m.
Phone: 471-8368                                                                  Fri. 1-2:30 p.m.
Texts
Adobe InDesign (desktop publishing software application)
Writer’s Market (2016 edition) or a website subscription (writersmarket.com)
The Associated Press Stylebook 2019
                   Note: Please do not use laptops, tablets, or phones during class.
Objective
This course is designed to give students an understanding of the magazine industry from the
perspective of both writers and editors. The course offers a broad core of practical knowledge
while also exploring issues related to the field.
Each year countless writers send articles off to national magazines, receive form-letter rejections,
and give up. This discouraging experience convinces most of them that the field is dominated by
writers who are already widely known, or that there’s some secret to success that only a few
privileged souls know. The errors made by those unsuccessful writers are easy to identify and
easier still to avoid. The real trick to getting your work published is understanding how the
system works — and having a willingness to work hard enough to produce quality work.
In this course, then, we’ll talk about the practical matters successful writers attend to: generating
story ideas; researching appropriate markets; conducting interviews; selling articles; developing
the best format for presenting your information; and, finally, organizing the material, writing the
article itself, and sending it off for publication. We’ll also talk about the process of publishing a
magazine. You’ll learn how magazines identify a niche audience; formulate an editorial vision;
produce content — devising departments, assigning stories, gathering art; and attend to the
practical matters of writing headlines and captions, cropping pictures, fitting copy, and designing
layouts.
And while all of this is occurring, magazine representatives are consistently selling advertising
space and recruiting subscriptions to keep the publication afloat — a tricky process to navigate
given that the size of an issue is entirely dependent on the amount of ad space generated.
Inherent in everything we discuss this semester will be a consideration of the ethical choices
faced when presenting information to a public audience. We’ll begin by trying to decide what
constitutes “truth” in journalism, then wrestle with all of the practical — and sometimes
profound — considerations that influence the collection and presentation of information.


                                                                                 RHE 328 Summer 2019
Requirements
Four major assignments, including a vox pop; a Q&A with an Austin-area figure; a proofreading
exercise; and a query letter (submitted to a publication you identify in Writer’s Market). These
assignments will help you acquire the skills necessary to ultimately craft a marketable article.
For your query — the final assignment in the course — you’ll conduct research (using, among
other tools, the UT library database system), interview sources, and identify potential markets.
Policies
Attendance: You’re allowed two absences. If you miss a third class, I won’t be able to pass you
in the course. Also, arriving to class after 8:40 a.m. or leaving before class ends will also count as
an absence.
IMPORTANT: When you’re absent, you need to contact someone in the class to find out what’s
due the following class meeting. You aren’t excused from turning in an assignment or completing
a reading assignment because of absence. I recommend you get together with someone else in
the class so that when you’re absent, they can pick up extra handouts for you and fill you in on
what you’ve missed before we meet again. I’ll also supply you with a list of class email
addresses.
Papers: All assignments must follow the prescribed formatting instructions (detailed on the
assignment sheet) and be handed in on time — at the beginning of class — for you to receive
credit. Assignments that don’t adhere to the formatting criteria or are turned in late will be
critiqued, but they won’t be graded, and you won’t receive credit for them. If you miss class, you
may have someone bring the assignment to class for you, or, if you know you’ll be absent, you
may hand in the assignment early.
Please don’t ever email me an assignment.
Submitting Papers: Unless otherwise noted, all major papers should be double-spaced and typed
in Times New Roman 12-point font using one-inch margins. You don’t need to use a title page or
a plastic cover or folder. Simply type, in the top right-hand corner of the first page, “Your Name/
RHE 328/Buckley/[word count].”
Be sure to stick to the word count identified on the assignment sheet. Papers that exceed the
word count will be returned unread.
Exams: The midterm exam will be on Thursday, June 20, and will cover all class discussions,
readings, and handouts to that point in the semester. The second exam will be on Wednesday,
July 10, and will be based on what’s covered after the midterm.
Contact: The best way to contact me is to come to office hours. I’m not always available via
email, so don’t necessarily expect a prompt response to a query. I also don’t use Canvas, so your
best options for reaching me directly are by phone or by coming to office hours.


                                                                               RHE 328 Summer 2019
Peer Critique Sessions: Before a major assignment is due, we’ll have a peer critique session at
which time at least one of your peers will read and evaluate your paper using a list of criteria I’ll
provide. You’re expected to come to class with a completed draft of your assignment (that is,
although it’s termed a “draft” session, you shouldn’t bring an incomplete version of your paper).
Missing a peer critique session — or arriving late — will result in an F for the peer critique
assignment (reducing your overall grade in the course by one full grade) and will prohibit you
from handing in a revision of that paper.
Office Conferences: Don’t hesitate to use my office hours to discuss any aspect of the course.
And if your aim is to work in the magazine industry, you should come by at some point to
discuss your path.
Grading Formula: You’ll have four major assignments and two exams, each worth 15 percent of
your final grade. The remaining 10 percent of your grade will be a participation grade based on
your attendance, promptness, and performance on shorter assignments and during peer critique
sessions. A plus-minus grade system will be used in the course — for papers and for the final
course grade.
In determining your final grade, I’ll look at your entire body of work over the course of the
semester, noting improvement you’ve made.
Because a majority of your grade will be determined later in the semester, I’m typically unable to
successfully respond to a student who asks, “How am I doing in here?” You may apply the
grading formula above to get an idea where you stand.
InDesign
This course requires that you learn (if necessary) and use Adobe InDesign. See the flip side of
this sheet for specific instructions.
Course Organization
Unit I: Principles of Magazine Writing (week 1)
     Paper #1: Vox Pop, due Monday, July 22
Unit II: Interviewing/Q&A (weeks 2-3)
     Paper #2: Q&A, due Friday, August 2
Unit III: Publishing Process (weeks 8-11)
     Paper #3: Design Project, due Friday, August 9
Unit IV: Query Letter (weeks 12-15)
     Paper #4: Query Letter, due Friday, August 16


                                                                                        RHE 328 Summer 2019
Adobe InDesign
As a UT student, you’re eligible to receive free training for a number of programs, including Adobe
InDesign, the most popular design program in the magazine industry.
InDesign is a powerful design tool, and understanding its complexities can take years. But you can
learn the basics of InDesign rather quickly, which will allow you to create documents that are
attractive and sophisticated. Knowing how to use InDesign — even the basics — will benefit you in
the marketplace.
This course requires you to use InDesign for most major assignments, which means you’ll need some
training, which, as I mentioned above, the university provides.
You can view training videos anywhere, but it won’t make much sense to do so without access to
InDesign. To that end the Department of Rhetoric & Writing allows students in Rhetoric classes to
have access to the program — using the lab in PAR 102 during regular hours. (This assumes you
don’t already have a copy of your own, of course.) You can also purchase a subscription to InDesign,
which, for students, should cost about $20 for the month.
The InDesign training videos can be found at lynda.com. Follow these instructions to access the
videos using your UT EID.
Go to lynda.com
At the top, click on the “Sign In” button (not the “Sign Up” button).
On the next page, click on “Sign in with your organization portal” at the bottom of the window.
Type “utexas.edu” in the text window, then press “Continue.”
From here, the UT EID system will take over.
Once on the lynda.com page, click on “Library” at the top left, then pull down to “Design.” You’ll see
three columns appear; scroll over to the second column and click “InDesign.”
Assuming you haven’t had previous training on InDesign, go to “Skill Level” in the left column and
choose “Beginner.”
From here, you should choose a training video from among the following:
• InDesign Quick Start with David Blatner (for those who want just enough of the basics to fulfill the
   course)
• InDesign CC Essential Training with David Blatner (for those interested in a more developed course
   — note that the video is almost 7 hours long)
• Magazine Design: Getting Started with John McWade (it’s best you watch this video after you’ve
   watAttendance: You’re allowed three absences. If you miss a third class, I won’t be able to pass you in
   the course. Also, arriving to class after 8:40 a.m. or leaving class before class ends will also count as an
   absence.
