                                          SYLLABUS
                                  POLITICAL ECONOMY
                             ECO s330T Second Summer 2019
                                        Unique # 80430
                              M-F 11:30 – 12:45pm GDC 2.210
Instructor: Dr. Wayne Hickenbottom
Office: BRB 3.102B Phone #: 512-475-7816
Email: hicken@austin.utexas.edu (same as through canvas)
Office Hours: M-F 10 – 11:15, M – Th 1 – 2 or by appointment. For appointments,
catch me in class or send an email with suggested day/time
Textbook
Two required textbooks
Economics of the Public Sector 4th ed. by Joseph Stiglitz and Jay Rosengard. While we
will be skipping around and editing quite a bit, we will definitely cover most or all of
Chapters 3 – 10, 14, and 17. Parts of other chapters will be covered as well. This
book will be used exclusively in the first part of this class and periodically in the second.
Readings in Public Choice Economics, Jac Heckelman editor. This will be the primary
text in the second part of the class. Various chapters will be assigned. We will not
begin discussing chapters from this book in class until August.
Overview
Let me start by explaining what this class is not:
1. This is not a class in Public Economics. While the textbook we are using is a
common textbook for that class, this class is not meant to be a watered down, writing
component version of what our department offers as ECO 321.
2. It is not a class in the government department. It is not a class about the politics of
economic issues. It is more a class of ecomomic analysis of issues in the political
arena.
We will be using microeconomic tools to study issues associated with collective
decision-making. This will include discussions of the appropriate role for government in
a market economy. After this, we will discuss the forces involved in determining and
implementing specific policies through a legislative process.
Prerequisites
Some introductory economics class at the college level. I am assuming everyone has
taken either some form of Introductory Microeconomics (ECO 304K here at UT) or a 1
semester combined Micro and Macro class (ECO 301 here at UT). However, typically
there are a number of students who have taken multiple upper level classes. Those
with the minimum pre-requisites must understand that material they may be seeing for
the first time will be review material for some of the students in the class.


Obligatory university disclaimors
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and
discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259. Get your accommodation letter to me as soon as you can
so we can discuss whatever arrangements you need.
Evaluation
Your final grade will be based on the following work:
5 homeworks - Best 4 will count                   20%
Paper
        Rough draft                                 5%
        Final draft                                33%
Peer Review                                         5%
Proposal evaluation                                27%
Committee seminar                                   5%
Summary Report                                      5%
Note: No final exam
Homeworks
There will be 5 HW assignments. They will be due July 17th, 19th, 24th, 26th, and August
8th. HW must be turned in at the beginning of class on that date. The first thing I will
do in that class is go over the homework. Because the first item of business in that
class will be to go over the homework that has just been turned in, no late homework
assignments will be accepted. I am VERY strict on this point. If you know you will not
be able to make it to class to turn in work, or think you will not be able to get to class on
time you have 3 options: (1) turn it in to me or the Dept. of Economics office (1st floor
BRB) at an earlier date, (2) Have someone else bring it to class on the due date, (3)
turn it in to the Department of Economics earlier in the day. It must be time stamped
before 11:30am or it will be considered unacceptable. The office opens at 8:00am. Do
not place homework on or under my door on the due date. In summary, your
homework needs to be in my hand, or be time stamped at the Department of
Economics office and placed in my box before 11:30am on the due date. I will count
the best 4 of the 5 HW’s for your grade


Paper: Specific policy analysis
Rough draft due July 31st. Final draft August 5th. You will be presented a scenario of
a specific change in policy. The paper will ask you to analyse and evaluate multiple
questions and issues around this policy change. The size requirement will be
somewhere in the 7-12 page range. A portion of your grade for this paper will be based
on your rough draft. The rest will be based on the final draft. The specific assignment
and grading criteria will be distributed July 19th. Grades on final drafts will be docked
10% for each day late.
Peer Review:
For the paper above, each of you will be assigned the rough draft of another student’s
paper. You will be graded on the value of the feedback you provide the student. You
will receive the rough draft you are evaluating on July 31st and the evaluation will be
                nd
due August 2 . If you submit your rough draft late, you will not be able to do a peer
review and lose those points.
Proposal evaluation, Seminar and Committee Report
August 16th, the last day of class, we will be holding a round table discussion based on
a topic which will be distributed the week before. The details of the assignment will be
given to you on August 9th. You will be graded based on 3 items related to this
discussion:
        1) Proposal evaluation: Before the discussion begins, you will be turning in an
        evaluation based on the discussion topic and a point of view you will have been
        assigned on August 9th. This will be due by 11:30am on August 16th. You need
        not be present on the 16th to complete this part of the assignment.
        2) Seminar and Committee Report: In class on August 16th, we will spend the
        day discussing the merits of the proposal based on the perspective you have
        been given in your proposal assignment. You will be graded based on your
        participation in this discussion, as well as a short report you will write up after the
        discussion. The report will be due 11:30am Saturday August 17th. You cannot
        receive credit for the seminar or committee report unless you are present for the
        entire discussion on the 16th.
Canvas
All assignments will be posted on the class canvas page as well as sent through email.
I will make you aware of other uses of Canvas as we move through the class.
Final Thoughts
While the syllabus doesn't provide a day by day outline of what will be covered in each
lecture, I usually start each class by outlining what will be covered in class for the next
few weeks. I sometimes will neglect to be specific about the reading assignments when
I do this preview. If you are unclear about what the current reading assignment is,
please ask.
