                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                            INTRODUCTION TO BLACK STUDIES
                                        AFR 303, ANT 310D
                                             79009/79279
                  Ethics and Leadership, Cultural Diversity, Global Cultures Flags
                                           Online Streamed
                                            Summer 2019
Location and Time: On-demand streaming through Canvas
Instructor contact and office hours
Traci-Ann Wint
Edmund Gordon
All Office Hours will be online and will begin on Friday June 7
Office hours will be held through Zoom Videoconferencing at https://zoom.us. Please follow the
links above to join each see the segment in Module 0 in Canvas titled “Online Office Hours” for
specific instructions on how to schedule a video conference.
Class Chat Times                                       Tuesdays noon-1pm,
                                                       Wednesdays 7-8pm,
                                                       Saturdays 10-11am,
Technical Support: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu.
Course Description:
This course provides students with an introduction to Black Studies. In the first section of the
course we consider the history of Black Studies in the U.S. using the integration and development
of Black Studies here at the University of Texas, Austin as a case study. We then turn to
considerations of the historical construction of Africa, the Black Diaspora, and the idea of
Blackness. Building on this foundation the course provides students with the analytical tools to
critically explore canonical Black Studies literature, themes, and theories. This section of the
course interrogates race, gender, class, sexuality, and their intersections. The second section of the
course focuses on Black cultures, power, and politics. It utilizes the analytical tools provided by
the course to forge an understanding of Black gendered cultural forms. The third section of the
course focuses in on the expression and use of Black Studies and the ethical questions raised by
applying this perspective to everyday concerns in critical areas of social inequity.
Description of Online Format:
This is the digital, on-demand version of AFR303. Unlike almost all other courses offered at the
University of Texas, you will be viewing this class online (from the comfort of your own home,


library, or coffee joint) rather than in-person. You are expected to “attend” class by logging into
the course to watch recorded lecture segments that have already been posted to Canvas.
The class is designed to accommodate 100 or more students. The course meets online through
Canvas. Students are encouraged to visit http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html to test their
computer and network connection and learn about the course structure.
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251050. You can enter directly at this URL or through
Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you will need
your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, you can navigate your way to other
areas.
Description of Course Structure:
The course is divided into 6 weeks that correspond with the six weeks of class in the summer
session. Weeks 1 and 2 will be released when the course opens; weeks 3 and 4 will be released on
June 13; and week 5 and 6 will be released on June 27. Activities for each week are found in
Canvas modules, which you are required to move through in order. These activities include
watching videos, participating in chat-sessions, answering poll questions, taking quizzes, and
completing assignments.
It is important for you to understand the schedule of this course. It is an on-demand course that
gives you some freedom to complete materials at your own pace. HOWEVER, the schedule shows
due dates built into the course to ensure that you pace yourself with the material. It is your
responsibility to understand the schedule contained in this syllabus and participate in the course
accordingly. The course CANNOT be completed successfully if you do not begin activities as the
course starts. This course is made up of modules, most of which contain multiple lecture video
segments, poll questions, an assignment, and a quiz.
About Online Class format:
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251050. You can enter directly at this URL or through
Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website, you will need
your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, locate the left navigation bar.
Some of the most important links on the left navigation bar include:
     1. Home – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, a help section, and other
         important links you’ll use in the course.
     2. Announcements – You can view major announcements from the teaching team here. Be
         sure to set your notification settings so that you receive an email when a new
         announcement is posted.
     3. Modules – The Modules page includes links to the Assignments, Readings, Lecture video
     archives and other course documents.


Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Modules tab.
Tech Requirements:
Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to an internet- enabled
laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should
have enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:
○       Computer laptop or desktop
○       RAM: at least 2GB
○       Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
○       Browsers: Chrome (highly recommended). Safari and Firefox are accepted but could be
problematic.
○       5Mbps internet connection speed (check here: http://beta.speedtest.net/)
You should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting the test
stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html.
There are multiple computer labs on campus for your use if you do not have a personal computer
or laptop. (You can find a listing of these labs here. If you do not have an internet-enabled device,
some inexpensive ones are available at local stores or on the internet, some for as little as $100.
We also encourage you to watch the lectures with your classmates so if you do not have a personal
computer or laptop you might consider pairing with a classmate who does.
Bandwidth limitations: Because the streaming video is bandwidth-intensive, you should not access
YouTube, Skype, Gmail video chat or other online video system, or any other program that is
bandwidth-demanding during class. During the class session, you should be watching the lecture,
taking written notes, and nothing else! (I recognize the temptation to multi-task. If you find
yourself frequently distracted online, I recommend you try browser-based solutions like
StayFocused or LeechBlock that prevent you from accessing certain tempting websites during
class hours).
Course communication:
Email
To contact the Teaching Assistants with general administrative questions about the course or
substantive concerns please email onlineAFR303ta@austin.utexas.edu or visit online office hours.
Class Chat
Students will be expected to engage in one of 3 class chat sessions weekly.
We expect that you will treat online discussions as though you are having a civil, respectful
discussion with your fellow classmates in the same classroom. Please refrain from using profanity
or any euphemisms for profanity. Please do not bait other commenters or personally attack them.
Please do not use sarcasm in a way that can be misinterpreted negatively. And please do not make
the same point over and over again. Also, please ensure that your discussion in the class chat
remain relevant to the topic a hand. In short, please just respect the right of your colleagues to ask
questions and discuss their opinions about the subject matter of our course on the discussion board
and refrain from unnecessarily being a distraction to others. Violators of these discussion rules


will simply be shut out of the online discussion board and will be asked to see the professor in
person.
Announcements
The TAs and professor will often post Announcements in Canvas. Click on the “Settings” link in
the upper-right corner of your Canvas page, to adjust your email address and notification
preferences. This will allow you to receive email updates whenever course Announcements are
made, or when assignments and grades are posted.
If you have a specific, personal or grade-related question, please email your TA or visit them
during office hours.
Please do not use the Inbox feature within Canvas for course-related email.
Even though this is an online course, you are encouraged to communicate with the professors and
TA. Come to our posted online office hours, or send an email to set up an appointment if none of
the weekly office hours fit your schedule.
Honor system for quizzes and writing assignments:
By taking this class, you agree to abide by the University of Texas regulations concerning
cheating. During the quizzes you cannot receive help from others or discuss your writing
assignments with other students. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact
the TAs or instructors.
Information and data security:
All quizzes and online interactions in Canvas will be saved and stored. All information will be
kept for educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other
researchers will involve de-identifying the data, including the removal of names, UTEIDs, email
addresses, or other information. To further ensure that your information is secure, please do not
include identifying information in your online interactions with others. Remember that in online
interactions, the instructors and TAs will have access to all information. Please communicate in a
respectful manner.
Reporting technical problems:
If you experience a technical problem during class, your first course of action is to email
gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu. Please provide your name, the course you are taking, and
any detailed information you can provide to describe the technical issue. A technical support
representative will respond within 24 hours to your email and include your instructor when
needed.
Course Requirements:


1. Class Attendance (8 pts.). In this course, you will watch several on-demand videos
    comprised of content pulled from lectures that were previously recorded. During these videos,
    you will see pop-ups called instapolls that you’ll be required to answer. The instapolls are
    graded on your participation, you don’t necessarily need to guess the correct answer but you
    will need to select an answer to get credit. You must watch all of the recorded videos in this
    course to receive full credit for attendance!
2. Class Chat (7 points)
        a. There will be a chat session attached to each module for a total of 6 chats. Each week’s
            chat will open 3 times Tuesdays at noon, Wednesdays at 7pm, Saturdays at 10am. You
            are required to participate at least once per week.
3. Quizzes (30 pts.)
        a. There will be 3 timed, open-book quizzes testing knowledge of African-American
            history and the history of Black Studies within the context of Blacks at the University
            of Texas, Black Studies core concepts and Ethics. Only some of the materials for these
            quizzes will be covered in class. Additional material on these subjects are available
            online and on Canvas. A study guide for each quiz will be available on Canvas.
4. Short Essays (45 points)
        a. There will be three 3-4 page essays covering the main topics discussed throughout the
            semester. The prompts will be posted on Canvas and the essays are to be uploaded to
            Canvas by 11:59 pm on their due date. Each essay should be 3-4 double spaced pages.
            Essays are worth 15 points each. Late essays will not be accepted unless previously
            authorized.
5. Ethics Case Study Essay (10 pts.)
        a. You will write 2-3 page response essay in which you discuss the ethics presented in a
            Case Study provided for you and determine a position you support regarding the issues
            raised by the Case Study. You must explain clearly why you have chosen the position
            you have taken. In your discussion, you must cite at least two scholarly essays
            assigned as class reading, and you must reference the arguments made during the
            presentation of ethics in class. Your essay must be no less than two and no more than
            three typed, double spaced pages. The essay is due posted on Canvas no later than
            11:59pm Thursday July 11. 2019. Late essays will not be accepted.
Grades:
The TA will work to return assignments within 10 days. After receiving each graded assignment,
wait at least 24 hours before bringing concerns to the TA. Any concerns about grades must be
brought to the TA’s attention no more than one week after the student receives the grade. Wint
will not discuss questions on the grading of your assignment with you unless you have had a
previous discussion with the TA who graded your assignment.
Graded Assignments:
Essays                                                                45 pts.
Ethics Case Study Essay                                               10
Quizzes                                                               30
Attendance                                                             8
Participation (Class chat)                                              7


TOTAL                                                                  100 pts.
Points to letter grades for final grade:
A = 94-100 pts.          A- = 90-93 pts.        B+ = 87-89 pts
B = 84-86 pts.           B- = 80-83 pts.        C+ = 77-79 pts.
C = 74-76 pts.           C- = 70-73 pts.        D+ = 67-69 pts.
D = 64-66 pts.           D- = 60-63 pts.        F = 0-59 pts.
Academic Accommodations and Academic Integrity:
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 512-471-6259 or 512-410-6644(video phone).
Academic integrity is central to the mission of the university. Each student is expected to turn in
work completed independently, except when assignments specifically authorize collaborative
effort. It is not acceptable to use the words or ideas of another person without proper
acknowledgement of that source. This means that you must use footnotes and quotation marks to
indicate the source of any phrases, sentences, paragraphs, or ideas found in published volumes, on
the Internet, or created by another student. For more information about the university’s
expectations for academic integrity, see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Course Protocols:
•   Rules for respectful discussion will be followed. These rules will be established and agreed
    upon by everyone early in the semester. If a student violates these rules, that student will be
    counted as absent for the day.
•   Written assignments are due as indicated on the syllabus unless otherwise specified. Late
    assignments will not be accepted unless an acceptable excuse is provided before the due date.
•   The University of Texas rules and regulations regarding plagiarism and intellectual honesty
    will be enforced. For details please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
•   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
    Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
    512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Readings:
Readings for African American History portion of Quiz:
http://www.npr.org/news/specials/blackhistorymonth/timeline.html#pre1800
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African-American_history
http://www.blackpast.org/timelines/african-american-history-timeline-1900-2000
All other readings will be available on CANVAS.


Sequence of Topics, Readings and Assignments
Please note well that you have an assignment due at the end of every week. All assignment
submission windows will close 11:59pm on their due date.
Introduction
Assignment: View Course Introduction and guidelines due Thursday June 6
Week 1: Black Studies and Blacks at UT
Readings: Karenga (1982), Marsh Duren (1979)
Assignment: Quiz 1: Due – Saturday June 8
Week 2: Africa, the Black Diaspora and Blackness
Readings: Davis (1998), Lovejoy (2000), Falola (2003)
Assignment: Essay 1: Due Saturday June 15
Week 3: The Conceptual Toolkit, Race, Gender, Class and Sexuality (part 1)
Readings: AAA Statement on Race; Bolnick (2007); Macintosh (1989); Domhoff (2005,2017);
Vargas (2004); Winddance Twine (1999)
Assignment: Quiz 2 Due Saturday June 22
Week 4: The Conceptual Toolkit, Race, Gender Class and Sexuality (part 2)
Readings: Lorber (1991), Crenshaw, hooks (2000), Combahee river collective (1977)
Assignment: Essay 2: Due Saturday June 29
Week 5: Culture and Power
Readings: Ngugi (1993); hooks (2004); West (1998); Moynihan (1965); Gordon (1998)
Assignment: Essay 3 Due Saturday July 6
Week 6: Ethics
Readings: Axelsen (1977), Pojman
Assignment: Quiz 3 and Ethics Case Study due Thursday July 11
