                                                       Psychology of Advertising
                                                   ADV 319|Unique Number: 06255
                                                      MWF 9-950 AM| BMC 2.106
Professor: Dr. Kathrynn (Kate) Pounders
Email: kate.pounders@austin.utexas.edu (Please use this email address instead of Canvas)
Office: BMC 4.388
Office Hours: Tuesday 2-3pm; Wednesday 10-11 am and by appointment.
Phone: 636-675-5831 (Cell)
TA: Sabitha Sudarshan
Email: sabitha.sudarshan@utexas.edu
Office: BMC Cubicle 3 (4th floor)
Office Hours: Tuesday 10 am – 12 pm
Note: Your assigned TA is your first point of contact for your queries about Canvas, attendance checks, and all grades (assignments,
quizzes, and exams). I am your first contact about the course material. I will attempt to be in the classroom by 845 every Monday
and Wednesday prior to class to address any questions or to discuss course material.
Course Description: This course provides an overview of psychology as it pertains to consumer behavior, particularly in the domain
of persuasion, advertising, and more generally, marketing. Students will become familiar with psychological perceptions such as
motivation, perception, learning, and memory. Additionally, the course introduces concepts related to consumer-behavior, such as
consumer demographics, psychographics, and the decision-making process to understand both intended and unintended
consequences that advertising has on consumers.
Course Objectives:
    1. Illustrate an understanding of psychological concepts as they relate to consumer behavior in the domains of persuasion,
        advertising, and marketing.
    2. Think creatively to solve problems that brands and the advertising industry face.
    3. Dissect how advertising impacts consumers at the individual, group, and cultural levels.


**This course meets your 3-credit UT Core Requirement for Social and Behavioral Science (SB).
Required Reading: Solomon, Michael. (2017), Consumer Behavior, Buying, Having, and Being (12th edition), New Jersey: Pearson-
Prentice Hall. This book is available as an ebook, value edition, or bound hardcover. You can find it at the Co-op, Amazon, the
Pearson website, and other venues, but it is critical that you buy the correct edition as chapter content will match the material on
weekly quizzes. Get the book ASAP!
Student Responsibilities
Class Attendance: It is your responsibility to attend class. To reward attendance, exams will include material: presented in class,
from in-class assignments, and examples shared by students and Dr. Pounders during class.
I encourage you to find a section of the lecture hall that you like and to sit in that section throughout the semester. Get to know
your neighbor – they may be the person you start a successful company with someday – and it is also good to have a friend to study
with. Getting to know other students in class will also make the class feel a lot smaller.
Email: As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate, you must learn to use it appropriately. Keep your emails formal; write
professionally, as if you are writing to your boss at work, not to your friend. The TA is your first point of contact for your queries
about grades. I am your first contact about any questions regarding the course material. The TA and I will try to return your e-mail
within 24 hours of receiving it on Monday through Friday, or by Monday evening if we receive it on the weekend. E-mail is an
excellent way to communicate if done appropriately.
Canvas: In this class, you will use Canvas to monitor class announcements, access assigned readings (in addition to the required
books) and check grades. It is your responsibility to check Canvas regularly. The Canvas page is:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1238642
My Responsibilities
Although this is a large class, my goal is to make it as interactive and participatory as possible. While there will be days when I have
to devote much of the class time to lecturing, I will set aside ample opportunities for discussion and participation.
I will make myself readily available if you have questions, concerns or just want to chat about the material. The best way to get a


hold of me is to stop by during office hours or to contact me via e-mail. I am always happy to set up a time to talk outside of office
hours.
I recognize that individuals learn in different ways and will use teaching and testing methods that acknowledge this. Lectures will
draw on multiple media formats, including video, still images and audio, in addition to written texts. Quizzes and assignments will be
structured in a variety of ways, including multiple choice, true/false, and short answer. Please contact me ASAP if you are not
performing as well as you would like in class.
Course Requirements and Learning Assessments
  Assessment                            Percentage
  Exams (3)                             65%
  Weekly quizzes                        10%
  Assignments and Participation         15%
  Attendance                            10%
  Total                                 100%
Exams: A total of 3 exams will be given during the regular semester. The exam dates are on the course schedule and will not change.
If you miss an exam (regardless of the reason) you will receive a grade of a zero (0) for that exam. There are no make-up exams. The
only make-up option is a cumulative optional final exam given during our scheduled final exam time.
This is for anyone who has missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who wants to try and replace the lowest in-class
examination. Thus, if you do not miss any of the exams during the semester and are happy with your grade the final exam is
optional.
Exams will cover material from assigned readings, lectures, and videos shown in class. The format is multiple choice and T/F
questions. After the exams are graded and the grades are posted, students will be given ONE WEEK to look over the exam during office hours.
Any concerns about the grading of each test must be resolved during this one-week period.
Quizzes: There will be weekly quizzes administered. Quizzes will be posted on Canvas and taken on your own time. Each quiz
consists of 10 multiple choice/TF questions and will be opened each Monday morning and will close each Friday at 11:59 PM. There


is only one chance to complete the quiz – once you begin you must finish. The quiz is due each week no later than Friday at 11: 59
PM. The quiz must be completed in 10 minutes. Your lowest quiz grade (including a missed quiz) will be dropped.
It is your responsibility to ensure that your computer is charged, notifications are turned off, and that have a good Wi-Fi connection
(I recommend campus if you are unsure). The quiz settings will not be restored due to computer or Wifi errors.
Attendance: You are expected to attend each class. Attendance will be tracked using a free app called Arkaive. This is a geolocation-
enabled app that will only recognize your attendance when you are in the classroom. You must either have a laptop, a tablet, or a
smartphone to use this app. If you do not own any of these devices please let me know.
I will administer a total of 11 Arkaive attendance “check-ins” this semester on random class meetings. Only 10 will count toward
your grade, meaning that you can miss 1 “check-in” without penalty. On the days chosen to administer attendance, the check-in may
occur at any time during the class meeting (e.g., at the beginning of class, in the middle of class, or right before the end of class). The
TA or myself will let you know when it is time to log into Arkaive to check-in. Students will then have 15 minutes to complete the
check-in process.
More detailed instructions for how to set up and up your Arkaive account will be provided on the Canvas website.
Note: It is considered a breach of academic honesty to check-in if you are not in class.
Assignments and Participation: Although this is a large class, I would like the environment to be as dynamic as possible. You are
encouraged to participate in class – you will learn more. There will be many in-class assignments throughout the semester– some of
which will be counted toward your attendance and participation grade. Some will be carried out individually and others will be group
assignments. In-class assignments will not always be announced ahead of time – and so it is very important to attend class. You must
be present in the classroom to receive credit.
There will also be a total of three individual written assignments throughout the semester. These assignments should be submitted
via Canvas and should have your first name, last name, and EID. No late work will be accepted; no exceptions.
Facebook Page: There is a FB page for this class. The name of the page is ADV 319 Spring 2019.
https://www.facebook.com/groups/249277615971965/ Please join the course FB page no later than Monday January 28th.


The purpose of the FB page is to share interesting and current events related to course material – as well as to keep each other
updated on course deadlines, assignments, etc. Some students do not always feel comfortable speaking in large classes, and so this
is another outlet to express viewpoints and opinions, which I think some of you will be more comfortable with. You are expected to
post/comment on current events related to the course.
Although you are not expected to post each week, your online presence should be consistent throughout the semester in the form
of both original content and replies to other posts. At a minimum you are expected to turn in at least 1 original content (in the form
of posts or replies to an existing post) every four weeks beginning the week of January 28th.
Professionalism: Arrive on time, do not pack up early, and stay the duration of the lass period. Arriving late and packing up early
causes disruption to everyone in the classroom, including myself. If you must leave class early, please tell me prior to class. You are
responsible for any information missed during an absence.
Be prepared to take notes during class. Laptops may be used for class referencing and note-taking purposes. All other electronic
devices (including phones) should be put away. Any student caught surfing the Internet, texting, checking e-mail etc. for non-class
purposes will be asked to leave immediately. If the behavior persists, points will be deducted from the student’s final course grade
each subsequent time this occurs. In addition, talking and other distracting behavior may result in students being asked to leave the
classroom.
Final Grades: Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Additionally, I do not round. I do not respond the
way you hope when you email me at the end of the semester about your need for an extra .1 point to get a certain grade. Cutoffs are listed so
you can work from day 1 to ensure you are not on the edge by the end.
   A                 94-100
   A-                90-93.9
   B+                87-89.9
   B                 84-86.9
   B-                80-83.9
   C+                77-79.9
   C                 74-76.9


  C-                70-73.9
  D+                67-69.9
  D                 64-66.9
  D-                60-63.9
  F                 < 60
Additional Words on Grading:
    •   When your work is graded you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the work and the accuracy,
        appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100 points and then lose them based on mistakes you
        might make. Your final points represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken
        away” for errors or omissions.
    •   Any disagreements about grades MUST be submitted in writing within seven days of when the grade is posted on Canvas.
Policy on Lecture Slides: I will post slides on Canvas prior to class; these slides are my intellectual property. Students who post them
online are infringing on my intellectual property. This activity is prohibited. By accepting this syllabus you must adhere to this
policy.
Struggling? Know your resources.
    •   Your teaching team! Kate and Sabitha!
    •   UT’s Sanger Learning Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
    •   Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
    •   UT resources for health and wellness: http://www.utexas.edu/campus-life/health-and-wellness


Other Policies and Procedures
In partnership with the Office of the Executive Vice President and Provost, the Counseling and Mental Health Center’s Counselors in
Academic Residence (CARE) program has placed CARE counselors in 13 colleges and departments to provide accessible mental
health support for students are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for
support.
For immediate support:
    - Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
    - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
 CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
    -   M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
 FREE Services at CMHC:
    -   Brief assessments and referral services
    -   Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
    -   MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
    -   Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/group
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy: The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a
student from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day,
including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence
and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time
after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to
complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior


to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
Documented Disability Statement: Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g. instructional videos need
captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also
includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz,
or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the
instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the
student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University.http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
Drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As stated in
Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate
student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit
doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given
instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Additional information
regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency


Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that provides The University of Texas at
Austin’s faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). An individual can either call the line at 512-232-5050 or
report their concerns using the online at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Due to increased student demonstrations and reports of classroom disruptions during the spring 2017 semester, the Office of the
Dean of Students has developed a behavior assessment and response tool for faculty in a classroom setting. You can download and
print this document for guidance on possible levels of disruption, notable examples and recommended responses. As always, if at
any time you feel you may be in danger, call 911 to reach UTPD immediate.
