AET 139/ITD 150 Live Video Game Design
  UID​: 20939, 21236                         Instructor:​ Tyler Coleman
  Meetings​: M 5:30 - 8:30                   Office Hours: ​T/TH 12:30-2
  Location​: DFA 4.126
Abstract
In the online and mobile game markets, games are endless worlds of play. This requires
monthly, weekly, daily, and sometimes hourly rollouts of new content and balancing. In this
course students will define and construct the process of designing for games as a service for a
live audience, making quick responses to player behaviors, feedbacks, and needs.
Outcomes
In this course, we will cover a variety of materials related to running a live game, including
launch, analytics, monetization practices, community management, and gameplay balance. The
goal is to give the students a ‘failing forward’ approach ​ ​in many of the topics that will affect
them in today’s live ops centric development environment.
Assessment
The assignments given will all be centered around simulated ‘games’ the students design in
groups within the first weeks of class, and then ‘launch’ during the first module. They will be
given a budget and constraints that they must work within.
In this structure, the class will take a form akin to a Business Sim pen & paper game, where the
lecturer will provide custom scenarios to the teams based on their ‘game’. Part of the students
grades will be based on presenting solutions to the challenges presented in these scenarios.
(The grade would be based on the thoughtfulness and applied understanding, not on whether it
succeeds)


Week 1 ​(1/27/20)
What is 'Games as a Service' (GaaS)
Developing for GaaS
Monetization of GaaS
---- RPG ----
Team Selection
Character Selection
Rules Explanation
HW: GaaS Analysis
Week 2 ​(2/3/20)
Launching
Bug Reports/QA in Live Ops
Key Metrics
Analytics
---- RPG ----
Launching our games
First Scenarios (Metrics and QA)
First Scenario Responses
HW: Key Metrics Analysis


Week 3 ​(2/10/20)
Growing an Audience
Globalization
Marketing
Updates
---- RPG ----
Adding Localization
Updates & Marketing Scenario
Update & Ads Marketing Responses
HW: Updates Analysis
Week 4 ​(2/17/20)
Maintaining an Audience
Community Management
Servers & Databases
Events
---- RPG ----
Maintenance Scenarios
Maintenance Scenarios Responses
HW: Community Analysis


Week 5 ​(2/24/20)
Transitioning to the next project
Future proofing
Reducing costs
Postmortem
---- RPG ----
New Project Scenarios
New Project Scenario Responses
RPG Resolution
Grades
4 Live-Ops Analysis & Discussion: 5% each
4 Group Project Presentations: 15% each
Attendance and Professionalism: 20%
Bonus: 5%
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
grade of A+.


 A         A-       B+      B       B-        C+      C       C-        D+       D       D-     F
 94-100 90-93 87-89 84-86 80-83 77-79 74-76 70-73 67-69 64-66 60-63 0-60
Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns professionalism
credit. Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to attend class meetings. If
attending a scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are expected to promptly notify
the instructor of extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than
six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution
of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that
number.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy
Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)


The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu,
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make the
necessary accommodations promptly.
Academic Integrity
The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are
expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic
work undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments,
exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
     ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
     ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
         assistance in preparing them;
     ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
         academic discipline;
     ● and avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
         student.
(adapted from​ http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 (Links to an external site.)
)
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
such as:
     ● Cheating
     ● Plagiarism
     ● Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion


     ● Falsifying Academic Records
     ● Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
         extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
     ● Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two
         courses without authorization to do so)
     ● Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
(adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
(from​ http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php
 (Links to an external site.)
)
Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-
conduct/).
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling
and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University
of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside
when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following
policies regarding evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the
building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered
the building. • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week
of class. • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Student Support Services
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
include (but are not limited to) the following:
Fine Arts Career Services​ (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
of services and resources to support students and alumni.
The Undergraduate Writing Center
(512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
their courses.
The Sanger Learning Center​ (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
time-management, and note-taking courses.
University Health Services​ (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and
health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
officially enrolled in certain University programs.
The Counseling and Mental Health Center​ (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students
with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.


UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of
changes in his or her official e-mail address (do so at
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned
to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication.
Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be
considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
(see​ http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy
 (Links to an external site.)
)
