Updated 8/23/2018
            ALD 320: COGNITION, HUMAN LEARNING, AND MOTIVATION
                                     Fall 2018, Unique # 08970
                    Tuesdays and Thursdays, 2:00 PM – 3:30PM, SZB 370
                                 The University of Texas at Austin
Instructor: Katherine Muenks (she/her/hers)                 Office hours: Tuesdays 4pm-5pm,
Office: SZB 506F                                            and by appointment
Email: kmuenks@austin.utexas.edu
                                          Course objectives
The purpose of this course is to give you a solid foundation in theories of learning and
motivation that inform learning and teaching strategies. When you have completed the course,
you should be able to:
     1.  discuss and apply the various theoretical perspectives
     2.  recognize examples of the theory in everyday instructional practice
     3.  relate them to yourself as a learner through examples and scenarios
     4.  relate them to your future professional work even if it’s not in education
The semester will be divided into three units:
        Unit 1 – Cognition: learning and memory
        Unit 2 – Critical thinking, assessment, and socially-based learning
        Unit 3 – Motivation and self-regulation
Each unit will be evaluated on a separate test and have a set of activities associated with it. You
will work individually and in groups throughout the semester.
                                   Website and Communication
This course has a Canvas site associated with it (http://canvas.utexas.edu/). Canvas will be used
to post announcements, course documents, assignments, supplementary materials, and lecture
slides. Canvas allows me to email the whole class and to have announcements and assignment
reminders posted to your page, so be on the lookout for messages from us on occasion. Please
check which email address is being used by the University for you. If you have problems with
computer access, please let me know immediately so we can make other arrangements.
The best way to reach me outside of class is via email. In the email subject title, make sure to
include “ALD320”. I try to respond to email as promptly as possible; if 24 hours have passed
without a response, please feel free to re-send the message. I would be happy to meet with you
individually, so please come talk to me during office hours or make an appointment for another
time.
                                                 Text
                                                   1


Updated 8/23/2018
No textbook will be required in this course. All of the assigned readings will be taken from
various sources and posted in Canvas. However, some students prefer to have a textbook to
supplement their learning in the course. Here are two textbooks that cover most of the key
concepts that you will be learning:
                 Human Learning by Jeanne Ormrod
                 Learning Theories by Dale Schunk
Any edition of either book will be equally useful, and older editions are likely to cost much less.
If you want to use a textbook, feel free to ask for guidance.
                                          Course Overview
This class heavily relies on team-based learning. As such, you will be assigned to small groups
based on your personal interests, preferences, and goals for each unit. Most class days will
involve you working in your group to do in-class activities that will expand on the basics from
the readings and prepare you for the exams.
It is expected that readings will be completed before the class in which lecture on the topic is
scheduled. Reading responses should be submitted by 9am each Tuesday (except for Week 14,
where the reading response is due by 9am on Thursday).
On Tuesdays, we will cover the week’s content with an interactive lecture, with activities
interspersed. Thursdays are generally used to discuss any material not covered the previous class
day, do in-class activities that will expand on the basics from the readings and lecture, and
review material covered the previous class day. Some class periods will be devoted to more in-
depth work on application of theories to class design scenarios.
On occasion, we’ll ask you to complete some online surveys that will be used to help us gauge
class interest in various topics and activities.
There will also be two application assignments (three opportunities) to be completed outside of
class for credit. These writing assignments allow you to apply what you have learned. Examples
of the types of assignments you may receive include analyzing a classroom scenario, analyzing
yourself as a learner, collecting and analyzing peers’ reflections on group work, analyzing a
video of a classroom, designing a class period, or finding a video that illustrates a unit’s topic.
You will be given several options for each of the application assignments.
                                                  2


Updated 8/23/2018
                                            Evaluation
You can demonstrate your efforts and learning in the class and earn credits toward your final
grade on a variety of assignments. All of these assignments should be completed individually,
except the Group Design-A-Class. A total of 400 points will be available throughout the course.
Grades will be distributed according to the following scale:
                                A:    92.5-100%       370-400 points
                                A-:   89.5-92%        358-369.5 points
                                B+:   86.5-89%        346-357.5 points
                                B:    82.5-86%        330-345.5 points
                                B-:   79.5-82%        318-329.5 points
                                C+:   76.5-79%        306-317.5 points
                                C:    72.5-76%        290-305.5 points
                                C-:   69.5-72%        278-289.5 points
                                D:    59.5-69%        238-277.5 points
                                F:    <59.5%          <237.5 points
IMPORTANT: If you wish to contest the grading of any item, you will be asked to fill out an
Item Review Form, which is provided on the course Canvas site.
Please check your point status after each exam or assignment. Please keep your records up to
date because late assignments will not be accepted. I also recommend that you keep a copy of
all group work so that we have a way to verify your work if there are discrepancies.
Reading responses (2.5%).
In each week, there will be several assigned readings. You must complete these readings, write a
reading response and post it to Canvas ahead of each week’s lectures. Reading responses must be
completed by 9am each Tuesday. Note that the one exception is Week 14, where it will be due
on Thursday 9am. Each of the 10 reading responses will be worth 1 pt, for a total of 10 pts.
You will post these reading responses to Canvas in discussion forum format. Once you have
submitted your response, you will be able to read the responses of your classmates. Note that this
means that your classmates will also be able to read your responses.
                            Why do I have to write reading responses?
     1. You will come to class better aware of what you do or don’t understand and can be ready
        to ask questions.
     2. You will become an active participant in your learning rather than a passive, empty
        vessel waiting to be filled.
     3. You will be ready to do extension activities in class, and so will learn more and better
        remember the applications.
In-class activities (7.5%).
There will be 10 in-class activity opportunities (generally on Thursdays, sometimes on
Tuesdays). Thinking up and comparing examples and active practice are excellent ways to learn
                                                  3


Updated 8/23/2018
new material. To help you do this, we will have small in-class groups in which you can work
cooperatively to generate a set of examples and activities to submit for credit. Each daily set of
activities is worth 3 points, for a total of 30 points. These in-class activities assignments should
be uploaded to Canvas within 30 minutes of the end of each class.
There will be no make ups for missed in-class activities.
Group Design-A-Class (15%).
These are group assignments, one per unit (Sept. 25, Oct. 23, and Nov. 20), that require
application of that unit’s material to a lesson your group will design. Points are available only to
people in attendance on the application day. There will be three group design-a-class days, with
each worth 20 points, for a total of 60 points. These design-a-class activities should be uploaded
to Canvas within 30 minutes of the end of each class.
If you are absent you will have to do the assignment by yourself to get credit. This make-up,
individual DAC assignment will be due by the same date as the unit’s application assignment
(i.e., Oct 4, Nov 3, or Dec 6).
Unit exams (45%).
After each unit, there will be a unit exam. Exams will consist of a mix of multiple-choice items
and short essay items. There will be three unit exams (Sept. 27, Oct. 25, and Nov. 27), worth 60
points each, for a total of 180 points.
There are no make-ups for unit exams. If you miss a unit test, your final exam score will stand in
for the missed unit exam score.
Application assignments (15%).
3 opportunities, but only the highest 2 count. These will be out-of-class assignments due one
week after the unit exams (Oct. 4, Nov. 3, and Dec. 6). Specific instructions for the application
assignment will be made available at least three-weeks in advance of the due date. Examples of
the types of assignments you will receive include analyzing a classroom scenario, analyzing
yourself as a learner, collecting and analyzing peers’ reflections on group work, analyzing a
video of a classroom, designing a class period, or finding a video that illustrates a unit’s topic.
You will be given several options for each of the three application assignment opportunities.
Each application assignment is worth 30 points, for a total of 60 points. These application
assignments should be submitted to Canvas by 11:59pm of the due dates.
Final exam (15%).
A cumulative final exam will be held on TBD. The final exam will be worth 60 points. There
will be no make up for the final exam. If you know that you will not be able to make it to the
final exam, please let the instructor know as soon as possible, and at least fourteen days prior to
the scheduled exam.
If you have to miss the final exam due to unforeseen circumstances, please let the instructor
know as soon as you can and provide written proof (e.g., medical note, police report). In this
case, you may be assigned an Incomplete for the course at the instructor’s discretion and if it
                                                    4


Updated 8/23/2018
meets the university criteria for an incomplete. The instructor will determine the exact
procedures by which a student will make up the work.
                                    Guidelines for Assignments
Every component of the course, except for the unit exams and final exam will be turned in via
Canvas. In other words, the weekly reading responses, in-class activities, group design-a-class,
and application assignments will all need to be submitted to Canvas.
Note that everything uploaded to Canvas will also be automatically checked against
Turnitin.com for plagiarism.
There will not be many essay-type assignments, but if you want to cite sources, then we
recommend using APA style. For guidance, see https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/purdue_owl.html
                                                  5


Updated 8/23/2018
                      OUTLINE OF COURSE AND READING LIST
   Week               Tuesday              Thursday            Assignments Due
      1              [no class]         What is learning?
 8/28, 8/30                             Classical theories
      2        Memory 1: Encoding     Extension, review, & Reading response #1 (Tue)
  9/4, 9/6     and working memory           activities
      3       Memory 2: Long-term     Extension, review, & Reading response #2 (Tue)
 9/11, 9/13           memory                activities
      4              Expertise        Extension, review, & Reading response #3 (Tue)
 9/18, 9/20                                 activities
      5               DAC #1              Unit 1 Exam
 9/25, 9/27
      6        Critical thinking and  Extension, review, & Reading response #4 (Tue)
 10/2, 10/4     conceptual change           activities        Application #1 (Thu)
      7       Assessment and transfer Extension, review, & Reading response #5 (Tue)
10/9, 10/11                                 activities
      8           Social learning     Extension, review, & Reading response #6 (Tue)
   10/16,                                   activities
   10/18
      9               DAC #2              Unit 2 Exam
   10/23,
   10/25
     10          Needs and goals      Extension, review, & Reading response #7 (Tue)
10/30, 11/1                                 activities        Application #2 (Thu)
     11       Self-efficacy and value Extension, review, & Reading response #8 (Tue)
 11/6, 11/8                                 activities
     12          Attributions and     Extension, review, & Reading response #9 (Tue)
   11/13,             mindsets              activities
   11/15
     13               DAC #3           Thanksgiving – No
   11/20,                                     class
   11/22
     14            Unit 3 Exam         Self-regulation and Reading response #10 (Thu)
   11/27,                                metacognition
   11/29
     15        Extension, review, &   Wrap up and Review      Application #3 (Thu)
 12/4, 12/6           activities            for Final
FINAL EXAM is TBD.
                                            6


Updated 8/23/2018
                                         Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success: Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need
accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent
you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage
you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus,
but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Services for Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. To determine if
you qualify, please contact the Dean of Students at 471-6259; TTY 471-4641.
The twelfth class day is Sept 14th, which is the last day to possibly get a refund if you drop a
class.
Religious Holy Day Observance: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and
examination schedules. If you miss a work assignment or other project due to the observance of a
religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that you
must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates
you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
Non-medical Absences: If you are going to miss class due to an involvement in university
activities at the request of University officials (e.g., athletic events), you must notify your
instructor at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent and
provide documentation. You will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence.
The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Dishonesty and Plagiarism: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating,
plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to
avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is
not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. Scholastic dishonesty
damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-
career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site
at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
                                                    7


Updated 8/23/2018
Personal Pronoun Use: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with
respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics,
sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the
instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by a
name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you
use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may
make appropriate changes to my records.
Safety information: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each
classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the
one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by The University of Texas at Austin Police
Department or Fire Prevention Services office. Other important Emergency Information:
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Title IX Reporting: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence
and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a
learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
        1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
        2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
        or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
        3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or
with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they
are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Student Safety and Resources
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050; https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
                                                  8


Updated 8/23/2018
UT Counseling & Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this
semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep, and taking
some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning
how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu
512-471-3515; 24/7 Crisis Line 512-471-2255
The Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate
students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All
students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private
learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or
call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu
SURE Walk: provides walking companions on campus from the hours of 7PM - 2AM, Monday-
Sunday, (512) 232-9255; https://www.utsg.org/request-a-sure-walk/
UT Student Safety website: https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/
                                                 9
