                   ANT 327C CULTURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
                                    Unique No. 31639
                                         Fall 2020
MWF 11:00 a.m. - Noon
WCP 4.174
Instructor: Jonathan H. Jarvis
Office: TARL 116 (Pickle Research Campus)
Office hours: Monday and Wednesday 2:00 – 4:00 p.m. or by appointment (In this case
“by appointment” means: feel free to stop by anytime but call or email first to be sure
I’ll be there.)
Email: jjarvis@mail.utexas.edu
Office phone: 512/471-5959
Course Description
This course is designed to provide a thorough overview of Cultural Resource
Management (CRM), primarily for students who are interested in pursuing a career in
archaeology. Projects funded or permitted by government agencies must comply with
various state and federal laws that mandate the identification and investigation of
archaeological sites that may be impacted by the project; as a result, the vast majority
of the archaeology conducted in the United States is done for compliance purposes.
This course will cover the development of CRM archaeology into a professional
discipline, the legal and regulatory environment in which CRM operates, the common
methods (and jargon) utilized and, importantly, employment prospects and how to go
about gaining employment in CRM.
Prerequisites
Upper-division standing required. An introductory archaeology course or any one of the
following is recommended prior to taking this course: ANT304, ANT304T, ANT453 or an
archaeological field school (ANT662 or equivalent).
Textbook / Readings
Neumann, Thomas W., Robert W. Sanford and Karen G. Harry
2010 Cultural Resource Archaeology: An Introduction. 2nd Edition. Altamira Press.
Walnut Creek, CA.
Additional readings will be provided by the instructor.


Grading Criteria
Course grades will be determined by two tests, three written assignments and active
class participation as described below. Written assignments will use American
Antiquities style. Additional information (specific grading criteria, requirements, style
guide, etc.) will be provided in class.
Midterm 20%
Final 25%
Written Assignments 45% (15%, 20% and 10%)
Participation 10%
The Midterm and Final Exam will be a mixture of multiple choice, ID/definitions and
short answers. The final will be comprehensive, covering material from the entire
course. We will have an in-class review before each test—there will be no surprises on
the test. Midterm (20%), February 19; Final (25%), May 6
Assignment #1, CRM “Gray Literature” Appraisal: Choose a geographic region (e.g.,
central Texas), agency, consulting firm or research topic and examine three or four
comparable CRM reports spanning at least 20 years. The deliverable will be a brief
synopsis of what information is consistently included in the reports and, obviously, how
the reports have changed through time. 3-4 pages. Details and a grading rubric will be
provided in class. 15%, Due February 17
Assignment #2, Interview a CRM Professional: Each student will be assigned to
interview someone involved in CRM. The interviews will be structured; a list of
suggested questions (career path, responsibilities, advice, etc.) and/or topics will be
provided. The deliverable will be a written summary of the interview (“Q&A” format is
fine) that will be shared with the class. 20%, Due March 13
Assignment #3, CRM Vita and Cover Letter: Each student will submit a curriculum vita
and letter of application for a fictional (or real) CRM job opening. 10%, Due May 4
Attendance & Participation: Attendance is important in all of your classes. It is
particularly important for this class. Guest lectures from CRM practitioners cannot be
replaced. Remember that participation is 10% of your grade.
Grading: The plus/minus grading system (100-93=A; 92-90=A-; 89-87=B+; 86-83=B; 82-
80=B-, etc.) will be used in this course. Grades will not be curved. There will be
opportunities for extra credit available as the semester progresses.
Classroom Policies & Important Reminders
•   You are encouraged to work together and discuss the material with one another;
    however, the graded assignments MUST be completed on your own.


•   If you are having problems with any of the course material or if any aspect of the
    course is unclear, please let your instructor know as soon as possible.
•   Do not hesitate to make use of your instructor’s office hours.
•   Please remember to turn your phone’s ringer off during class
•   Have I mentioned that attendance and participation are important?
Tentative Schedule
Topics and guest lectures are subject to change.
Week 1
January 22
Topic: Course Introduction
Reading for next class meeting: Neumann, et al., Chapter 1
January 24
Topic: History of CRM archaeology
Week 2
January 27
Topic: History of CRM archaeology – Texas perspective
Guest Lecture: Dr. Thomas R. Hester (Professor Emeritus, UT-Austin)
Reading for next class meeting: Nuemann, et al., Chapter 2
January 29
Topic: Federal Laws and Regulations – NHPA, Section 106 & 110; NEPA, NAGPRA
Reading for next class meeting: Texas Antiquities Code
January 31
Topic: Texas Antiquities Code and the Texas SHPO
Guest lecturer: Bill Martin (Reviewer, Texas Historical Commission)
Week 3
February 3
Topic: Laws and Regulations – State & Local; Miscellaneous Federal Regulations
February 5
Activity: Project role playing exercise
Reading for next class meeting: Nuemann, et al., Chapter 3
February 7
Topic: Project background, constraints mapping, desktop reviews
Reading for next class meeting: Nuemann, et al., Chapter 4


Week 4
February 10
Topic: Reconnaissance, impact evaluations and pedestrian survey (“Phase I”)
Reading for next class meeting: Nuemann, et al., Chapter 5
February 12
Topic: Testing (“Phase II”)
Reading for next class meeting: Nuemann, et al., Chapter 6
February 14
Topic: Mitigation / Data Recovery (“Phase III”)
Reading for next class meeting: Nuemann, et al., Chapter 7
Week 5
February 17
Topic: Review for midterm test
Assignment #1 Due
February 19
Midterm Test
Reading for next class meeting: TARL Curation Guidelines
February 21
Topic: Collections and Curation
Guest lecture: Marybeth Tomka (Head of Collections, TARL)
Week 6
February 24
Topic: TARL – records, collections and the Atlas
February 26
Topic: Managing and protecting cultural resources on public lands
Guest lecture: Dr. Chris Lintz (Program Faculty, Texas State University)
February 28
Tour: TARL (Pickle Research Campus; alternative dates/times for visiting TARL can be
arranged if you have a scheduling conflict)
Week 7
March 2
Topic: The business of CRM – budgeting and project management (Part 1)


March 4
Topic: The business of CRM – budgeting and project management (Part 2)
Guest lecture: Doug Boyd (Vice President, Prewitt & Associates)
March 6
Topic: The business of CRM – budgeting and project management (Part 3)
Activity: Prepare a mock budget for a survey project
Week 8
March 9
Topic: CRM and public outreach (Part 1)
Guest lecture: Mason Miller (Principal Investigator and Media Director, AmaTerra
Environmental)
March 11
Topic: CRM and public outreach (Part 2 – Working with descendant communities)
Guest lecture: Dr. Maria Franklin (Associate Professor, UT-Austin)
March 13
Topic/Activity: Present the results of Assignment #2 to class
Assignment #2 Due
Spring Break March 16-20
Week 9
March 23
Topic: Equipment, technology and techniques in CRM (Part 1 - Introduction)
March 25
Topic: Equipment, technology and techniques in CRM (Part 2 – Geophysical survey)
March 27
Topic: Equipment, technology and techniques in CRM (Part 3 – Other technologies)
Guest lecture: Arlo McKee (Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission)
Week 10
March 30
Topic: A crash-course in map reading and land navigation for aspiring CRM
archaeologists (Part 1)
April 1
Topic: A crash-course in map reading and land navigation for aspiring CRM
archaeologists (Part 2)


April 3
Topic: A crash-course in map reading and land navigation for aspiring CRM
archaeologists (Part 3)
Activity: Navigate across campus with map and compass
Week 11
April 6
Topic: Field notes, forms, plan maps (Part 1)
April 8
Topic: Field notes, forms, plan maps (Part 2)
Activity: Draw plan map of features on campus
April 10
Topic: Field notes, forms, plan maps (Part 3)
Activity: Fill out a State site form
Week 12
April 13
Topic: Health and safety in the field and lab (Part 1 – OSHA, et al.)
April 15
Topic: Health and safety in the field and lab (Part 2 – Practical tips for the field)
April 17
Topic: Council of Texas Archeologists meeting (attendance is optional but strongly
recommended)
Week 13
April 20
Topic: Allied disciplines (Part 1 – historic preservation)
Guest lecture: Dr. Michael Holloran (Associate Professor, UT-Austin)
April 22
Topic: Allied disciplines (Part 2 – environmental consulting)
Guest lecture: Ashley McLain, AICP (Principal, Cox|McLain Environmental Consulting)
April 24
Topic: Allied disciplines (Part 3 – subconsultants)
Guest lecture: Dr. Leslie Bush (Owner, Macrobotanical Analysis)
Week 14
April 27


Topic: Getting a job in CRM – roles, skills and education
April 29
Topic: Getting a job in CRM – resources and employers
May 1
Topic: Getting a job in CRM – preparing a CV and cover letter
Week 15
May 4
Topic: Course wrap-up and debriefing, discuss Assignment #3
Assignment # 3 Due
May 6
Topic: Final exam review
May 8
Final Exam
Important Dates
(Please see the Registrar’s academic calendar for official, definitive dates and deadlines)
January 24 – Last day of the official add/drop period.
February 5 – 12th class day (date the official enrollment count is taken)
April 6 – Last day an undergraduate may change registration to or from pass/fail
University Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty & Plagiarism
Plagiarism is a serious violation of academic integrity. In simplest terms, this occurs if
you represent as your own work any material that was obtained from another source,
regardless how or where you acquired it. It is the student’s responsibility to read and
abide by the requirements for presentation, referencing and avoidance of plagiarism to
be found at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plag_collab.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
(video phone) or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.


Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
announcements. University policy suggests that students should check email at a
minimum of twice per week (your instructor recommends checking email daily). The
University’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address can be found at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
Religious Holy Days
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of
the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/.
