                                    Sociology F321V (Environmental Sociology)
                                                      Sec 83265
                                        SUMMER 2020 ONLINE COURSE
                                         Instructor: Dr. Scott Swearingen
              Required Textbooks: Bell, M., An Invitation to Environmental Sociology (4 or 5 ed)
                                       office hours: Mon, Tue, Thurs 1-4 PM
                                            Office Phone: 512 232 6312.
                                           Email swear@austin.utexas.edu
          To schedule an individual Zoom meeting, please email in advance for a M, T, or TH time slot.
Course Objectives:
This course is set up to give you an understanding of how human society and the natural environment
interrelate. This includes:
       the role of ecological systems in shaping human societies,
       the impacts of human society and social institutions on natural ecosystems, especially urbanism,
        pollution, and the environment
       the synthesis of humans and nature; are humans "in" nature, is nature "in" humans, or is there a more
        complicated relationship?
       cultural understandings of nature; that is, how we define and think about "nature.”
       broad philosophies of the human-natural relationship: domination, mainstream and popular ecology,
        gaia, deep ecology, and eco-feminism
       the cultural and historical determinants of the environmental movement, and the effects of the
        environmental movement on contemporary society.
       How the environmental movement in Austin created a unique city that mixes urban and nature.
       the possible futures that could create of an ecological society.


                      What an Online Course means, and what you are expected to do for it
I have been teaching online courses for years, and the first to thing to know is that the material is just the same
for online as it is for a classroom section – there is no difference in expectations. You will spend about the
same amount of time reading and watching the lectures on your own as you would have in a regular classroom.
But, since this is a 5 week course, be prepared to work diligently and continuously, because this baby is going
to go REAL FAST!
There are no tests. This is a writing flag course, so all work for this course is written essays. You will have a 3-
4 page essay due every Friday morning, so writing the essays will take time as well. With the reading and
writing for the course you will be doing pretty much the same hours for this course as any other classroom
course, you just won’t have to take any tests.
The course is divided into 5 units, each of which requires 2-3 book chapters and 2-3 online lectures of mine.
That works out to basically one class activity per day, each of which should take a couple of hours. Then, at the
end of each unit, you will write the 4-5 page essay on the course material for that unit. The rubric for all essays
is below, and note you are graded most heavily on your use of course content – meaning you need to cite
information from the book and course materials as you write. Your grade in the course, therefore, will be about
70% from information learned from the book and lectures – just like any other normal class. The difference is
you do the reading and lectures on your own time, instead of coming to class, and the other 30% is coming from
some basic writing requirements – the arguments part of your papers are worth 20% and the grammar/spelling
10%.
                                                Unit Pages on Canvas
Click on your Pages link on your Canvas page, and you will see the five unit pages. When I use material from
an online source in the lectures, I will also put that source on the relevant unit page so you have access to it that
way.
                                         Online Lectures on Panopto Video
Each lecture appears on the Panopto Video tab of your Canvas page. You can watch them at your leisure.


                                                    Writing Flag
Since all graded work in this course are essays, there are hard and fast deadlines for turning them in. Essays are
due each Friday morning by 8:00 am. In practice this means you are probably writing it the night before (if you
are like me), or hopefully, you have done it sooner (if you don’t put things off to the last minute, like me). At
any rate, it is due Friday morning, so just think of the “due date” as late Thurdsay night and send it before you
go to bed (whenever that is).
You can turn in essays early, and if you do, I’ll grade them early and give you feedback early (which means you
can rewrite them earlier, too).
Late essays are penalized -10 points per DAY late. So if you turn it in Sat morning that’s -10, Sunday is-20,
etc.
                                                 Rewriting Essays
One of the points to a writing flag course is to get some experience rewriting your work, so that it gets better.
In this course you may rewrite up to 3 of your essays, earning the higher grade if it gets better.
I will spend each Friday grading, and I will reply to each person with comments and feedback on your essays by
Sunday. We can then use Zoom or a phone call to go over them on Mondays and Tuesdays. I will be in the
office from about 100 to 400 those days, so for those of you who want to rewrite an essay, we can use that time
to discuss it in person if you want. You can then rewrite an essay after I give you feedback, and rewrites are
due the following Wed morning. That way you will have two more days to move on to the next essay that is
due, that Friday
**You can NOT rewrite late essays. If you turn in an essay after Friday morning, I will not be grading it until
later, thus will not have time to give you feedback in time for you to rewrite it. You can only rewrite essays that
are turned in on time, Friday mornings.**
                                                  Essay Rubric:
The rubric is exactly the same for all the essays. Essay needs to be about 3-4 pages in length,
double spaced, 12 point font, with standard 1” margins.
 Essays will be graded on the following criteria
Content: 70%. Did you use material from the book, websites used for the course, and lecture to write
your essay? Content means using facts and figures from book, sites, and lecture, examples from any
or all, etc. In other words, I will be looking to see if you are using material we went over in that unit, or
material assigned in the book chapters
Argument: 20%. Did you present a coherent, logical argument in your essay? Did you back up your
assertions, claims, or beliefs with facts and figures from the book, sites, or lecture? Is your essay
written in such a way that the reader can follow your argument and understand your thesis and
central points?
Spelling and Grammar: 10%. Did you use correct spelling and grammar? Did you use correct
paragraph and indentation procedures? This is the easiest part to do. Don’t lose points because you
didn’t indent each paragraph.
Citing course material and writing a Bibliography:


When you cite the book in your essay, just use inline citation in the form of (“Text, p.32”). That’s all
you need to do for book citations, because I know which text you are using. When you cite material
from the online sources, just use footnotes, and that way it doesn’t clutter up the page with long inline
citations. You do NOT need to quote a professor’s lecture, by the way. Some people think you have
to, but no, the point of a lecture is to impart information. When you use that info in an essay I’ll know
where it comes from. You only need to cite written material. However, if you really want to make sure
I know you got something from a lecture, you can just say, “As one of the lectures pointed out….” Etc.


Course Calendar
Mon        Tue        Wed      Thurs   Fri      Sat     Sun
                               June 4  5        6       7
                               Classes
                               begin
8          9          10       11      12       13      14
1-4 OH     1-4 OH              1-4 OH  Essay 1  Replies Replies
                                       due 8:00
                                       am
15         16         17       18      19       20      21
1-4 OH     1-4 OH     Essay 1  1-4 OH  Essay 2  Replies Replies
for        for                         due 8:00
discussing discussing Rewrites         am
papers     papers     due
and        and
rewrites   rewrites
22         23         24       25      26       27      28
1-4 OH     1-4 OH     Essay 2  1-4 OH  Essay 3  Replies Replies
for        for                         due 8:00
discussing discussing Rewrites         am
papers     papers     due
and        and
rewrites   rewrites
29         30         July 1   2       3        4       5
1-4 OH     1-4 OH     Essay 3  1-4 OH  Essay 4  Replies Replies
for        for                         due 8:00
discussing discussing Rewrites         am
papers     papers     due
and        and
rewrites   rewrites
6          7          8        9       10
1-4 OH     1-4 OH     Essay 4  1-4 OH  Essay 5
                                       due
                      Rewrites
                      due


The course is divided into the following units, with the questions we will use to guide each unit. Each unit is
one week. Note that each week, you have 2-3 chapters to read and 2-3 lectures to watch on Panopto Video.
                                Week I How Humans and Nature influence each other:
How does natural ecology influence human social systems, and how have our social institutions reshaped our
ecology? A Sociological Perspective on this question through the concept of “Dialogue”: Ch 1 Environmental
Problems and Society
How does human population growth impact both humans and the environment? Chapter 4 Population and
Development
How do cultural understandings of nature shape our beliefs about the human-nature relationship? CH 8: The
Human Nature of Nature
Online Lecture: Are we part of nature, or separate from it? How? What would it even mean, to be “part of” or
“separate from” nature?
Online Lecture: global warming, causes and effects as an example of that issue
               Unit 1 Essay question: How are humans and the environment related?
Before you write this, think about the big questions: Are we part of nature, or separate? Why do we think about
and act towards nature the way we do? Think about the whole idea of “pollution” and global warming as you
write, and use course material to illustrate your points.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Week II. The Material Environment is Social as much as Physical
How does our economy set up treadmills of production and consumptions? Why do people want so much stuff,
but need very little?
Chapter 2 Consumption and Materialism
Chapter 3 Money and Machines
Online lecture: Capitalism and Inequality
Online lecture: why we want so much stuff – and how that leads to Global warming.
  Essay question: How does a human economy cause us to think and act towards “nature”
                               as well as each other, and our own environment?
Before you write this, think about the big questions: Does capitalism cause us to think and act as consumers, or
does our desire to consume just find an outlet through capitalism? How is our economy both cause of
inequality and an effect of inequality? Are those related to our environment? Do we treat our environment as
an actor, or something we act upon? Is that a form of inequality in itself?
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Week III: Social Power, Risk and Environmental Justice:


Who gets the “goods”, and who gets the “bads”? How is environmental justice really another form of social
justice?
Chapter 5 Body and Health
Chapter 9 The Rationality of Risk
Online lecture: Equity, Vulnerability, and Capitalism
Online lecture: Externalities and Health
Essay Question
Week IV: How our ideas of Nature are shaped by our society
Why do we think we are outside of nature? What has happened in the modern era to make some people worry
about “nature” and “the environment”? What is the Dialogue of Environmental Concern?
Chapter 6 The Ideology of Environmental Domination
Chapter 7 The Ideology of Environmental Concern
Online lecture: the modern world removes us from “nature”, and simultaneously makes us desire to be back in
“nature” somehow. Technology as especially important in that now.
Online lecture: TBA
Essay Question
Week V. Toward an Ecological Society: How can we build a sustainable future?
What is sustainability? What are the main philosophies of the human-nature relationship, and what kind of
possible future does each point us toward? How can we use shape social institutions to build a sustainable
future? How does the case of Austin illustrate these ideas?
Chapter 10 Mobilizing the Ecological Society
Chapter 11 Governing the Ecological Society
Online Lecture: the concept of Sustainability ,and the 3E’s. How they fit together. What would it take to
change that relationship?
Online Lecture: Sustainability, Global Warming, and Politics: how the two parties differ radically in
Environmental Policy, and how global warming is the biggest threat to an ecological society. Why politics
matters in solving global warming.
Essay Question


                                            GRADE FOR THE COURSE
Your course grade is based on five unit essays.
Grading Criteria for essays
The essays are not “right or wrong” essays. They are analytic, synthetic, or application oriented. So your grade
is based on how well you use course material (the book chapters and online lectures) to write the essay. The
grade will be broken down like this:
                1) Your argument: 20%, based on a logical progression of statements.
                2) Content: 70%, based on the amount of course material you use, including use of textbook and
                lecture material to illustrate your points.
                3) Grammar, spelling, and punctuation: 10%
Policy on late essays: Essays are due on Friday morning of the date due. For each DAY late, you will have 10
points deducted from the grade on the essay. However, you may be excused for late paper if you can document
one of the following reasons for missing the posted due date: school activity, sport, illness, death in the family,
unforseeable technical issues. Once you provide proof of one of these, I will give you credit for the day you
missed. Until you provide such proof, you will have the lowered grade for the tardy essay. You may not rewrite
late essays.
DUE DATES:
Essay 1 Friday June 12
Essay 2 Friday June 19
Essay 3 Friday June 26
Essay 4 Friday July 3
Essay 5 Friday July 10
Class Attendance
You have paid your money for this course, so I don’t see any reason to require you to come to class. However,
the essays require you to use information presented in class, so unless you come, you will not have access to
that information.
Instructor Information
The instructor for this course is Dr Scott Swearingen. I will have office hours M,T, and Th in my office,
available by Zoom, email, or phone.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
Because of the nature of the essay assignment, there is little room for overt cheating such as buying a paper. I
have never had an incident of cheating in this course, and I do not expect to see one this semester. However,
you must remember that copying someone else’s work is cheating. It is called plagiarizing. If you are caught
plagiarizing on an essay, you will receive a ‘0’ for the grade on that essay. In addition, I will file a charge of
academic dishonesty against you with the Dean.. The same applies for any research project you turn in. It is


perfectly all right for you to study with another student, help each other, and learn from each other. But you
may not COPY from each other. Make sure you write your own paper.
