Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                 1
Course Description
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE,
BATTLE HALL, ROOM 117,
AUSTIN, TEXAS 78712- 0222
ARCHITECTURAL CRITICISM SEMINAR
ARC 386M, ARC 350R
INSTRUCTOR                 PROF. DR. H.C. WILFRIED WANG
O‘NEIL FORD CENTENNIAL CHAIR IN ARCHITECTURE
TEL 512.232.9312                      E - M wilfried.wang@mail.utexas.edu
OFFICE HOURS AS AGREED


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                       2
Course Description
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND SYLLABUS
INTRODUCTION
Architectural criticism is as much an act of creation as architectural design. In a way, it reverses the
design process by viewing the designed project, analyzing its parts and deducing the underlying
intentions. The deduction of the underlying intentions is necessary especially in cases in which there is
little communication from the designers with regard to their underlying intentions. With underlying
intentions are meant all intentions including social and cultural ones. Frequently, architects express goals
regarding cultural and ethical value systems, economic costs, technological performance, or they speak
generally about the design's generating metaphors. Architectural criticism should be able to assess to
which extent these aspects of value systems, costs, technological performance, generating metaphors
etc. are factually realized in the designs. Beyond this comparative assessment, architectural criticism
should also uncover the unspoken, suppressed or even unintentional qualities of a design. Architectural
criticism is thus concerned with the context in which intentions are effectively translated into reality or
not. As such architectural criticism is concerned with the degree of truth in the realization of conceptions,
intentions, propositions, or theses into objectively analyzable, factual, physical materialization. Thus, while
the individual act of architectural criticism concerns itself with a singular instance of design from
conception to realization, a collection of architectural criticism reveals the ethical stance that this body of
built work both constitutes as well as represents.
Architectural criticism is essential in enabling architects and the general public to evaluate architectural
designs, preferably ahead of their realization. In the context of the broader debate on sustainability,
buildings need to achieve a long lasting overall design quality which includes the broadest level of public
acceptance as a means by which interest, care and maintenance become cultivated. Architectural
criticism thus requires both a comprehensive approach to the political and physical context, design
conception and material realization of a built phenomenon as well as a precise, concise, incisive analysis
of these issues themselves. The seminar in architectural criticism introduces students to a method that
encompasses description, analysis and evaluation. Architectural criticism, at its best, is neither exhaustive
nor should it be exhausting, but an act of synthesis, thus paralleling the act of design.
The class meets according to mutually convenient times (twice a week during the presence of the
instructor, see calendar attached).


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                   3
Course Description
OVERVIEW OF CLASSES AND ASSIGNMENTS
The seminar is structured in five components of classes and assignments. In part, these overlap in time
and space.
1            Introductory presentation of a theory of architecture and a methodology of criticism
2            Case studies exemplifying the method
3            Task 1: Summaries and critical commentaries
4            Task 2: Student Architecture Award, Preparation of Award Ceremony for the end of the semester
5            Task 3: Student seminar presentation, preparation and submission of final paper
All of the three tasks involve an analysis of value systems requiring each student to individually pursue
their own research (independent inquiry), laying out a specific thesis regarding the analyzed subject with a
set of reasoned and deductive statements (qualitative reasoning), synthesized in a clearly structured
verbal (seminar presentations) and written discourse (writing: summaries, critical commentaries and term
paper).
1            Introductory presentation of a theory of architecture and a methodology of criticism
The first two seminar presentations will provide an outline for an architectural theory and for an
architectural criticism. This outline may be adopted and adapted by students of the seminar for their own
subsequent critical presentations of a single building of their choice to the class.
2            Case studies exemplifying the method
A number of in-depth case studies will be presented reviewing one building per seminar presentation.
Each building will be presented in terms of the architect's ideas, cultural and ethical value systems. Each
presentation will analyze the relation between ideas/concepts, cultural and ethical value systems with
their factually recognizable spatial and formal, compositional and material embodiment.
3            Task 1 : Summaries and critical commentaries
Each student chooses a recent volume of a journal/newspaper/blog. A volume constitutes the output of
one year. Gather information on this medium (readership, circulation, etc.). Select two essays from this
single medium, the first should be an architectural criticism, the second should be a more general essay,


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                        4
Course Description
for example on issues of the environment, sustainability, historical context, design or technical innovation,
etc.
Prepare a short summary of no more than one single double-spaced typewritten page; this is to be
verbally presented to the seminar and submitted for short comments. Then, prepare an evaluation and
criticism of each text. Following questions should be answered:
.   a How does the author describe the building/the architecture/the issue? What are the means by which
             this description is undertaken? Is there an implicit/explicit descriptive/analytical system? Is the
             author using common metaphors?
.   b How does the author evaluate the subject? What is the author's value system?
.   c How critical is the author? Is the author repeating the designer's statements? Is the author pointing
             out other aspects, that relativize or even contradict the designer's statements?
.   d Do you agree with every reflection of the author?
.   e What has the author omitted or neglected?
.   f What would you have said in the author's place?
.  
4 Task 2: Student Architecture Award
As there have not been architectural criticism seminars in the last three years, there will be four UT
Austin Student Architecture Awards for the years from 2015 to 2018 given to the best buildings
completed in the previous four calendar years (cut-off dates 1 Nov – 31 Oct as dates of completion) in the
Austin area.
The students in the seminar constitute the jury. If there is an odd number, then everyone has one vote. If
there is an even number, the jury decides who has a casting vote in case of a tie. The jury also elects a
secretary and a chair.
There is a selection process (long list, short list, probably a total of three rounds of voting) and visits to the
short-listed buildings (ideally 3 buildings per year).
At the end of the semester, there is a reception with an official award presentation. This involves the
design of a poster announcing the event, invitation of the clients and architects of the short-listed
buildings, a video or PowerPoint presentation of images of the buildings visited, laudatory speeches and
the presentation of the four bronze plaques that may be fixed to the winning buildings.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                    5
Course Description
5 Task 3: Student presentations and preparation and submission of final paper
For the final task, each student selects one building that she or he has visited. There is no restriction on
the age of the building, however, important data such as statements by the client and the architect on the
reasons for the building, its conception, are more likely to be found with more recent buildings.
Each student is to prepare a seminar presentation lasting 30 min (maximum 45 images). The seminar
presentations should include verbal/written description, evaluation and criticism of the selected building.
The criticism may also be in the manner of redesigning aspects of the building in question, using
Photoshop, etc. as a presentation tool. The seminar’s focus is on the in-depth analysis of individual pieces
of architecture, ultimately allowing for the discussion to broaden to other buildings and socio- cultural
issues.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                       6
Course Description
1.0          Introduction: The origin of architecture
Architecture has its origin in the division of responsibilities between the commissioning, designing,
supervising and constructing of a building. Before, or in the absence of the division of responsibilities, that
is, when the act of commissioning, designing and constructing are executed by a single person, there is
no need to externalize any thoughts or decisions. From mind to eye to hand, all actions are contained
without any communication.
As soon as there is a division in responsibilities in the process of constructing a building, decisions about
the constitution and representation of that building have to be communicated between the commissioner
and the executers, the latter may include a person or group of persons in charge of giving shape to the
commissioner’s preferences. An exchange of ideas takes place that requires premeditation and reflection
of these ideas. Premeditation and reflection call for the mental act of conjecture or projection. Ideas are
thought out in the mind, a design is construed ahead of the act of construction, a building is projected into
another medium prior to the real, practical process of construction: an abstract or theoretical process of
ordering a series of decisions regarding the preferences of the commissioner are undertaken to give
shape to the latter’s commission.
The larger and more complex a building is, as compared to for example a hut or house, the more likely its
realization presupposes the division of responsibility so as to ensure that such a complex building may be
realized in a given period of time.
With size and degree of complexity of a building come aspects of its practical realization that cannot be
adequately accounted for without preparation.
1.1          The need for architectural criticism
If the architectural profession is honest with itself, it will acknowledge that only a small proportion of the
entire building activity results in structures that are of an appropriate level of design quality. This is true
regardless where one might look.
Architectural criticism is needed so that proportion of appropriate design quality can be significantly
raised, regardless whether the design quality is related to large complexes, individual buildings or work to
existing structures. Architectural criticism is necessary because, if the vast majority of the urban
complexes and buildings lacks the appropriate level of design quality, then these structures also lack the
sympathy and care needed to ensure their long life; and thus, they are more likely to be demolished
within a few decades of their completion. We can see this happening all around us to buildings of the
immediate post-Second World War years.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                      7
Course Description
Urban design and individual buildings of an inappropriate or even poor level of design quality are a burden
on society and the environment. They are the underlying cause for individual disaffection from society.
They are part of the cause for the collective disruption in the fabric of socio- ecosystems. Their early and
untimely demise puts a severe strain on resources such as human labor, finances and materials.
Inappropriately and poorly designed urban fabric and buildings are therefore not sustainable. Architectural
criticism is thus more urgently needed than ever before.
Ideally, just as urban and architectural design projects are submitted to planning and building departments
for technical and legal scrutiny, every building activity should be scrutinized for its appropriate level of
design quality. Better to scrutinize, criticize and improve a proposed design over and over again than to
build badly once. However, there are severe constraints on the practice of effective architectural criticism.
Particularly in commissioned criticism such as for professional journals or monographs, criticism is often
unable to voice its real concerns. Architects or clients, whose buildings receive or are threatened to
receive a poor critical evaluation, often threaten editors of journals with future retaliation, not to mention
legal redress. Architectural criticism is also hampered by the false respect professionals pay to each other
for fear of either becoming the recipient of poor critical evaluation oneself or involving oneself in potential
libel cases. Even close colleagues shy away from giving their honest evaluation of their friends’ work for
fear of upsetting them with potentially hurtful truths. It seems that the most frank architectural criticism is
expressed in schools of architecture, sometimes in competition or award juries, the latter behind closed
doors. All of these constraints and difficulties reduce the likelihood that a design for a new urban quarter
or an individual building can attain the best possible level of design quality.
The unwillingness of many design professionals to face these facts is a cause for the lack of standing of
the design profession amongst the public. It is high time that we have a more strongly regulated design
profession that ensures that urban design and buildings are of the best possible level of design quality.
These are central issues of professional ethics that each architectural critic has to confront and answer for
herself/himself. As for any other act of criticism, the most important value that a critic has to uphold is
that of an intellectual independence so as to establish an unassailable ethical position.
Besides this argument, it is imperative that the design profession does not once again allow the
technocrats to control the debate on sustainability, as sustainability is not achievable through technical
means alone. The modern movement has shown that a one-sided reliance on economic rationalism has
led to disaster in the urban design and architectural fields. For this reason, the design profession must
resist the selective occupation of the issue of sustainability by technocrats and large corporations. This is
only achievable if the design profession demonstrates that design quality is indivisible: that design quality
is dependent on as much the aesthetic as the technical aspects.
From this point of view, the need to specify what architectural criticism is, how it is constituted and that it
is supported by a wide majority of the design profession, becomes a criticial matter for the survival of the
design profession.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                          8
Course Description
1.2          The purposes of architectural criticism
Architectural criticism serves a variety of purposes. These can be defined firstly in terms of a number of
points of view, secondly by the different modes of understanding of the object under discussion, and
thirdly by pointing to the specific media used in the communication of the architectural criticism and in
turn by identifying the audiences that are thus constituted by the specific medium. These can stated as
follows:
From the point of view:
      1   the designing architect as critic
      2   the professional critic, that is, non-architect or at least, not actively designing architect, such as a
             member of a jury for a competition or award, or author of texts for blogs, journals and
             newspapers; or as a design teacher
      3   the client, the owner, the investor
      4   the user
      5   the member of the general public
      6   the government representatives such as politicians, members of a building consent authority,
             conservation department, etc.
observing the object:
      1      as a complete, static, autonomous object
      2      as an object that is part of a local, regional, global (physical) context
      3      as an object within a local, regional, global discourse
      4      as an object with a range of qualities and consisting of a number of elements which themselves
             are part of a physical context and/or global discourse
      5   as an open-ended, dynamic, changing phenomenon that is subject to transformations, adaptation,
             changes in use, demolition, recycling
      6   as a catalyst or vehicle for associative discourse
using the medium:
      1      of the spoken word in direct speech during academic, professional or other evaluative juries
      2      of the spoken word in telecommunication (radio, tv, web sites, etc.)
      3      of the written word in printed media (weblogs, newspapers, journals, books, etc.)
      4      of the built idea, that is, architectural criticism through the built fact
addressing the criticism at the following:
      1      oneself as the designer
      2      other designers, including colleagues, students
      3      other clients, owners, investors
      4      users
      5      those interested in architectural criticism, including a lay public
      6      other politicians, public administrators, etc.
Architectural criticism can therefore be multidirectional, multivalent, if not to say diffuse. Of course, it can
also be very precisely rooted in a conscious critical source, mediated through a specific design
phenomenon and directed towards a precisely circumscribed recipient or audience. Given the often raised
doubt about the possibility of “objective” criticism, the fact that it is possible to specify the different


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                    9
Course Description
purposes of architectural criticism, that it is possible to identify the point of view, the way the design
phenomenon is seen, in which medium the communication takes place and to whom the message is to
be conveyed, seems to me to provide the analytical basis for deconstructed and therefore objective
criticism.
In this connection, it is possible to categorize architectural theories. Most of the earlier architectural
theories were developed by architects for the design profession (eg. Vitruvius, Alberti, Perrault, Schinkel,
Guadet, van der Laan et al). In these theories, the way architecture is defined and discussed is seen from
the point of view of the designing architect. The thrust of the theory is directed towards the act of design,
the act of construction and the resultant’s effect, where the notion of effect is not to be understood as
the more modern term of “reception”, but rather the more traditional aesthetic dimension of sensory
effect.
The questions at the forefront of architectural theoreticians' considerations have traditionally been: How
does design come about? What are its constituent elements? Which effects do certain compositions
have?
More recently, architectural theoreticians, that is, in general non-practicing architects or art historians
writing in the field of architecture as well as other writers on architecture, have also sought to establish
theories of architecture, with greater or lesser impact on actual practice. The reasons for this greater or
lesser impact on actual practice lies in the diffuse nature of communication, the great number of media,
the widespread dissemination of ideas and the absence of a consensus on a basis for a general
architectural theory, fueled particularly by the much coveted desire by architects to maintain design
freedom, or to put it more clearly, the fiercely defended right to free and individual design expression.
The fact that these two aspects – the existence of a consensus on a basis for a general architectural
theory and the freedom of self-expression – are not co-dependent, does not prevent many architects or
architectural students from vehemently objecting to any notion of a general architectural theory.
However, it does appear to me to be possible to deduce a general architectural theory that is able to
provide the basis for a broadly comprehensible method of architectural criticism. Therefore, to lay the
foundations for this method, here is a definition of what architecture is.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                    10
Course Description
1.3          A definition of architecture
Architecture, as distinct from building, is consciously concerned with the material constitution and
associated representation of a set of cultural, social and ethical values in forms and spaces for a specific
need, a given site and culture.
The act of building, however, or more precisely put, the vernacular act of building, is concerned with the
sub-conscious representation of a set of values within an unquestioned repetition of forms and spaces.
These intangible values find their translation in an equivalent set of morphological qualities, including
those of an aesthetic dimension.
Is architecture an art or a science, a scientific art or none of these? Architecture is an autonomous form
of knowledge with its own language and discourse.
By means of its material and spatial components and compositions it constitutes its own compositional
logic or language.
The discourse in architecture is open to universal comprehension as to its basic expression regardless of
prior conscious knowledge on behalf of the observer. Thus, architecture is closer to music in its capacity
to be meaningful and to be universally understood. Beyond meaning, architecture has the ability to create
reality through its own elements. Distinct from the other arts, it relies on its effectiveness and
meaningfulness on its material and spatial presence, thereby establishing ambience and character.
Architecture does not need to rely on words, though these are often used to give it value; it does not
need literary references, though some architects and critics seem to depend on these to claim values and
qualities for a design that it may or may not possess; it does not need any other form of legitimation,
though this is often dominant in the public media. There is clearly a discourse about architecture, which is
in written or spoken form. That is to say, there is a linguistic aspect to architecture.
Every architectural element contains its own history of the knowledge about that element. That is to say,
besides the linguistic aspect, there is an epistemological aspect to architecture, relating to all of its
morphological elements. However, above all, architecture exists in its own right, it is constituted by
means of its own morphological elements. Architecture is able to carry meaning primarily through these
elements, although other objects have made an appearance within architecture such as cladding
materials, graphics and technological components.
It is this ontological dimension that gives architecture the possibility of universal comprehensibility. From
this, architecture derives its credibility: material presence and constructive clarity are the ontological
foundations of architecture.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                    11
Course Description
1.4          Architectural values
Without entering into a differentiated philosophical discussion of value, the use of the term “value” is
understood as the intention, the desire or the volition behind the realization of an architectural design. I
would suggest that in any given architectural design it is possible to trace values that are preferred by
clients and architects.
By embracing a value, a judgment is being made, amongst others, in ethical, ideological, social, or
aesthetic domains. Values themselves express what individuals see as ethically better or worse. In
architecture, the values of simplicity or honesty, the preference for either industrial production or
traditional craftsmanship, the importance placed either in social accessibility or in exclusion, may pervade
the one or the other design consideration: from siting to detail.
In aesthetic terms, we find the sublime and the picturesque as recurring values throughout.
1.5          Architectural qualities and their assessment criteria
The way the word “quality” is used, it seems that it already stands for something exceptional, excellent.
However, from a more general point view, quality is an inherent characteristic, no more and no less.
Every phenomenon has different qualities. A quality is an element in the identity of a phenomenon. It
assists in defining or distinguishing a phenomenon in contrast to other phenomena. But it is not by itself
already a mark of outstanding distinction: “quality time” and “quality architecture”: these are by no
means synonymous with appropriate or good quality. There is good and bad design quality, there are
architectural elements that are more appropriate than others in terms of the underlying conception of a
design, in terms of the relationship to an immediate or greater context.
The notion of quality is merely an index of a level of conceptual and compositional resolution measured
against explicit criteria. The setting of these criteria can be defined from three fundamentally different
points of view:
First, as observers, we may each bring our own, more or less personal set of criteria; that is the
subjective perspective.
Second, we might equally set aside our own criteria, or not have any particular set of preferences, and
allow our sensibilities to compare one phenomenon in the context of similar phenomena, and therefore
come to an assessment as to the differences and identities that constitute the preferred version. It is like
trying an unknown recipe in different versions. We might refer to this as the discursive perspective.
Third, we might fix our view on the ontological dimension of a piece of architecture and try to understand


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                       12
Course Description
the morphology on its own account; this we could call the immanent perspective.
By differentiating these perspectives, we are able to make explicit personal approaches and preferences,
but also acknowledge the existence of an immanent and ontological aspect of architecture.
Making explicit these three perspectives helps to overcome the reservation that “beauty lies in the eyes
of the beholder” only, and that there can never be any common ground in the qualitative comparison of
anything. Architectural designs can be assessed, can be criticized with regard to their components as well
as the resulting overall effect.
1.6          Which architectural values and qualities?
Which values or qualities might be sought in any single instance of architecture and how would these be
best achieved?
The qualities that architecture might embody range from the determination of daily habits, social values,
ethical beliefs, personal comfort, collective memories, privacy, monumentality, the sublime, flexibility,
resource efficiency, durability, etc.
By embodying certain values or qualities, a building expresses a will, an intention. To a certain extent, by
no means in all instances, are these values and qualities impressed upon the building’s users. The
process of impressing these values ranges from the active and instantaneous perception of the users to
their slow, subliminal, subcutaneous absorption, the ingestion by habit.
In this way, an architectural design attains a distinctive quality or set of qualities, qualities that determine
a cultural identity through the material embodiment of a discursive idea.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                    13
Course Description
2.0          A general definition of architecture as the basis for a descriptive method
The general definition of architecture proposed here concerns itself with the conception, intention,
composition, meaning, effect, character and value of built phenomena.
For this purpose, it is important to begin with the description of the visible and invisible elements of
architecture, that is, it is necessary to derive a descriptive method, much as it exists for most other
human communication systems. The visible elements of architecture are the spaces and forms, the
invisible aspects include the quality and meaning of the individual elements as well as that of the overall
composition. Therefore, here is the implication that any built phenomenon has a material and spatial
presence and that it stands for something else, that is, that it embodies an intention. Thus, this definition
of architecture presupposes that architecture is a form of communication, a language system.
On this basis, a descriptive method is developed that consists of five axioms: the first deals with the
criteria for identifying a phenomenon in the first place. the second deals with the nature and structural
relations between identified elements. the third deals with the definition of elements and their relation to
a whole. the fourth deals with the idea of the concatenation of a whole of one morphological category to
the part of another morphological category. the fifth deals with the relations of part to the whole and
content to form. The first two axioms are adaptations of Paul Frankl’s work published in Das System
Kunstwissenschaft (1938).
2.1          The Identifiability of a phenomenon: Identity, Differentiation, Definition
The first axiom establishes the morphological basis that enables the identification of a phenomenon in the
first place.
2.1.1        The identifiability of a phenomenon
Only through the relative isolation of a phenomenon can it be identified. Thus, a phenomenon has identity
if it differs from the ground against which it is experienced (see for instance the discussion of figure-
ground in Gestalt theory). A dot in space is an instance of a figure against a ground.
2.1.2        Differentiation
Phenomena can also be identified through the act of differentiation where no dominant and subdominant
phenomena are involved. Thus, the meeting of two co-planar surfaces along a visible line is an instance of
the act of differentiation.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                      14
Course Description
2.1.3        Definition
The observed phenomenon does not need to be sharply outlined, as described in the previous example.
An gentle undulation in a plane, even though there is no rupture in the surface of the plane, can again be
identifiable as a figure through its subtle definition from the ground.
2.2          Morphological variables
The second axiom establishes the abstract structural relationships of phenomena to each other,
described as a resultant. Five variables can be identified to adequately describe the range of abstract
structural relations which figures would have vis-à-vis one another:
definitiveness heterogeneity/homogeneity Distributiveness/arrangement iterativeness/rhythmic seriality
proportion/scalar relation
2.2.1        Definitiveness
The degree to which figures in themselves are more or less clearly defined with regard to the ground is
covered by the first axiom. Given that figures are at all defined, the first morphological variable describes
the degree of definition vis-à-vis other figures and therefore the degree of clarity of the resultant structure
or pattern.
2.2.2        Heterogeneity/homogeneity
The figures of a structure or a pattern may not all be identical. In the case that they are, the resultant is a
homogeneous abstract structure. In the case that all figures of a structure only occur once, the resultant
is a heterogeneous abstract structure. Mixtures exist between these two poles.
2.2.3        Distributiveness/Arrangement
Figures of a structure or pattern have neighborly relationships with each other. Thus, there may be
"structures" without any clear neighborly relationships at all, these structures are freely distributed.
Figures can be found to be arranged in such a way that they always have two neighbors, one on either
side, these structures are closed series. An open series is one in which two figures only have one
neighbor, namely the first and the last in the series.
Structures or Patterns in which with at least one figure is in the neighborhood of three other figures are
grouped. These groups can be open, if the other three figures do not form a series themselves, or closed,
if they form a series.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                         15
Course Description
2.2.4        Iterativeness/Rhythmic Seriality
Structures and patterns consisting of different figures may constitute recurring sub-patterns, which in
turn establish an orderly description that is independent of the variety of figures that constitutes the sub-
pattern or the overall pattern. Thus a pattern "a b a b a" is identical in its iterativeness or rhythmic seriality
to "abc yx abc xy abc".
2.2.5        Proportion/Scalar Relation
Without defining absolute dimensions, figures within a structure or pattern may stand in scalar relation to
each other. Figure "x" is a proportional factor of "y".
2.3          Morphological elements
The third axiom relates concepts and their labels to an abstract geometric typology of forms and spaces.
The abstract geometric types are the point, line, plane, cube. These basic types find their equivalents in
each of the five morphological categories.
While of course the relationships between a formal or spatial element, its concept and its label, cannot be
pinned down with absolute precision, research shows that there are domains of certainty that allow
forms and spaces to be more clearly associated with their concepts and labels (ills.). These relationships
are relatively straight forward, if not to say banal. However, the graphic representation serves as a
reminder, that forms and spaces, concepts and words ought to be used carefully and with precision.
On this analytical basis, it is possible to establish a thesaurus of elements, relating their cognitive labels to
their geometric-proportional definitions.
Inasmuch geometric axioms begin with points, lines, planes and volumes, the abstract geometric
transposition to the realm of building gives the equivalents as the block, the bar, the slab and the cube.
From this, a range of phenomena in the realm of building can be defined in abstract geometric terms.
2.4          Morphological categories
The descriptive method and its precise application is the foundation for a close and accurate analysis of
designed phenomena. Obviously it is insufficient to merely describe individual elements. Of fundamental
importance in architecture is the interrelationship of different elements, elements of different orders of
magnitude and further, relationships to phenomena and value systems outside the architectural
phenomenon itself (ill.). Based on the constitution of a built phenomenon itself, there is a constituent


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                        16
Course Description
relationship between an element and its constituting parts.
The fourth axiom adopts the notion of part to whole to the phenomena of building. The notion of part to
whole, the concatenation of elements of a lower category to elements of a higher category:
      •      constructional
      •      tectonic
      •      compartmental
      •      configurational
      •      contextual
Using the notion of part to whole, of parts forming other wholes, it is possible to understand the
conceptual structuring of the phenomenon of building into five morphological categories. From
construction, tectonic, compartmental, configurational to contextual, each category contains elements,
that are constituted from elements from previous categories (with the exception of the category of
construction).
Given this, there are interpolating relationships between elements of the same order and those of a
higher morphological category. For example, by placing bricks together – elements of the constructional
morphological category – it is possible to form an element of the next morphological category, namely
that of a tectonic category such as a wall (ill.). In turn, placing a number of walls together, it is possible to
create an enclosure, or a compartment.
Each morphological category interfaces with social, iconographic, scientific, economic, material, aesthetic
domains of reality. Thus, for instance, the constructional category engages issues of social organization,
economy, statics, and building physiology.
Taking the use of bricks in a building allows an understanding of the knowledge required in its production,
transport and laying; the origins of the clay and its excavation and thus the economic and legal
dimensions to the process of extraction; the human and energy resources necessary to produce, deliver
and assemble the bricks, means of production; the building physiological performance of bricks, their
levels of toxicity and their ability to be recycled; the sensuous dimension of bricks, etc.
This constructional element can be compared across time and space with any other constructional
material such as limestone blocks, titanium sheeting, Corten panels, triple glazing panels, etc. Each use of
a material allows an architectural critical statement to be made, given the understanding of the context
and the points of view of the evaluation criteria.
In the morphological category of construction, for example, existing research on resource flows as
relating to energy and emissions can be easily integrated, as can be standard economic models of
construction cost.
In the morphological category of compartments the analysis of abstract planimetric relationships in terms


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                     17
Course Description
of topological adjacencies and their social values which they embed can be carried out (Hillier & Hanson,
1984).
In short, the differentiation of building phenomena into these five morphological categories initially
provides for the clear inclusive structuring of other, existing particular analytical models or future research
and ultimately allows for the review of the various operative analytical criteria.
2.5          Relations as rhetorical figures
The fifth axiom relates compositional figures and conceptual figures to rhetorical figures (figures of diction
and figures of thought). The notions of form to content and part to whole.
The theory, imitation and practice of rhetoric sets out terms by which to understand the art of
communication. Rhetorical analysis structures communicative phenomena into
the character of discourse (eg. solemn/stately, matter-of-fact, relaxed) leading to the notion of character
of reality (see Dagobert Frey, "Realitätscharakter" (Engl. character of reality)) the consistency of discourse
(eg. appropriate choice of elements within the composition, conscious or unconscious errors in
composition - i.e. "shabby chic" compositional figures (see for instance Ad C. Herennium) for instance:
duplication, repetition, inversion, suppression, substitution, elimination conceptual figures, for instance
metaphor, metonymy, onomatopoeia, synecdoche, allegory
While not every term used in rhetorical analysis is applicable to the field of building, there are many
rhetorical figures which shed clarifying light on the question of the judicious choice of ideas,
communicative elements and their appropriate composition.
In this regard, it is of interest to look more closely at the relationship of parts to a whole. Such
compositional relationships are comparable to some rhetorical devices. For example, looking at the stone
column with flutes at the Temple of Hatshepsut, Deir-el-Bahari, we can identify the components of the
shaft, the individual drums of varying heights. The procurement of stones, whether during the times of
the Egyptian Pharaohs or ancient Greeks, probably did not allow for pieces of identical volume. Thus, their
heights vary. The faceting of the drums and thus of the column shaft or even more so the carving of
flutes reduce the visual impact of the irregular occurrence of horizontal joints. Each shaft appears uniform,
of a single shape. Thus, one could speak of the individual constituting elements of the shaft, each drum,
being suppressed in their presence at the benefit of the tectonic form of the column shaft. The rhetorical
act is that of suppression of the part in favor of the whole.
Similarly, in more recent times, the use of a single material or color for an entire building is often intended
to strengthen the visual presence of the whole, while occasionally allowing the constituting parts to


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                  18
Course Description
remain visible, even if these are very small indeed (Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein). Color, Joint lines, the
flush set glazing, the presence of the constituting components may altogether be selected and detailed in
such a way as to maximize the presence of the resultant whole, and conversely, require the minimization
of the presence of the parts. In this sense, the rhetorical act requires a maximum effort at creating what
is otherwise known as minimalism.
This relationship between visible – the maximized presence of the whole – and invisible aspects of the
architecture – the effort that has been expended on the building’s design – is equally open to architectural
criticism and analysis.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                    19
Course Description
3.0          Architectural criticism
While any form of analysis can be thorough, complete and exhaustive (in both senses of the word), with
practice and experience come increased precision with regard to the identification of key issues in a
design. Practice and experience allow the architectural critic to establish a data base, an instrument, so to
speak, with which to probe a design in question. However, this may not always lead to satisfactory
conclusions.
Returning to the issue of architectural qualities and their assessment criteria, three points of view were
identified, that each gave rise to their own assessment criteria: the subjective, the discursive and the
immanent. Practice and experience may sharpen the architectural critic’s mind, but they should not
prevent the critic from superficially glancing at a design in question; that would leave out the immanent
dimension.
As there are developments in other fields, so there are new architectural concepts and intentions which
may find an unusual set of forms and spaces at a smaller or larger scale of realization. Altogether, a
design may offer unfamiliar elements for analysis and criticism, thereby calling for more precise
interrogation of the visible and invisible elements of an architecture.
3.1          Inductive understanding
Some of the possible outcomes of the in-depth investigation of the architectural object itself might be the
anticipation, the presaging, the sensing of a distinct idea of a compositional order. At the simplest level,
such anticipation happens when one stands in a space, whose extent cannot be fully seen, but following
sources of light, acoustics or the spatial envelope over a visual barrier, as in Baroque churches. The eye
follows the curves of the surfaces, notices indirect light sources, adds one set of observed phenomena to
another and conjectures into the void further suspected, anticipated, presaged envelopes, structures and
forms. Here the senses follow inductive reasoning. At best, the result is an understanding of the built
phenomenon in one’s mind that closely models the actuality and even establishes the intentions, or the
ideation behind the building’s design.
3.2          Deductive understanding
Conversely, there is the reverse process of analysis or reasoning: after having visited and/or used a
building, having studied its spatial and formal composition, its underlying conception may have become
clear to the critical observer. Without necessarily having noticed every detail, the broad gestures in a
piece of architecture have become obvious, allowing a process of deductive reasoning to take place.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                     20
Course Description
Thus, for example, the Villa Müller in Prague by Adolf Loos reveals itself as an overlapping of a tri- partite,
static, Palladian syntax with a dynamic, rotational, spatial movement à la Loos. The Villa Müller thus
stands as the culmination of a research in bourgeois central European domestic architecture. Or, another
example, the Alvar Aalto’s Cultural Centre in Wolfsburg can be understood as a facility to accompany an
individual’s artistic and cultural development from the days as a young child attending public readings to
adult education classes, including the exploration of the fine arts, the latter as the apogee of Aalto’s
understanding of civilization’s highest point of development.
Both the Villa Müller and Wolfsburg’s Cultural Centre can therefore be thoroughly analyzed and criticized
without an exhaustive investigation into every single detail, even though that would also be an
educational experience.
3.3          Synthetic criticism
The practical reality of architectural criticism sees a combination of all of these aforementioned points of
view and paths of reasoning. Each of us will always maintain something of a personal, subjective position.
And then, some of us find it easier to act as neutral observers of phenomena. The discursive point of
view, the dispassionate or Kantian disinterested approach to criticism is more readily taken with advanced
age and experience, not to speak of disillusionment. What does appear to be lacking a lot of the times in
architectural criticism is the close and thorough look at an architectural design itself.
Most architectural critics find the personal experience of a building to be indispensable. Many things
become visible that in the images and drawings remain hidden or unexpressed. What appears simple and
even banal in some two-dimensional drawings in reality might turn out as a rich, complex three-
dimensional statement. The opposite is equally true.
In the course of these visits and in the process of looking at other documents, reading or listening to
other people’s statements, a complete understanding of a building may not have been reached, but one
might follow inductive reasoning to pose questions that lead further to the rendering of a complete
picture. Finally, when the critic believes to be close to an understanding, a thesis is posed about the piece
of architecture in question, thereby setting off a series of dialectic or deductive reasoning that may
ultimately culminate in a synthetic understanding of the work of architecture.
One might say that a critic has grasped as much as is humanly possible when the world view the
architect designed through the building is understood in the same way by the critic. In other words, the
architectural design becomes a means by which the world as it is and as it is intended can be
apprehended and comprehended. This understanding, apprehension and comprehension does not mean
that the critic shares the same world view of the architect, but shows that the critic has pervaded the


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                     21
Course Description
architectural work as a materialized, spatialized conception.
Architectural criticism may then begin: from the design, its meaning to its contribution to the social and
cultural reality, architectural criticism will evaluate how an architectural design achieves material, formal
and spatial integrity, how it achieves unity between conception and realization, how values and qualities
are established, and how, in the final analysis, the design seeks to establish a world view.


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                           22
Course Description
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1            [Cicero]                     Ad C. Herennium: De Ratione Dicendi
                                          (Rhetorica ad Herennium)
                                          Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1954
2            Edmund Burke                 A Philosophical Enquiry into the origin of our Ideas of the Sublime and
                                          Beautiful
                                          London: R. and J. Dodsley, 1757
3            Immanuel Kant                Critique of Pure Reason (Ger. Kritik der Urteilskraft, 1790)
                                          Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998
                                          http://strangebeautiful.com/other-texts/kant-first-critique-cambridge.pdf
4            John Ruskin                  The Seven Lamps of Architecture
                                          London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1849
5            Julien Guadet                Éléments et Théorie de 'Architecture,
                                          Cours professé à l'École Nationale et Spéciale des Beaux-Arts
                                          Paris: Aulanier et Cie., Éditeurs, (undated, 1900), 4 vols.
6            Paul Frankl                  Das System der Kunstwissenschaft
                                          Brünn/Leipzig: Rudolf M. Rohrer Verlag, 1938
7            Dagobert Frey                Kunstwissenschaftliche Grundfragen
                                          Wien: Rudolf M. Rohrer Verlag, 1946
8            Dagobert Frey                Grundlegung zu einer vergleichenden Kunstwissenschaft
                                          Innsbruck/Wien: Margarete Friedrich Rohrer Verlag, 1949
9            Christian
             Norberg-Schulz               Intentions in Architecture
                                          Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1965
10           Robert Venturi               Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture
                                          New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1966
11           Niels Luning Prak            The Language of Architecture
                                          The Hague/Paris: Mouton & Cie, 1968
12           Sven Hesselgren              The Language of Architecture
                                          London: Appied Science Publishers Ltd., 1969, 3 vols.
13           Hans van der Laan            Architectonic Space: Fifteen Lessons on the Disposition
                                          of the Human Habitat
                                          Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1983
14           Bill Hillier and
             Julienne Hanson              The Social Logic of Space
                                          Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984
15           Karsten Harries              The Ethical Function of Architecture,
                                          Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1996
16           Wolfgang Kemp                Architektur analysieren: Eine Einführung in acht Kapiteln
                                          Munich: Schirmer/Mosel, 2009
Essays
1            Thomas Fisher                "The Death and Life of Great Architectural Criticism", in:
                                          http://places.designobserver.com/feature/death-and-life-of-great-
                                          architecture-criticism/30448/
2            Paul Goldberger              14th Annual Vincent Scully Prize Lecture:
                                          http://www.nbm.org/media/video/scully-prize-paul-goldberger.html


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                          23
Course Description
SEMINAR                   SCHEDULE
30 Aug                    Seminar 1: Introduction and overview to the seminar
                          Theory of Architecture and Criticism of Architecture Assignments I to III
                          Possible media for review:
                          Architectural Review              London
                          ARCHIS                            Amsterdam
                          a&t                               Vitoria-Gasteiz
                          Baumeister                        Munich
                          Bauwelt                           Berlin
                          Blueprint                         London
                          Casabella                         Milan
                          DOMUS                             Milan
                          Metropolis                        New York
                          New York Times                    New York
                          Select one medium, preferably from a recent volume (eg. 2010).
                          Select one architectural criticism and one theoretical text from last year's production.
                          Summarize each text. Each summary should be no longer than one page.
                          Describe, analyze and criticize each text on another single page.
                          Prepare a 10-minute seminar presentation of your review.
                          Discussion on assignments 2 and 3:
                          Task 2: Student Architecture Award
                          Task 3: a building criticism, seminar presentation and paper.
04 Sep                    Seminar 2: A Theory of Architecture and a Descriptive Method Part I
                          3 Student presentations of text summaries and criticisms
                          Discussion on the rules for the Student Architecture Award
06 Sep                    Seminar 3: A Theory of Architecture and a Descriptive Method Part II
                          3 Student presentations of text summaries and criticisms
25 Sep                    Seminar 4: Building Criticisms I
                          E.1027, Eileen Gray, Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, 1926-1929
                          Villa Mairea, Alvar Aalto, Noormarkku 1938-1939
                          3 Student presentations of text summaries and criticisms
                          Submission of proposals for the Student Architecture Award long list
27 Sep                    Seminar 5: Building Criticisms II
                          Philharmonie, Hans Scharoun, Berlin 1957-1963
                          New National Gallery, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Berlin 1963-1968
                          3 Student presentations of text summaries and criticisms
                          Discussion of proposals for the Student Architecture Award long list
                          Discussion on the selection process
09 Oct                    Seminar 6: Building Criticism III
                          St. Petri Church, Sigurd Lewerentz, Klippan 1963-1966
                          Thermal Spa, Peter Zumthor, Vals 1986-1996
                          Jury Session Long list
                          Presentation of buildings for the Student Architecture Award,
                          at least one proposal per student
11 Oct                    Seminar 7: Student Architecture Award:


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                     24
Course Description
                          Jury Session Short List Discussion of each proposal
                          Vote for short-list of buildings
                          Preparation for permission to visit buildings, itinerary, logistics
16 Oct                    Seminar 8: Student Architecture Award:
                          Jury Session, discussion, vote
                          Site visit I to shortlisted buildings
18 Oct                    Site visit II to shortlisted buildings
                          Jury session, discussion, vote
                          Preparation of laudatory statements and award ceremony
                          Distribution of tasks for award ceremony: PowerPoint/Video
30 Oct                    Student presentations I
                          2 presentations by seminarists of building criticisms
                          Prepare a 30 minute presentation with maximum of 40 images
                          Each presentation is followed by 20 minutes of discussions on the
                          building and presentation
01 Nov                    Student presentations II
06 Nov                    Student presentations III
08 Nov                    Student presentations IV
27 Nov                    Student presentations V
29 Nov                    Student presentations VI
04 Dec                    UT Austin Student Architecture Award Ceremony 5 pm
© WW 4 Jan 18


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                                25
Course Description
GRADING POLICY
There are five equal components to the grade:
      1      Summaries and critical commentaries
      2      Participation in Student Architecture Award
      3      Seminar presentation
      4      Final paper
      5      Regular attendance and participation in the seminar
Grade Descriptions
A/A-: excellent work Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual
ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and
beyond what is discussed in class.
B+/B/B-: good work Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Demonstrates
potential for excellence.
C+/C/C-: required work Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with
dedication or rigor. (Note: C- does not meet the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree.)
D+/D/D-: poor work Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are
not level- appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.
F: unacceptable work Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
assigned with excessive unexcused absences.
X: excused incomplete Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments are
not a cause for assigning this grade. An incomplete is assigned after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices.
Incomplete coursework must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR UNEXCUSED ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused absences may be dropped
from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than three unexcused absences is a full letter
drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss
class.
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an examination, work
assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to
complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. You must notify each of your instructors as far


Architectural Criticism Seminar Fall 2018                                                                                26
Course Description
in advance as possible prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
By UT Austin policy, students must notify the instructor of any pending absence for reasons of the observation of
religious holidays at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If a student must miss
a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, the student will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. Students with disabilities requiring special accommodations need to
obtain a letter documenting their disabilities from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be
presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be
discussed at that time. Five business days before an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing
accommodations that will be needed.
Academic Dishonesty
UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics) and an explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism (Link to
University Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09- 10/ch01/index.html)
Evacuation in Cases of Emergency on Campus
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
•   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
             fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
•   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
             nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
•   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
•   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
•   Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
             Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
•   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
•   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
             www.utexas.edu/emergency
