ADVANCED STUDIO
ARC 696 / 561R
Instructor: Nichole Wiedemann
Office hours: W 10-12pm in SUT 3.128
Email: wiedemann@utexas.edu
Phone: 512-471-0736
                                                                                 Carte de Louisiane, 1718
TEXAS [redux] …designing the Camino Real experience
The advanced studio will explore El Camino Real de los Tejas and the making of the Texas. Over
hundreds, if not thousands, of years, the persistent traversing of the land has left a residue of
marks (roads, forts, ranchos, acequias, swales, missions, towns, names, words, trees, and so on)
that retell a rich narrative intertwining people, place, and time. Manifest in these intermittent
traces is a collective narrative, both factual and fictional, that connects the below to the above
and the past to the present.
An evolving network of Spanish paths, El Camino Real de los Tejas, was founded on prehistoric
American Indian trails and enabled the convergence of cultures, initially, Native Americans,
Spanish and French. These trails followed the clues given by the land. At times physically
inscribed in the landscape, as swales, the trails stitch together moments of pause, often for
water, that become, what we know today as, Austin, San Antonio, San Marcos, and New
Braunfels, in Central Texas. Ultimately, this network of paths from Mexico City to Natchitoches,
Louisiana, gave rise to Texas, and our country, as we know it today.
context
In 2004, El Camino Real de los Tejas was incorporated into the National Trails System, which
includes historic trails like the Trail of Tears and Lewis and Clark. As designated by an act of
Congress, El Camino Real de los Tejas commemorates a historically important route of national
significance, including trade and commerce, exploration, migration, settlement and military
campaigns, and, therefore, demonstrated the potential for greater historic appreciation and
recreational use. In 2011, a comprehensive management plan by the National Park Service
provided a vision for the trail with particular attention to visitor experience and use.
                                                    1


Unlike most national parks with designated acreage, this historic trail is a network of paths
(lines) passing through the landscape from Mexico City to Natchitoches, Louisiana. At times, the
trail aligns with existing roads and is marked with signage, some of which is over 100-years old,
and other times the trail is obscured by urban expansion. Sometimes, the routes are lost over
time. With the majority of land privately owned in Texas (95.8% as determined by the US Census
Bureau) and, therefore, inaccessible; the current visitor’s experience is a long drive (2580
designated miles) punctuated by historical markers and the occasional historic site.
trip
The road trip retracing the Camino Real from the Mexican border to Natchitoches, LA (March 7-11) is
an integral aspect of this advanced studio and, therefore, required. Steven Gonzales, Executive
Director of the El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail Association, will be our expert
guide to a variety of significant (and often inaccessible) trail sites.
work*
As a collaborative undertaking, with the El Camino Real de los Tejas National Historic Trail
Association (“client”) and frog design, we will try to comprehend, define and design the visitor
experience of El Camino Real de los Tejas. (There are no preconceived outcomes for the studio.)
To do this effectively, we will collaborate closely with frog design, a global design firm that
believes “form follows emotion” and “advances the human experience through design,” from
branding to products to environments. Students, working both collectively and individually, will
undertake the definition of the strategy and vision (research, immersion, sorting and synthesis)
as well as the design solution (refinement and design production) with the support of the “frog
places” team in Austin.
schedule**
wk 1-2                RESEARCH_planning                                      5%***
                      due: 2/1
wk 3                  IMMERSION_in the field                                 5%
                      interviews/intercepts
wk 4                  SORTING_concepting in parallel                         5%
                      due: 3/15
wk 5-7                SYNTHESIS_representation                              15%
                      Trip: 3/7-3/11
                      pin up: 3/6
wk 8                  REFINEMENT_concept development                         5%
                      review: 3/19
wk 9                  spring break
wk 10-15              DESIGN PRODUCTION                                     60%
                      review: 4/15
wk 16                 Final Review
                      dates: 5/8-10
                      Engagement/Improvement                                 5%
*Expect, and be open to, a diverse range of design approaches and outcomes.
**Schedule may have revisions. Advance notice will be provided.
***Grade weighting roughly corresponds with duration.
                                                                  2


grades
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in
other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may
be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of
issues. Your work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the semester.
Grading for studio courses is broken into three components: 1/3 grasp (ideas combined with an
appropriate process of inquiry), 1/3 process (the consistent and rigorous development of ideas)
and 1/3 resolution (the demonstration of competence, completeness and understanding
evidenced in the representation of the project and its architectural implications).
A/ A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor,
craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class.
The work submitted surpasses required drawings and models in depth and/or scope.
B+/ B/ B- : above average
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and
suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. The work demonstrates potential for
excellence and is complete.
C+/ C/ C- : average and below
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. The work
submitted is incomplete in one or more areas. For undergraduates, a grade of C– will not count toward the degree.
D+/ D/ D- : poor
Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level– appropriate.
Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base. The project is incomplete.
F : failure
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is unacceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned due to excessive
unexcused absences. Project unresolved/incomplete.
X : excused incomplete
Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments are not a cause for assigning
this grade. An “X” is used only after consultation with the administration and must include an agreement for completion
of outstanding work and deadline. Resolution of the incomplete must be prior to the commencement of the next
semester.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR UNEXCUSED ABSENCES, LATE WORK + LATE ARRIVALS.
events
Plan to attend the lectures, exhibits, talks, symposia and so on. These experiences are invaluable
and significant in your architectural education. For a complete listing, please visit soa.utexas.edu.
attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. Please contact the
instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class.
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class schedules. Please notify me prior (14 days) to
the class dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day. If you miss a work assignment,
or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to
complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence.
students with disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
                                                              3


Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
This letter should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
security, safety and the studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the
careful attention to the needs of individual. Please be considerate your classmates. All spraying
of fixative, spray paint or any other substance must be done in the shop. Damages done to the
facilities will not be tolerated by the School of Architecture.
Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week. Be smart. Be safe.
                                                    4
