                                       Sports, Stadiums, & Society
                                  CRP 385C | Unique 01444 | Spring 2020
Class meets:      Tuesdays & Thursdays, 3:30 AM – 5 PM, SUT 3.112
Instructor:       Prof. Miriam Solis              Office: SUT 2.120
Pronouns:         She/Her/Hers                    Office Hours: Tuesdays, 1-2:30 PM
Email:            solis@austin.utexas.edu         Office Hours Link: wejoinin.com/sheets/mubeq
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Sports, Stadiums, & Society: This course explores the social, political, and economic implications of
sports stadiums and arenas. It draws on urban planning and social science theory to examine how and
why cities plan them, how they are sites of contested power and resistance, and why both these
questions have racial meaning. The course is divided into three parts. Part I focuses on the sports
stadium planning process, including the policies and economic rationales that are deployed in their
development. Part II examines stadium and arena design, including the resources involved in their
operation and maintenance. Part III focuses on stadium and arena use by athletes, spectators,
organizational leaders and staff. Students will have the opportunity to explore the course material
through an analysis of a hometown stadium or arena of their choosing (e.g., a high school stadium, an
NBA arena). Course content and assignments will also revolve around the planning of Austin’s FC
stadium, scheduled to open in 2021.
Students will develop their competency in the following areas:
     • How to engage in, synthesize, and communicate critical thinking
     • How to integrate knowledge from different disciplines to assess social and physical phenomena
     • The ability to identify key stakeholders in urban environments
     • The ability to identify how the media and rhetoric are deployed in planning processes
By the end of the course, students will:
     • Have a stronger understanding of general planning knowledge and theory
     • Comprehend how the built environment contributes to processes of racialization and social
         inequality
     • Recognize the governance and participation dynamics of large-scale planning projects
     • Have a working understanding of the opportunities and challenges associated to advancing
         social justice
     • Understand the significance of culture and movements in planning processes
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Austin FC Opinion Editorial (Op Ed) Your Austin FC opinion-editorial will summarize a dimension of the
stadium’s planning process, describe its effects and implications, as well as provide recommendations
for the stadium’s operations and use. The facts on which the op-ed is based will draw on at least five
primary data sources, requiring the student to do some research. You will also write an accompanying
reflection paper on how your op-ed is informed by the theories, concepts, and ideas presented by the
course readings. The reflection paper will discuss intended audience and how it challenges public


perceptions about stadium planning. Students will share submissions with each other, provide
constructive feedback, and consider placing the editorial in a target publication. The op-ed will be 1-1.5
single-space pages, and the reflection paper will be 1 single-spaced page.
Professional Development Project (PDP): You will choose a topic on sports, stadiums, and society and
provide an analysis of a question of your choice. Your topic should be something that is genuinely
interesting to you. It may take the following forms (or something else that you propose):
    • Podcast/audio documentary
    • Short film
    • 6 single-spaced page research paper
    • Informational website
    • Zine, curriculum
    • Exhibition
    • GIS analysis
You will be required to submit a 1-2 page PDP proposal. This proposal should include:
    • A short summary of the proposed project;
    • An outline of the content you plan to include;
    • A timeline for completing the project;
    • A description of what attributes you believe the completed projects should have to earn an
You will receive feedback on your proposal as needed to ensure that we have a mutual understanding of
what a successful completion of your project will look like.
Class Participation: This seminar requires active participation in discussions and critical reflection and
assessment of the course material. You should be prepared to discuss the main points of the reading,
ask questions, and provide constructive feedback, and generate and share critical perspectives. We will
engage in a number of walking tours and be joined by guest speakers. Students are expected to
participate in all course activities in an engaging and thoughtful manner.
In addition, students will sign-up for two days on which they will assign a media story related to the
day’s content. They will bring questions to guide class discussion.
Statement on Learning Success: Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need
accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you
from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies
to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the
student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you
with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading:
Austin FC Op Ed                    20%
Student Project            50%
Participation                       30%


  Date                                        Assignment                                    In Class
Week 1: Introduction & Theory
T 1/21     Course background and syllabus overview
Th 1/23 Carrington, Ben. "The critical sociology of race and sport: The first fifty years."
           Annual Review of Sociology 39 (2013): 379-398.
           Recommended: David Zirin, A People’s History of Sports in the United
           States:250 Years of Politics, Protest, People, and Play (The New Press, 2008).
           Select chapters.
Part I: PLANNING
Week 2: Rationales
T 1/28     Lipsitz, George. How racism takes place. Temple University Press, 2011, Ch. 3,
           Space, Sports, and Spectatorship in St. Louis.
           Propheter, Geoffrey. "Are basketball arenas catalysts of economic
           development?." Journal of Urban Affairs 34, no. 4 (2012): 441-459.
           Last Week Tonight with John Oliver, “Stadiums,”
           https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xcwJt4bcnXs.
Th 1/30    Seifried, Chad, and Aaron W. Clopton. "An alternative view of public subsidy
           and sport facilities through social anchor theory." City, Culture and Society 4,
           no. 1 (2013): 49-55.
           Mondello, Michael, and Timothy Kellison. "Sport Stadium Referendums:
           Factors Influencing the Success or Failure of Ballot Measures." Journal of
           contemporary athletics 10, no. 2 (2016): 139.
           Bay Area Council Economic Institute, “The Economic Impacts of a
           New Baseball Stadium in Oakland.”
           Recommended: Sant, Stacy-Lynn, Daniel S. Mason, and Chen Chen. "‘Second-
           tier outpost’? Negative civic image and urban infrastructure development."
           Cities 87 (2019): 238-246.
           Groothuis, Peter A., and Kurt W. Rotthoff. "The Economic Impact and Civic
           Pride of Sports Teams and Mega-events: Do the Public and Professionals
           agree?." Economic Affairs 36, no. 1 (2015): 2016.
           Ahlfeldt, Gabriel, and Wolfgang Maennig. "Arenas, arena architecture and the
           impact on location desirability: the case of Olympic Arenas' in Prenzlauer
           Berg, Berlin." Urban Studies 46, no. 7 (2009): 1343-1362.
           Humphreys, Brad R., and Adam Nowak. "Professional sports facilities, teams
           and property values: Evidence from NBA team departures." Regional Science
           and Urban Economics 66 (2017): 39-51.
Week 3: Financing and Governance
T 2/28     Coates, Dennis, and Craig A. Depken. "Tax Schemes for Sports Venues." For
           Your Own Good: Taxes, Paternalism, and Fiscal Discrimination in the Twenty-


          First Century. Arlington, VA: Mercatus Center at George Mason University
          (2018).
          Irizarry, Alejandra M. Hernandez. "If You Build It, They Will Relocate: Public
          Private Partnerships in Sport Stadium Financing." Pub. Cont. LJ 46 (2016): 853.
Th 1/30   Delaney, Kevin J., and Rick Eckstein. "Urban power structures and publicly      Discuss
          financed stadiums." In Sociological forum, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 331-353. Oxford, op-ed
          UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2007
          Friedman, Michael T., and Daniel S. Mason. "Stakeholder management and
          the public subsidization of Nashville’s coliseum." Journal of urban affairs 27,
          no. 1 (2005): 93-118.
          Recommended: O’Reilly, Norm. "Professional team ownership models in
          North America." In Routledge Handbook of Sport Governance, pp. 129-149.
          Routledge, 2019.
          Sapotichne, Joshua. "Rhetorical strategy in stadium development politics."
          City, Culture and Society 3, no. 3 (2012): 169-180.
          Lowes, Mark. "Toward a Conceptual Understanding of Formula One
          Motorsport and Local Cosmopolitanism Discourse in Urban Placemarketing
          Strategies." Communication & Sport 6, no. 2 (2018): 203-218.
          Winand, Mathieu, and Christos Anagnostopoulos, eds. Research Handbook on
          Sport Governance. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2019.
Week 4: Siting
T 2/11    Sze, Julie. "Sports and Environmental Justice: “Games” of Race, Place,
          Nostalgia, and Power in Neoliberal New York City." Journal of Sport and Social
          Issues 33, no. 2 (2009): 111-129.
          Yosso, Tara, and David García. "" This Is No Slum!": A Critical Race Theory
          Analysis of Community Cultural Wealth in Culture Clash's Chavez Ravine."
          Aztlan: A journal of Chicano studies 32, no. 1 (2007): 145-179.
          KCET Online, “S2 E2: Before the Dodgers.”
          https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NAtoyOI5VZg
Th 2/13   Saito, Leland. "Urban development and the growth with equity framework:
          The National Football League stadium in downtown Los Angeles." Urban
          Affairs Review 55, no. 5 (2019): 1370-1401.
          Cain, Colleen. "Negotiating With the Growth Machine: Community Benefits
          Agreements and Value-Conscious Growth." In Sociological Forum, vol. 29, no.
          4, pp. 937-958. 2014.
          Kingsbridge Armory CBA (Select readings)
          Recommended: Sparvero, Emily, and Laurence Chalip. "Professional teams as
          leverageable assets: Strategic creation of community value." Sport
          Management Review 10, no. 1 (2007): 1-30.


            Rosen, Jovanna, and Lisa Schweitzer. "Benefits-sharing agreements and
            nonideal theory: The warning signs of agreement co-optation." Planning
            Theory 17, no. 3 (2018): 396-417.
            McCue, Andy. "Barrio, bulldozers, and baseball: the destruction of Chavez
            Ravine." NINE: A Journal of Baseball History and Culture 21, no. 1 (2012): 47-
            52.
            The Home Team. https://www.thehometeamfilm.com/media
Week 5: Austin
T 2/18      Austin FC planning documents and op-ed discussion                                     Work-
                                                                                                  shop
Th 2/20     Austin FC documents and walking tour                                                  Walking
                                                                                                  Tour
Week 6: Mega-Events
T 2/25      Müller, Martin. "The mega-event syndrome: Why so much goes wrong in
            mega-event planning and what to do about it." Journal of the American
            Planning Association 81, no. 1 (2015): 6-17.
            Boyle, Philip, and Kevin D. Haggerty. "Spectacular security: Mega-events and
            the security complex." International Political Sociology 3, no. 3 (2009): 257-
            274.
            Recommended: McGillivray, David. "Sport events, space and the ‘Live City’."
            Cities 85 (2019): 196-202.
            “Hosting the Olympic Games in Developed Countries: Debating Human Rights
            and the Ideals of Sport,” in The Ideals of Global Sport: From Peace to Human
            Rights, ed. Barbara J. Keys (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
            2019), 156-177.
Th 2/27     Discuss submissions                                                                   Due
                                                                                                  Op-Ed
Part II: DESIGN
Week 7: Architecture
T 3/3       Sklair, Leslie. The Icon Project: Architecture, cities, and capitalist globalization.
            Oxford University Press, 2017. (Select chapters)
Th 3/5      Horne, John. "Architects, stadia and sport spectacles: Notes on the role of
            architects in the building of sport stadia and making of world-class cities."
            International Review for the Sociology of Sport 46, no. 2 (2011): 205-227.
            Ahlfeldt, Gabriel, and Wolfgang Maennig. "Stadium architecture and urban
            development from the perspective of urban economics." International journal
            of urban and regional research 34, no. 3 (2010): 629-646.
            Recommended: Bryson, John M., and Barbara C. Crosby. "Policy planning and
            the design and use of forums, arenas, and courts." Environment and Planning
            B: Planning and Design 20, no. 2 (1993): 175-194.


Week 8: Sustainability
T 3/10    Kellison, Timothy B., Sylvia Trendafilova, and Brian P. McCullough.             PDP
          "Considering the social impact of sustainable stadium design." International    proposal
          Journal of Event Management Research 10, no. 1 (2015): 63-83.                   due
          Select readings of the Mercedes-Benz Stadium, the “Most Sustainable Sports
          Venue in the World.”
Th 3/12   Boykoff, Jules. Green Games: The Olympics, Sustainability, and Rio 2016,” in    Guest
          Rio 2016: Olympic Myths, Hard Realities, ed. Andrew Zimbalist (Washington,      Speaker
          D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2017), 179-205.
          Recommended: Kellison, Timothy B., and Sungil Hong. "The adoption and
          diffusion of pro-environmental stadium design." European Sport
          Management Quarterly 15, no. 2 (2015): 249-269.
          Kellison, Timothy B., and Yu Kyoum Kim. "Marketing pro-environmental
          venues in professional sport: Planting seeds of change among existing and
          prospective consumers." Journal of sport management 28, no. 1 (2014): 34-
          48.
          Trendafilova, Sylvia, Jeffrey Graham, and James Bemiller. "Sustainability and
          the Olympics: The case of the 2016 Rio Summer Games." J. Sustain. Educ 16
          (2018): 1-22.
SPRING BREAK- No Class on M 3/17 and W 3/19
Week 9: The Field
T 3/24    Cleary, Richard. "The architecture of sports." Places Journal (2017).
          Caudwell, Jayne. "Queering the field? The complexities of sexuality within a
          lesbian-identified football team in England." Gender, Place & Culture 14, no. 2
          (2007): 183-196.
Th 3/26   Moody Arena                                                                     Walking
                                                                                          tour
Week 10: Multi-Function
T 3/31    Geiger, David H., and David M. Campbell. "Multi-purpose stadium." U.S.
          Patent 5,103,600, issued April 14, 1992.
          Spedden, Zach. https://footballstadiumdigest.com/2017/05/the-rise-and-fall-
          of-the-multi-purpose-stadium/.
          Daugeliene, Ala, Rasa Apanaviciene, and Birute Kuneviciute. "Facility
          Management Model for a Multi-Functional Sports and Entertainment Arena."
          In ICCREM 2013: Construction and Operation in the Context of Sustainability,
          pp. 1278-1290. 2013.
          Lee, Christopher. https://populous.com/holy-grail-sports-stadium-design-
          truly-multi-use-venue.
          Inside Edition. “Inside New Orleans’ Superdome Days After Hurricane
          Katrina,” https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vAQy6-x4Z0w


            Recommended: Moore, Jack. “Throwback Thursday: Cincinnati's Riverfront
            Stadium And The Era Of Multipurpose Mistakes.”
            https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/nzpxvg/throwback-thursday-cincinnatis-
            riverfront-stadium-and-the-era-of-multipurpose-mistakes
            Spedden, Zach. The Rise and Fall of the Multi-Purpose Stadium.
            https://footballstadiumdigest.com/2017/05/the-rise-and-fall-of-the-multi-
            purpose-stadium/
Th 4/2      No class. Please work on PDPs.
Week 11: Abandonment
T 4/7       Wergeland, Even Smith. "When Icons Crumble—The Troubled Legacy of           PDP
            Olympic Design." Journal of Design History 25, no. 3 (2012): 304-318.       check-in
            Humphreys, Brad R., and Adam Nowak. "Professional sports facilities, teams
            and property values: Evidence from NBA team departures." Regional Science
            and Urban Economics 66 (2017): 39-51.
            Rhoden, William. “Warriors aren’t leaving Oakland, they are abandoning fans
            and the city.” https://theundefeated.com/features/warriors-arent-leaving-
            oakland-they-are-abandoning-fans-and-the-city/
            30 for 30 Shorts: I Am Yup'ik
            https://www.espn.com/video/clip/_/id/14832535
Th 4/9      Hiller, Harry H. "Post-event outcomes and the post-modern turn: The
            Olympics and urban transformations." European sport management quarterly
            6, no. 4 (2006): 317-332.
            Kassens-Noor, Eva, Christopher Gaffney, Joe Messina, and Eric Phillips.
            "Olympic transport legacies: Rio de Janeiro’s bus rapid transit system."
            Journal of Planning Education and Research 38, no. 1 (2018): 13-24.
            “After the Crowds Leave,”
            https://architizer.com/blog/inspiration/stories/repurpose-abadoned-
            stadiums/.
            “From stadium to … what?”
            https://www.si.com/extra-mustard/2014/11/05/stadium-what-7-best-
            repurposed-stadiums
            Kasimati, Evangelia. "Post Olympic use of the Olympic venues: the case of
            Greece." Athens Journal of Sports 2, no. 3 (2015): 167-184.
            https://www.cbsnews.com/pictures/abandoned-stadiums-and-crumbling-
            arenas/12/
Park III: Communities
Week 12: Fans


T 4/14    Taver, Erin. "The I in team: sports fandom and the reproduction of identity."
          (2019).
          Robinson, Zandria. https://newsouthnegress.com/tricksgettingwhipped/
          The Fab Five (Film)
Th 4/16   Zirin, Dave. How the Mike Brown killing changes US sport [online]. Green Left
          Weekly, No. 1065, 18 Aug 2015: 22.
          Walton-Fisette, Theresa. "Metaphorically ‘Taking a Knee’: Pausing, Reflecting,
          Acting." Sociology of Sport Journal 35, no. 4 (2018): 293-300.
          Carrington, Ben. “Post/Colonial Theory and Sport.” Routledge Handbook of
          the Sociology of Sport (2015): 105-115.
          Lawrence, Stefan, and Christian Davis. "Fans for diversity? A Critical Race
          Theory analysis of Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) supporters’
          experiences of football fandom." International Journal of Sport Policy and
          Politics 11, no. 4 (2019): 701-713.
Week 13: Players & Coaches
T 4/21    Boykoff, Jules, and Ben Carrington. "Sporting dissent: Colin Kaepernick, NFL
          activism, and media framing contests." International Review for the Sociology
          of Sport (2019).
          Coombs, Danielle Sarver, and David Cassilo. "Athletes and/or activists: LeBron
          James and Black lives matter." Journal of Sport and Social Issues 41, no. 5
          (2017): 425-444.
          Darnell, Simon C., and Rob Millington. "Social justice, sport, and sociology: A
          position statement." Quest 71, no. 2 (2019): 175-187.
Th 4/23   Brown, Letisha Engracia Cardoso. "Post-colonial feminism, black feminism and
          sport." In The Palgrave handbook of feminism and sport, leisure and physical
          education, pp. 479-495. Palgrave Macmillan, London, 2018.
          Carter-Francique, Akilah R., and Joyce Olushola. "Women coaches of color:
          Examining the effects of intersectionality." In Women in sports coaching, pp.
          81-94. Routledge, 2016.
          Spears, Marc. https://theundefeated.com/features/the-undefeated-
          interview-michele-roberts/.
          Ratna, Aarti. "Black women, Black voices: The contribution of a Spivakian and
          Black feminist analysis to studies of sport and leisure." In Sport, Leisure and
          Social Justice, pp. 153-167. Routledge, 2017.
          Van Ingen, Cathy. "Geographies of gender, sexuality and race: Reframing the
          focus on space in sport sociology." International Review for the Sociology of
          Sport 38, no. 2 (2003): 201-216.


          Boykoff, Jules, and Pete Fussey. "London's shadow legacies: security and
          activism at the 2012 Olympics." Contemporary social science 9, no. 2 (2014):
          253-270.
          Thompason, Derek. American Meritocracy Is Killing Youth Sports
Week 14: Transnationalism
T 4/28    Engh, Mari Haugaa, Federico Settler, and Sine Agergaard. "‘The ball and the
          rhythm in her blood’: Racialised imaginaries and football migration from
          Nigeria to Scandinavia." Ethnicities 17, no. 1 (2017): 66-84.
          Pescador, Juan Javier. "¡Vamos Taximaroa! Mexican/Chicano soccer
          associations and transnational/translocal communities, 1967–2002." Latino
          Studies 2, no. 3 (2004): 352-376.
Th 4/30   Boykoff, Jules. NOlympians: Inside the Fight Against Capitalist Mega-Sports in
          Los Angeles, Tokyo and Beyond (Select Chapters)
          Thompson, Derek.
          https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2018/11/income-inequality-
          explains-decline-youth-sports/574975/
          Jensen, Ric, and Jason Sosa. "The importance of building positive relationships
          between Hispanic audiences and Major League Soccer franchises: a case
          study of the public relations challenges facing Houston 1836." Soccer &
          Society 9, no. 4 (2008): 477-490.
          Lin, Alex R., Cecilia Menjívar, Andrea Vest Ettekal, Sandra D. Simpkins, Erin R.
          Gaskin, and Annelise Pesch. "“They will post a law about playing soccer” and
          other ethnic/racial microaggressions in organized activities experienced by
          Mexican-origin families." Journal of Adolescent Research 31, no. 5 (2016):
          557-581.
Week 15: Looking Ahead
5/5       Burdsey, D., Carter, T., & Doidge, M. (2018). Something has got to be done
          about this: Transforming Sport, Selves, and Scholarship. In T. Carter, D.
          Burdsey, & M. Doidge (Eds.), Transforming Sport: Knowledges, Practices and
          Structures Abingdon: Routledge.
          Boykoff, Jules. “End Games” in NOlympians: Inside the Fight Against Capitalist
          Mega-Sports in Los Angeles, Tokyo and Beyond
5/7       Student Presentations                                                            Final
                                                                                           project
                                                                                           due


CLASSROOM POLICIES
Late Work: Late work will be handled on a case-by-case basis. Generally, work submitted after a
deadline will receive a half-letter grade deduction for every day that it is past due. Exceptions include
instances where students are away for a UT-sponsored activity, the due date conflicts with a religious
observance, or due to a chronic, documented illness or emergency. Please communicate with me if you
are having problems keeping to the schedule. It is better to talk through problems than ignore them.
Excused Absence: Students must attend class. More than two unexcused absences will lower your
participation grade. The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let me know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check
with me for details or arrangements.
Email: I will use Canvas to email the class. Please check your email at least once a day to ensure that you
did not miss any notices or updates.
Electronics: Laptop/tablet use in class is not recommended. Using your laptop or tablet to take notes
often leads to checking email and social media or browsing the internet. This hinders your learning and
has also been shown to distract those around you. Therefore, I highly recommend taking notes on
paper. Also, please keep your cell phones on silent and put away in your bag or pocket. Lastly, no
portion of this course may be audio or video recorded.
Changes to the Syllabus: This is a new course in the SOA. Therefore, based on student interests, slight
changes will be made in the course of the semester.
Basic Needs: Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and believes this may
affect their performance in the course is urged to contact the Dean of Students for support. Furthermore,
please notify me if you are comfortable in doing so. This will enable me to provide any resources that I
may possess.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be
found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php Q Drop
Policy If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop


Personal Pronouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster,
and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of this preference early in
the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible.
I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for
Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus,
go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal. Student Emergency Services:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/


Food Pantry & Career Clothes Closet
Student Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of Students has launched UT Out
post (UA9 Building, 2609 University Ave; ring bell for service) to support students on our campus that is
equipped with a food pantry, and a career clothes closet to ensure every Longhorn has access to
professional clothes for job and internship interviews. Emergencies and financial hardships can interfere
with student success beyond the classroom, and this program will serve as an additional resource for
students. Learn more: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
          become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512- 471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
          first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
          found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY


University of Texas Honor Code
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
Each student is expected to abide by the University’s Honor Code (see above). Any work submitted by
you in this course for academic credit will be your own work. For the purposes of this course,
collaboration is allowed in presentations and written assignments that are a product of working in
groups. However, what you submit is your own work, written in your own words, and will be evaluated
in relation to you only.
OTHER NOTICES AND POLICIES
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
You should be familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. You are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that
you check your e-mail daily (and at a minimum twice a week). The complete text of this policy and
instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or see:
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
