                            Advertising and Public Relations Law and Ethics
                                     ADV 353 (72735)/ PR 353 (72850)
                                               Summer II 2019
Instructor: Tim Scott
Email: timscott@utexas.edu -- Please use this instead of Canvas
Office: BMC 4.358 (Belo Building, 4th floor)
Online Office Hours: Tuesday 1030am – 12pm / or by appointment
Phone: 832-818-6373 (Cell)
Skype: HelloTimScott
Teaching Assistant: Siyan Li
Email: siyan_li@utexas.edu -- Please use this instead of Canvas
Office: BMC 4th floor cubicles (Belo Building)
Online Office Hours: Thursday 1030am – 12pm / or by appointment
Phone: 512-264-4407 (Cell)
Skype: siyan li
COURSE DESCRIPTION: Many of the courses offered in advertising focus on methods for developing
persuasive communication. This class has a different purpose and examines the ethical issues related to
the practice of advertising and marketing communications. Are some practices in advertising or public
relations unethical? How can we recognize, define, assess, reprimand and prevent unethical practices?
What impact do these acts have on individuals, the industry and society? Toward answering these
questions we will consider ethical principles, industry codes, legal and regulatory issues, and larger
macro societal issues related to the institution and practice of advertising and public relations. The goal is
to raise important questions and issues and to help students learn how to critically think and evaluate
them.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
    1. Identify ethical issues in advertising and public relations by exploring beliefs about human nature,
        philosophical perspectives, ethical principles, and industry ethical codes.
    2. Deconstruct the complex interactions among advertising/public relations and individual,
        economic, legal, and social issues impacting ethical assessments of advertising.
    3. Think creatively to solve ethical problems facing the advertising industry.]
    4. Recognize how ethical issues impact the advertising and public relations industries, and you, as
        both an advertising/public relations professional and as a consumer.
    5. Articulate a sense of your personal and professional ethical beliefs and behavior.


COURSE TOPICS
Personal Ethics, Heuristics, and Moral Philosophy: Topics include an examination of personal values,
individual ethical perspectives, moral philosophy, human heuristics and behaviors, personal values, moral
myopia and moral muteness.
The Legal Environment of Advertising and Public Relations: Topics include an examination of
commercial speech and the First Amendment, the FTC, false advertising, puffery, copyright, and
trademark law.
Advertising/Public Relations & Society: Topics focus on the aggregate effects of advertising and public
relations and their intended and unintended consequences such as the obesity crisis, creating and/or
reinforcing problematic stereotypes, advertising to vulnerable populations, and privacy issues.
Required Reading
    • Controversies in Contemporary Advertising, 2nd edition, 2014, by Kim Sheehan, ISBN- 13:978-
        1452261072, available from the University Co-op
Recommended Reading
    • Advertising & Marketing Law: Cases and Materials, 2nd edition, 2014, by Rebecca Tushnet and
        Eric Goldman can be purchased for $11.50 from the following website: https://gum.co/vnCkL
    • Additional assigned readings posted on Canvas.
NOTE: Readings not in your textbook (Sheehan 2014, Tustnet and Goldman 2014) can be found on
Canvas.
COURSE METHOD
This five- week course is web-based and asynchronous, meaning that you do not have to be online during
the assign course time. You can access the online lectures when it is convenient for you. The course is
primarily self-directed. You will proceed through weekly modules. The modules are structured on a
weekly basis. You must finish one before moving on to the next.
Each week there is a participation requirement on your assigned FB page, as well as a written
individual assignment due each week. You can complete the work at your own pace and convenience
throughout the week as long as the work is submitted by the due date and time. No late work will be
accepted. As some of you may not be in the country please double check time zones and due dates.
Additionally, do not wait until the last minute to turn in assignments or make posts – please account for
possible technology issues that could cause a delay.


COURSE CONTENT
The course will consist of online lectures, weekly group participation through your assigned FB Page,
weekly individual written assignments, and a final term individual research paper. Each is described in
more detail below. Note: Google Chrome is the recommended browser for Canvas.
Online Lectures: Each module is topical and will include a series of short recorded lecture(s) that will be
posted online. The lectures cover the assigned reading, related topics, and are designed to supplement the
assigned readings. For each lecture I will prepare a brief outline and/or PPT slide deck. The files will be
available on Canvas. For each lecture you will receive a URL and the password to enter the lecture,
which can be found in the weekly module. Lectures for each module will be posted by Noon Monday
CST each week. Although you are not required to watch the lectures, you are expected to
incorporate content from readings, lectures, and group participation into your weekly assignments
and term paper.
Important: To view online lectures Flash must be enabled, and the adobe connect website needs to
be on the “good” page. Here is a link to ensure Adobe Connect will work with your browser:
https://ut.service-now.com/utss/KAhome.do?number=KB0017037
Facebook Group Participation: You will be assigned to Facebook(FB) Participation Group page with
9-10 of your classmates. The goal of the FB Participation Group is to provide you with a structure to
engage in thoughtful dialogue with your peers. Rather than attempting to create meaningful online
discussion with the entire class (60+ students), you will engage with a small group of your peers for more
thought-provoking discussion.
You are expected to participate in meaningful, relevant, targeted discussion in your group.
You can find your assigned FB Participation Group and corresponding FB Page URL in the module on
Canvas titled “Facebook Participation Group Information.” Please note that this is a closed group you
will need to ask to join the group.
The discussion board begins each Monday morning at 8 AM and concludes the following Sunday at
11:59 PM CST. Throughout the week there are deadlines that you must meet as either the participation
manager 1or 2 or a group participant, which are explained below.
Participation Manager 1 & 2 Responsibilities: Please check the module “FB Participation Group” to
find what week you are assigned Participation Manager 1 or 2 (you will only be assigned one role during
the course).
For each FB participation group each week there will be 2 Participation Managers: Participation Manager
1 and Participation Manager 2.


Each Sunday evening I will post a participation prompt that can be used to help the Participation
Managers brainstorm ideas for engaging posts.
Participation Manager 1 is responsible for posting an initial response to my prompt Monday by Noon
CST. Participation Manager 1 is also responsible for leading subsequent discussion through Wednesday
at Noon CST. This includes replying to your group members’ posts to generate a thoughtful discussion by
asking probing questions as well as clarifying assumptions in posts made by peers. Your last required
post during the week that you are assigned Participation Manager 1 is due by Wednesday at Noon CST.
Participation Manager 2 (same week) is responsible for posting a new response to my prompt on
Wednesday of his or her assigned week by Wednesday at 1159 PM CST. This response can contain some
overlapping themes and concepts as the post by Participation Manager 1, but should be unique enough
that it can be considered distinct from the post by Participation Manager 1.
Additionally, Participation Manager 2 is responsible for leading subsequent discussion through Friday at
1159 PM CST. This includes replying to your group members’ posts to generate a thoughtful discussion
by asking probing questions as well as clarifying assumptions in peer posts. Your last required post
during the week that you are assigned Participation Manager 2 is due by Friday at 1159 PM CST .
Important: Both Participation Manager 1 and 2 response’s to my prompt should relate to the
week/module’s overarching theme, assigned readings and can incorporate current events and popular
press articles (i.e., Ad Age, Ad Week, WSJ). The posts should integrate course concepts from assigned
readings and lectures. This means you must read ahead! The topic should be thorough, thought-
provoking, and stimulate interesting conversation. This assignment is worth 25 points so take it
seriously!
General Participation: On the week you are not assigned the role of Participation Manager you are
responsible for posting a minimum of 2 posts during the week. The first post should be posted no later
than Tuesday at Noon CST and the second post no later than Thursday at Noon CST. Reminder: This
is the minimum amount of work for this assignment (thus, not A- level). It is recommended that you are
an active participator throughout the week.
Participation comments should reflect critical thinking and analysis of the assigned reading, current
events, and your own life experiences. These deadlines will allow the Participation Manager adequate
time to meet his or her deadlines. Your comments should reference online lectures, assigned reading,
additional articles that you find, current/past events, and life experiences. Please see handout in Canvas
on Tips for Participation Discussion.
Participation Conclusion Assignment: During a week that you are not assigned Participation Manager
you will be assigned to write up a participation conclusion that summarizes the conversation
throughout the week and ties everything back to the core course concepts from your lectures, assigned
readings, outside reading, personal experience, etc. The conclusion can include your opinion on the
topic(s), but should be considered more of a critical analysis of the weeks discussion rather than an
opinion piece of your peers’ posts, comments, and examples. This is due on Sunday at 1159 PM CST
on your assigned week. Please submit this assignment on Canvas as a file upload. It is recommended
that this assignment be roughly 1 page single-spaced.


Important: An A-level assignment will not just regurgitate what your classmates wrote throughout the
week – you are expected to apply critical course concepts into your conclusion. Please see the rubric on
Canvas.
FB Bio: You are required to post a short written bio introducing yourself to your FB group. You can find
your assigned FB group information in the folder on Canvas titled “Participation Facebook Group
Assignment - Rubric and Examples.” The bio should be posted by Friday July 19th by 11:59 PM CST.
Please feel free to comment on your group members’ bios. I will also read and comment on your bios, as
well as I will also be posting my bio post to each group.
Video Bio: You are required to post a short bio introducing yourself to our teaching assistant and
me. This Bio should be posted to canvas by Friday July 19th by 11:59 PM CST. You will need to
post your video as a response to the Intro video that I post of myself.
Individual Written Assignments: You will complete a total of four written individual assignments.
These assignments are expected to be your individual work and will be checked for plagiarism through
Turn It In. Assignments will be posted on Canvas each Monday by 8 AM CST and are due Friday at
11:59 PM CST. You will not have an individual written assignment on Week 5. This time should be
spent on your research paper. No late work is accepted.
Research Paper: You will be required to write a 6-8 single-spaced research paper on a course- related
topic of your choice. The format will be that of a research report and you are expected to seek out
academic sources and relevant popular press articles (i.e., WSJ, AdAge). The purpose of the assignment
is to become an expert on your chosen topic. To get ideas of potential topics, it will be helpful to look
through the course schedule and table of contents in the Controversies of Contemporary Advertising
textbook. In addition to those topics, we will be covering the following topics related to advertising law:
deceptive advertising, copyright law, and trademark law.
You will be required to submit a research topic proposal by Thursday August 1tst at 11:59 PM.
There will be more information on Canvas. You are welcome to submit earlier to me via email.
Your final paper is due on Monday August 19th at 11:59 PM.


COURSE ASSESSMENT
Assessment Tool                                                    Points
Bio                                                                5
Participation Manager                                              25
Participation Conclusion Assignment                                30
Discussion Participant (4 weeks, 10 points each per week)          40
Written Individual Assignments (total of 4, 25 points each)        100
Research Paper                                                     100
Total                                                              300
COURSE GRADING SCALE
A               93-100
A-              90-92.9
B+              87-89.9
B               83-86.9
B-              80-82.9
C+              77-79.9
C               73-76.9
C-              70-72.9
D+              67-69.9
D               63-66.9
D-              60-62.9
F               < 60
Some Words on Grading:
    •   When we grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on
        the quality of the work and the accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your
        answers. You do not start with 100 points and then lose them based on mistakes
        you might make. Your final points represent the total points earned for that
        assignment, not the number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions
    •   I will round up percentage points; if you earn an 89.6% that translates into an A-.
    •   NOTE: All due dates refer to Central Daylight Time (CDT). If you are in another
        time zone, you are responsible for adjusting the time so that you are logging in to
        submit assignments and engage in the Discussion board at the correct time.
        Missing a deadline as a result of confusion about time zone does not count as
        an acceptable excuse.


Course Organization, Policies, and Standards
    •   Grades will be posted to the Canvas grade book continually throughout the
        term. It is your responsibility to check your grades. Assignment feedback will
        be electronically. All inquiries about grades must be in writing to the TA AND
        myself within 7 days of the grade being posted.
    •   Everything produced for this class is to be your original work. Enlisting aid
        from anyone outside the class is considered a breach of UT’s Standard of
        Academic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
    •   All assignments should be typed. Before uploading the assignment please be
        sure to label it effectively and include your last name and EID in the
        document. Grammar, spelling, and style errors will significantly reduce an
        assignment score. If you need help with writing, please use the
        undergraduate writing center.
    •   Announcements about the class will be distributed via the Canvas
        announcement and email systems. You are expected to check the
        announcement system and email multiple times per day and especially
        before class. Note that the Canvas announcement system is different than
        your UT email.
    •   If you have any technical troubles at all using the Canvas website you can
        view tutorials and contact live support via this webpage:
        http://canvas.utexas.edu. Andy and I will do our best to answer questions,
        but we are not Canvas experts. Having “technical problems” will not excuse
        you from late or missing assignments, so do not wait until the last minute to
        upload assignments. Please be proactive and ensure you know how to use
        the system well before assignments are due.
MY RESPONSIBILITIES:
I will make myself readily available if you have questions, concerns or just want to chat
about the material. The best ways to get a hold of me is to Skype during office hours or
make an appointment to Skype or drop by my office – I am in Austin and would be happy
to meet with you!
I recognize that individuals learn in different ways and will use teaching methods that
appeal to different learning preferences. As far as possible and as appropriate, lectures
will draw on multiple media formats, including video, still images and audio, in addition
to written texts.
STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
Email: As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate in academia and industry,
you must learn to use it appropriately. Keep your emails formal; write professionally, as
if you are writing to your boss at work, not to your friend.


The TA is your first point of contact for issues pertaining to discussion board and
written assignment grades; always email him first with your queries. I am your
contact for questions pertaining to lectures, course material, and your final research
paper.
The TA and I will try to return your e-mail within 24 hours of receiving it on Monday
through Friday, or by Monday evening if we receive it on the weekend. E-mail is an
excellent way to communicate if done appropriately.
Canvas: You must check the course website regularly.
UT Class Related Policies
More information can be found at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/index.html
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy: The Texas Education Code specifies that an
institution of higher education shall excuse a student from attending classes or other
required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day,
including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this
subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a
reasonable time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements
can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. Please
notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day.
Documented Disability Statement: Any student with a documented disability who
requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
accessible (e.g. instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for
proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations
for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of
accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
(video phone) of reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as
cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act
designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty


also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of
the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for
the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the ADV/PR 353
University. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
Drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops
for academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall
2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate
student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student
has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin
campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm
activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself
with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students
requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Additional
information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a
service that provides The University of Texas at Austin’s faculty, students and staff an
opportunity to discuss their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). An individual can either call the line at 512-232-5050
or report their concerns using the online submission form available at
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
