Introduction to                                      TEACHING TEAM + OFFICE HOURS
Ancient Rome                                          INSTRUCTOR
                                                      Jane Millar ​(she/her/hers)
                                                                                             OFFICE HOURS
                                                      jane.millar@utexas.edu                 Thurs. 1-3pm
Summer 2020
                                                      TEACHING ASSISTANTS
Syllabus (CC302, Unique: 79040)                       John Anderson ​(he/him/his)            Mon. 9-11am
                                                      johnanderson@utexas.edu
                                                      Katherine Handloser ​(she/her/hers)    Fri. 11am-1pm
                                                      khandloser@utexas.edu
                                                      Samantha Meyer ​(she/her/hers)
                                                      sm.meyer@utexas.edu                    Wed. 9-11am
                                                      Zoé Thomas ​(she/her/hers)
                                                      zethomas@utexas.edu                    Tues. 11am-1pm
                                                      PRESENTER & DESIGNER                   by email appt.
                                                      Dr. Steve Lundy ​(he/him/his)
                                                      steven.lundy@utexas.edu
                                                                         COURSE EMAIL:
                                                                 onlinecc302ta@austin.utexas.edu
REQUIRED COURSE MATERIALS
   ●  Greg Woolf, ​Rome: An Empire’s Story           SYLLABUS CONTENTS
      (Oxford University Press, 2013)
          ○ This course text is available through       1.   Course description
                                                               1.1.   A note on challenging course material
              all major book retailers and online
                                                       2.    Contacting the teaching team
              through ​UT Libraries                           2.1.    Announcements from the teaching
          ○ All other course readings will be                         team
              made available within Canvas                   2.2.     How and when to contact us
   ●  Reliable access to high speed Internet and a     3.    Assessment
      laptop, tablet, or phone with access to our             3.1.    Assessment activities and policies
                                                             3.2.     Assessment activity details
      course platforms (more information under               3.3.     Grade reporting
      section 6.3.)                                          3.4.     Late work policy
   ●  Canvas​: You must have an email account                3.5.     Final grade allocations
      connected to Canvas, and you are                 4.    Provisional dates
      responsible for any announcements posted         5.    Etiquette
                                                       6.    Course policies
      on Canvas.
                                                              6.1.    Academic honesty
                                                             6.2.     Add/drop policies
                                                             6.3.     Technical requirements
                                                             6.4.     Students with disabilities
                                                             6.5.     Religious holidays
                                                       7.    Additional resources
                                                   1                        79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


    1. COURSE DESCRIPTION
Ancient Rome has long been a source of inspiration for artistic, architectural, and literary creativity,
political thought and military strategy, philosophical and religious beliefs, and social norms across the
globe. So entrenched is its influence that we often fail to see how deeply indebted the Americas,
Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East are to this ancient past. By some estimates, for instance,
nearly 60% of English vocabulary is Latin—the language of the Romans. Moreover, Roman political and
social institutions, as well as their artistic and architectural styles, serve as a basis and model for many
modern cultures, including our own.
This introductory-level online course covers the cultural and political history of Ancient Rome,
beginning with the mytho-prehistory of the city’s origins in the Iron Age (c. 800 BCE); the rise of the city
from a rural town to an imperial capital under Augustus; the rule of emperors in the 1​st​ and 2​nd​ century
CE; and ending with the crisis of the 3​rd​ century CE and the reign of Constantine the Great. Students
will have the opportunity to learn about Rome’s evolution from a small, hilltop settlement to the head of
a world empire, followed by the collapse of Rome as an imperial power in western Europe -- and its
long afterlife in the East. We will also examine Rome’s colonial and imperial interactions with foreign
cultures which helped shape “Roman” identity and consider its cultural legacy up to the present day.
By the end of the course, students will be able to:
    ● Understand and discuss major topics in the study of ancient Rome, including imperialism, the
        military, religion and mythology, the rise of Christianity, and the fall of Rome
    ● Describe the basic framework for the periodization of Roman history and discuss the causes
        and consequences of major events in Roman history
    ● Understand the experiences of non-elite and often marginalized members of Roman society,
        including women, slaves and freedmen, provincials, and Christians
    ● Engage with and analyze critically ancient literature (in translation) and material culture that
        inform us about Roman culture
    ● Interpret and criticize ways we represent and describe the Romans in the modern period, both
        in academic scholarship and in pop-culture
The course is made up of textbook readings, primary source readings, and highly interactive,
multimedia content modules. The beginning of each week we will focus on a chronological period in
Roman history, as well as a specific social group within Roman society. At the end of the week, you will
engage with and interpret primary and secondary sources where you can “choose your own
adventure” from a selection of short assignments called case studies.
There are no prerequisites for this course. This course fulfills the​ Global Cultures ​and​ Visual and
Performing Arts ​requirements​.​ It ​addresses the following four core objectives established by the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork,
and social responsibility.
                                                         2                       79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


        1.1 A note on challenging course material
Roman history and culture contains many stories depicting violence, including sexual violence, warfare
and civil violence, and systemic oppression and brutalization. Roman art and literature (as well as
modern representations of Roman material) also contain frequent references to human sexuality,
including depictions of nudity. Many students understandably have concerns about these aspects of
courses, and should be forewarned that these aspects will be a regular part of course materials.
Students will not be required to directly analyze, write about, or participate in discussions pertaining to
these episodes as part of their grade, but they may be required to demonstrate an awareness of these
episodes as part of the broader inquiry of the course. ​We have done our best to provide content
warnings for certain material, and in our first module we will provide more information on opting
out of potentially triggering material​. Students who do wish to discuss these episodes should do so in
full awareness of the course etiquette policy, displaying respect and sensitivity towards other course
participants at all times.
Students with concerns related to these topics may wish and are encouraged to consult the following
resources:
     ●  UT Counselling and Mental Health Center: ​https://cmhc.utexas.edu
     ●  Voices Against Violence: ​https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/index.html
     ●  SAFE (Stop Abuse For Everyone) Austin: ​http://www.safeaustin.org
     ●  Please also see the resources on the last page of this syllabus, the Canvas orientation module,
        and contact the instructor with any other questions or concerns.
     2. CONTACTING THE TEACHING TEAM
        2.1 Announcements from the teaching team
This course uses several platforms (Canvas, Piazza, emails, etc.) to communicate information to
students. All key information (for example—relating to assignments, deadlines, exams, etc.) will be sent
through Canvas announcements. ​ Students are responsible for information in these announcements.
We recommend that you turn on notifications for them.
        2.2 How and when to contact us
     ❏ Have a question that pertains to you individually? Need to communicate an urgent or
        sensitive matter? Need to ask about a grade?
        Email the teaching team at ​onlinecc302ta@austin.utexas.edu​.​ We will check email for this
        course during designated email hours (M-F, 8am-5pm). Under normal circumstances, we will
        respond within 24 hours to emails that are received during those times. Emails sent on weekend
        days and holidays may not receive an answer until Monday at the earliest. We will do our best to
        be responsive to emails concerning urgent matters. You are also encouraged to come to office
        hours via Zoom.
                                                    3                        79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


❏ Have a general or logistical question ​(e.g. what’s on the exam, when is the homework due,
   etc.)​?
       1. First, make sure you've read the ​syllabus.​ There's a lot of key information in here.
       2. Then, check the​ Canvas announcements and Piazza.​ Someone may have already
           answered your question.
       3. If you still have a question, post on ​Piazza​.
   If your question can be answered by the syllabus, Canvas, etc., we will direct you back to
   that resource.
❏ Is there a tech issue?
   Since this is a fully online course, technology-related issues can sometimes be a problem. We
   invite students who are affected by technology-related issues to first report them to the Canvas
   techs (who can be reached from the course homepage). If problems persist, students can also
   post queries on Piazza, and we will create a discussion thread for troubleshooting the issue. If
   these issues affect grade reporting, students should contact the teaching team via email
   directly.
❏ General guidelines about contact with the teaching team and the class:
       ❏ Please ​do not​ use the Canvas messaging system to contact the teaching team. We may
           not receive or read messages sent via Canvas.
       ❏ Zoom office hours are a great resource! ​Office hours are a time we set aside in our
           week just to talk to you. Join any of our Zoom meeting office hours to discuss questions,
           concerns, or just to introduce yourself!
       ❏ Piazza is a great place to address logistical questions, but you can also use it to discuss/
           ask us and other students about course material.
       ❏ Remember that course communications are not casual text messages. ​When you send
           an email, you are expected to be courteous and respectful.​ Please include the
           appropriate greeting (Dear _____,) and make sure to sign your name. This is a good
           habit for the academic and professional world and helps us maintain a collegial
           environment. You may address everyone on the teaching team by our first names (Jane,
           Sammy, Zoé, John, Katherine, Steve, and Joann).
       ❏ If you are unsure on whether the content or the tone of something is appropriate to
           post or send for this class, ask yourself if it would be appropriate in a face-to-face
           classroom setting.
3. ASSESSMENT
   3.1 Assessment activities and policies
   Your course grade is determined by the following assessments:
       ● Two non-cumulative exams (25% total)
              ○ Exam 1 (10%)
                                                  4                      79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


             ○ Exam 2 (15%)
      ●   Review assignments (20%)
      ●   Quizzes (20%)
      ●   Hypothesis and Padlet assignments (15%)
      ●   Case studies (20%)
  3.2 Detailed information on each assessment activity
❏ Exams ​(25% total)
  There will be ​two​ exams that will be administered online. Exams consist of multiple choice
  questions, IDs, and short answer questions. The exams are open-book and open-note, but there
  will be time limits for different sections of the exam, so you should study and prepare
  accordingly. You will be responsible for all material covered in assigned readings, recorded
  lectures, and other class content. Exams are ​not cumulative. ​Prior to each exam, we will release
  a study guide with more detailed information.
          Exam 1:​ ​Monday, June 22
          Exam 2:​ ​Finals period ​(Friday-Saturday, July 10 or 11)
      ● You are expected to take the exam on the designated day unless you have a ​legitimate
          conflict ​such as a documented illness, a conflicting class, etc., in which cases we will
          schedule a make-up exam​. You should let us know about any of these conflicts as
          soon as possible. ​If an emergency conflicts with an exam, contact the instructor
          immediately.
      ● Students with SSD accommodations such as extended test-taking time may also take
          make-up exams. ​You should provide your SSD documentation to the teaching team as
          soon as possible. ​Please see section 6.4 of this syllabus for more information.
❏ Weekly review assignments ​(20%)
  Each week you will complete ​two review assignments​ related to content and topics covered in
  lectures. The first will involve a timeline assignment, in which you will identify and analyze
  important historical events and figures within a chronological framework. In the second,
  students will provide a more freeform critical and/or creative response to the week’s topics.
❏ Quizzes ​(20%)
  In Canvas modules, students will take various quizzes attached to assignments and lecture
  videos. These include regular stand-alone lecture quizzes that synthesize the content from the
  lectures, as well as “instapolls” (questions delivered within the lecture feed). You have two
  attempts at the lecture quizzes, and the average grade will be counted. Your 2 worst quiz
  performances will be dropped.
  Please note that, for reasons of academic integrity, students are not provided with immediate
  feedback for these quizzes until after the deadline for the quiz has passed.
❏ Hypothesis and Padlet assignments ​(15%)
                                                  5                      79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


        As a key component of studying Roman antiquity, we will pay particularly close attention to
        certain texts and images, both ancient or modern. Using the collaborative annotation tool
        Hypothesis (instructions for Hypothesis will be posted on Canvas) and the bulletin board
        platform Padlet, you and your classmates will highlight and analyze particular features of texts
        and images to better understand the Roman world and develop skills in close reading and visual
        analysis. Your grade comes from annotating part of one text each week or posting and
        commenting on one image related to Roman culture. Regardless of which text or image you
        choose for your own contribution, you should read every text and the annotations on
        Hypothesis and view the Padlet contributions by other students.
    ❏ Case studies​ (20%)
        Every week, students will complete TWO out of three short assignments of their choosing,
        related to the literature, material culture, mythology, and religious life of Roman antiquity. In
        these assignments, students will be engaging with and analyzing primary and secondary source
        material. Each assignment will typically consist of a Canvas quiz, introducing them to the
        material and sources, and a brief written analysis of the evidence, either in a discussion group,
        Hypothesis collaboration, or Padlet assignment. These assignments will be due on Saturdays
        each week.
        3.3 Grade reporting
All grades will be reported on the Canvas “Grades” page. Students are personally responsible for
ensuring that their grade reporting is accurate. If there is an error in your grade reporting or calculation,
please contact the teaching team ​via the course email ​(NOT on Canvas messaging or as a comment
on the assignment) at the earliest opportunity.​ We recommend checking to make sure all of your
grades are recorded correctly once a week so that you can be in touch with the teaching team in a
timely manner.
If you are taking this course on a credit/no credit option, you must earn at least a 60 to receive credit
for this course. Final grades are rounded to the closest full point (e.g. a 92.9 becomes a 93).
You are always welcome to discuss your course progress and goals with the teaching team, but please
note the following:
    ❏ We can discuss progress, but any grade predictions are provisional and depend entirely on your
        performance in the class. ​We cannot guarantee or promise a certain score.
    ❏ We will not reconsider grades​ for any reason other than reporting/calculation error.
    ❏ There may be a few class-wide extra credit opportunities. We will NOT offer individual extra
        credit opportunities, so​ please do not ask.
    ❏ If you want to review your Instapolls, you should schedule a Zoom appointment so we can
        efficiently show you your records.
    ❏ University policy and federal privacy laws prevent us from discussing certain grading specifics
        via email, so some grading discussions must take place via Zoom.
                                                       6                       79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


        3.4 Late work policy
Excluding certain kinds of timely assignments (like instapolls) or major testing events (exams,) students
can generally submit work late twice in the semester without penalty, as long as the work is submitted
within 48 hours of the original deadline. Thereafter, late work will be given a zero.
        3.4 Grade allocations
100 - 93: A                           82 - 80: B-                            69-67: D+
92 - 90: A-                           79 - 77: C+                            66 - 63: D
89 - 87: B+                           76 - 73: C                             62- 60: D -
86 - 83: B                            72 - 70: C-                            Below 60: F
    4. PROVISIONAL DATES
Lecture and reading assignments each week will usually be due on​ Thursday nights at 11:59pm.​ Case
studies will usually be due on ​Saturday nights at 11:59pm​.​ ​Review assignments will usually be due
Sunday nights at 11:59 pm.​ The teaching team will announce any occasional deviations from this
schedule. Modules will always be opened before the due date of the preceding module for those who
want to work slightly ahead or who need flexibility in their schedules.
Please review this general overview of​ major course dates​ and mark your calendars now.
 Week/theme                      Historical period
 0 (June 4-7)                    Orientation
 1 (June 8-14): ​Fragments       Rome’s prehistory (c. 800 BCE-275 BCE)
 2 (June 15-21): ​Conflict       The Conquest of the Mediterranean (275 BCE-146 BCE)
 3 (June 22-28): ​Consent        The Collapse of the Republic and the Advent of the Principate (146 BCE-96
                                 CE)
 4 (June 29-July 5): ​Reverence  The High Empire (96 CE-192 CE)
 5 (July 6-8): ​Endings          Collapse and Transformation (192 CE-???)
    5. COURSE ETIQUETTE
As in any other course, students are expected to abide by a code of ​collegial respect and civility
towards their classmates and the teaching team,​ including and especially in posting to any of the
                                                     7                       79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


online teaching platforms (Canvas, Piazza, Hypothesis, Padlet). Again, ​if you are unsure whether the
content or the tone of something is appropriate to post or send for this class, ask yourself if it
would be appropriate in a face-to-face classroom setting.
To encourage this sense of respect, we require you to sign up to Piazza, and on all platforms you must
post either under your full name or an alias you have determined with the teaching team in advance
(you can make non-discussion posts anonymous to your classmates but not to us).
We will also require you to agree to an etiquette policy, stating your willingness to abide by these
standards and awareness of the consequences of their transgression. If you are found to be in violation
of these standards, you will receive a written warning from the instructor. If you continue to violate
these standards, we will ban you from the platform in question (e.g. Piazza), pending a disciplinary
discussion with the instructional team. Further issues will be reported to the relevant authorities (i.e.
Student Judicial Services).
If you have a specific issue with the course, you are free to discuss it privately with the teaching
team over email or in office hours. ​Please see section 2 of this syllabus for more details on contacting
the teaching team.
    6. OTHER POLICIES
        6.1 Academic honesty
As a student at UT, you agree to abide by this honor code: ​“​As a student of The University of Texas at
Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”​
If you feel overwhelmed by the academic honesty policy guidelines outlined below or are unsure about
whether something is academically dishonest, please reach out to the teaching team in office hours.
We take this code seriously, and we want you to be well-equipped to abide by it. ​Acting contrary to
these values is unethical and unfair to the teaching team, to your fellow students, and to yourself.
            ● General policy
        Any student caught cheating or facilitating cheating on any assignment will receive an F in the
        course and immediately be referred to the Dean of Students. In cases where dishonesty is
        strongly suspected, I reserve the right to re-examine the student(s). We will, however, assume
        absolute integrity on your part until shown otherwise. If you are unsure what constitutes
        academic dishonesty, see ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php​. ​It is your
        responsibility to be familiar with the contents of this website and to avoid any behavior that
        might be interpreted as academic dishonesty. ​If you observe others cheating, we request that
        you contact the teaching assistant or instructor.
                                                       8                        79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


     ● Online quizzes and exercises
While taking online quizzes, you​ may not r​ eceive help from others. You ​are permitted to use
your own notes and course materials​, but you are ​not ​permitted to ​copy​ information from
online sources (including course content) and present it as if it were your own work​.
Online courses require means of supporting academic integrity that differ from traditional
courses in order to ensure fairness to all students. This course uses a software system intended
to automatically detect behavior that violates the course rules – for example, collaborating on a
quiz or any graded work with another student in any way not consistent with the syllabus and
UT Austin Academic Integrity Principles. As part of this effort, our system will occasionally result
in students receiving email notifications if any problematic behaviors are detected. These
notifications are intended mainly to remind students of the course code of conduct, and carry no
automatic implications for a student or for their grade in this course. If you receive such an
email, it does NOT mean that you are under any suspicion – it is an indication that the system
has flagged a particular behavior or set of behaviors.​ ​We will only investigate cases where our
system determines that there is considerable evidence that the code of conduct is not being
followed.
     ● Plagiarism
It’s a good idea to familiarize yourself with the University rules governing plagiarism:
(​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php​).
In general, avoid the following mistakes:
     ● copying word-for-word (or “verbatim”) any amount of material from the textbook, Canvas
         instructional material, or any other source (e.g. Wikipedia)
     ● failing to acknowledge borrowed material with the appropriate citation (usually
         acceptable in the form ​Author, page number,​ e.g. “Boatwright, p. 32;” more details will be
         provided on relevant assignments)
     ● copying material with a few words or word order changed to avoid charges of verbatim
         copying
     ● unintentional plagiarism, through poor note-taking or forgetfulness
Paraphrasing material is acceptable, but you should cite the material you are paraphrasing. In
general, ​students should express their ideas using their own words and phrasing​. Students
will be contacted in cases of suspected plagiarism; persistent violations will be cause for referral
to the Dean of Students.
If you are concerned about writing assignments, I ​strongly encourage you to use the services
offered by the University Writing Center. The UWC offers 45-minute, one-on-one consultations
with UT students on any piece of writing. You may visit up to three times per assignment. The
consultants are well trained, and the cost of the service is covered in your tuition.
6.2 Add/drop policies
                                                9                      79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


Students adding after the first class day should contact the teaching team as soon as possible to
discuss the possibility of completing any missed assignments. You are responsible for following the
university's official add/drop policies. We cannot accept assignments missed after the twelfth class day.
**UEX students: Please familiarize yourself with the University of Texas Extension School’s official
add/drop policy. Any requests to drop the course will be handled in accordance with these policies.
        6.3 Technical requirements
All students are required to have access to a ​laptop​ or ​desktop computer​, running either ​Windows​ or
macOS​ operating systems. (Tablets, smartphones, and Microsoft Surface devices are not supported.)
Your computer should meet the following requirements:
    ● Modern and up-to-date operating system (macOS or Windows)
    ● Browser: Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox (If using Safari or Firefox, be
        prepared to ​download Chrome​ and use it.)
    ● 5 Mbps internet connection speed (​check your speed here​)
    ● Functional webcam and microphone
    ● Zoom installed and configured
Confirm that your computer is able to stream video by visiting
https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.php
        6.4. Students with disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information contact the Dean of Students at (512)
471-6259 or see h  ​ ttp://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd.​
In order to receive accommodations, you must be registered with the Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD). ​The instructor must have a copy of your accommodations letter in order to
provide accommodations. She is not able or qualified to provide accommodations otherwise.
In order for us to best accommodate you, we ask that you meet with the instructor to discuss your
letter within the first week of class (or within a week of receiving your letter). Services for Students with
Disabilities provides a list of other rights and responsibilities here:
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/rights-and-responsibilities/​. ​We are committed to making
Introduction to Classical Mythology an accessible course, and we respect and value your rights.
        6.5. Religious holidays
We encourage you to observe your religious holidays if you so choose, and we will treat your
traditions with respect. Please abide by the University’s policy below so we can accommodate you.
According to Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code, students shall be excused from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day,
including travel for that purpose. If you will miss class (including exams) to celebrate a religious
                                                       10                       79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


holiday, you must notify us ​AT LEAST 14 days prior to the holiday ​so that we can make arrangements
for you to make up the assignment.
    7. RESOURCES
At UT and in this course, you are held to high academic and professional standards. This should not,
however, come at the expense of your wellbeing. The University offers a variety of free and low-cost
resources to help you through personal, academic, and health-related issues in your life, and many
students don’t take advantage of them because they simply aren’t aware of what’s available.
Any student who has difficulty affording groceries or accessing sufficient food to eat every day, or who
lacks a safe and stable place to live, and believes this may affect their performance in the course, is
urged to contact the Dean of Students for support. Furthermore, please notify the instructor if you are
comfortable doing so. This will enable her to provide any resources that she may possess.
If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
(BCAL) to discuss your concerns by phone. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050
or visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal​.
I encourage you to save or print the next page and put it somewhere where you can access it if you
need it.
  The Mental Health Crisis Line               Available 24/7 — 512-471-CALL (2255)
  Behavioral Concerns Advice Line             512-232-5050 or
  (BCAL)                                      https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line​.
  The Counseling and Mental Health            512-471-3515 or ​https://cmhc.utexas.edu/​.
  Center
  University Health Services                  512-471-4955 or ​https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/
  The 24/7 Nurse Advice Line (free for        512-475-6877
  students)
  Student Emergency Services                  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/​. The fastest
                                              way to get assistance is in person at SSD 4.400.
  Report incidents of bias and/or hate        https://diversity.utexas.edu/ccrt/
  Services for Students with Disabilities     512-471-6259 (phone); 512-410-6644 (videophone); email
                                              ssd@austin.utexas.edu
  Peer and professional support for           http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/advocacysu
  sexual harassment, assault, and             pport.php
  misconduct
                                                     11                      79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS


 Title IX reporting                         https://titleix.utexas.edu/file-a-report
 Advocacy and Survivors’ Emergency          https://cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/vav_advocacy.html
 Fund
 The UT Outpost (student food pantry)       http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.p
                                            hp​. Building UA9.
 Sanger Learning Center (for academic       https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
 support)
 The Ombuds Offices                         512-471-3825 or ​https://ombuds.utexas.edu/student
 International Student and Scholar          https://world.utexas.edu/isss
 Services
 Student Legal Services                     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/lss/
 Gender inclusive restroom locations        http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/gender-inc
                                            lusive-restrooms/​ and on the Inclusive U App.
This list is not comprehensive. More resources can be found at
https://www.utexas.edu/student-resources​.
                                                   12                        79040 Summer 2020 SYLLABUS
