                             University of Texas - Austin
                                 Summer I, 2020
                                PSY F364S 81880
                                 Human Sexuality
                                Dr. Amy M. Meeks
COURSE GOALS
        This course is designed to introduce you to the field of human sexuality. In doing
so, we will discuss various aspects of sexuality and how those aspects interact with
psychological principles. Because this is a survey course, we will not be able to go into
great detail on any of these topics. The goal instead is to cover the main points and
give you a working knowledge that will help you understand human sexuality as a
discipline and as a science. I hope this knowledge will add to your understanding of
how complex and fascinating the human body is and can be. As we walk through this
course together, my hope is that you encounter new ideas and facts, incorporate this
new material into your existing values and beliefs, and emerge at the end of this
semester more aware of human sexuality and its’ impact on our lives. This is an
incredibly rich field that touches us in a myriad of ways.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
---- Four (4) Exams (80% of final course grade)
---- Work completed in Connect (20% of final course grade)
REQUIRED TEXT: Hyde and DeLamater, Understanding Human Sexuality, (14th ed.).
New York: McGraw-Hill. To purchase the book please click on Assignment #1 in
the Canvas site for this course and you will be taken to the publishers’ site where
you will have several options to access the book.
INSTRUCTOR
Dr. Amy M. Meeks: UT email: ammeeks@utexas.edu
                        Office Hours: by appointment


COURSE POLICIES
Academic Integrity Issues
We will adhere to the University Academic Integrity Policy in dealing with academic
issues.
STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
Reading Assignments
We will cover approximately three chapters per week, and you are responsible for all
assigned reading.
Classroom Discussions
Issues in sexuality can be among the most sensitive and personal that we may
encounter in the academic world. Your opinion is valuable, and we want to hear from
you. Listening to new perspectives will facilitate your own learning and that of others.
The following ground rules will aid us in having useful, respectful discussions about
these sensitive topics:
Take responsibility for your own learning in this class.
Speak up if you have a question or do not understand.
Respect all opinions, your own and those of others.
Feel free to disagree with any opinion that is expressed, but only after you fully
understand the other point of view.
Derogatory comments or personal attacks are not acceptable.
Agree that we may disagree.
Take risks by sharing feelings and opinions but please leave what others say in the
classroom. In other words, please do not use their words against them outside of class.
If, during this course, personal issues are raised that you would like to discuss with a
counselor, please contact the University Counseling Center. I am willing to help you
find the right resources for you and your situation.
SPECIAL STUDENTS
If you are a student with a disability who will require an accommodation(s) to participate
in this course, please contact me as soon as possible. You will be asked to provide
documentation from the office of Services for Students with Disabilities.


COURSE GRADES
Your grade in this course will be the result of four (4) examinations, the work you
complete on Connect, and any extra credit points you accumulate.
All exams must be taken on the day they are given. There are no exceptions to
this requirement. If you miss an exam on the day it is given, you will receive a
zero (0) for that exam.
No exam scores are dropped.
The grading scale will be as follows:
                                            A…94 to 100,        A-…90 to 93.99
                   B+…87 to 89.99          B…84 to 86.99,       B-…80 to 83.99
                   C+…77 to 79.99          C…74 to 76.99        C-…70 to 73.99
                   D+…67 to 69.99          D…64 to 66.99        D-…60 to 63.99
                                            F…… 59.99 and below
You are each responsible for the grade that you make in this class.
HOW YOU AND I COMMUNICATE:
When I have information that I need to tell you, I will always put it in the form of an
Announcement on our Canvas class site. At the same time, I always send a copy to
your university email account. PLEASE read your university email so you will know of
any changes I have made to the class schedule.
EXTRA CREDIT
Limited to 6 points total for the semester, therefore, a limit of three reflection
papers per student.
Extra Credit Papers:
I will give you 2 points for each one-page paper you write. These papers can be on
anything in life that you experience or wonder about as it relates to sexuality. You can
tell me about an event that you attended, a movie that you saw, a relationship that you
have noticed. It can be about any aspect of sexual life that causes you to think. Tell me
about it in one page or less and I will give you two points.
The one-page papers must be typed, double-spaced, and turned in through
Assignments on the Canvas class site.


COURSE CALENDER – HUMAN SEXUALITY – SUMMER I 2020
WEEK 1 June 4        Classes Begin
                     CHAPTER 1: Sexuality in Perspective
                     CHAPTER 2: Theoretical Perspectives
                     CHAPTER 3: Sex Research
WEEK 2 June 12      EXAM 1 on Chapters 1, 2, 3 DUE
                     CHAPTER 4: Sexual Anatomy
                     CHAPTER 5: The Menstrual Cycle
                     CHAPTER 6: Conception, Pregnancy, and Childbirth
WEEK 3 June 22       EXAM 2: Chapters 4, 5, 6 DUE
                      CHAPTER 7: Contraception and Abortion
                      CHAPTER 8: Sexual Arousal
                      CHAPTER 11: Attraction, Love, and….
WEEK 4 July 1         EXAM 3: Chapters 7, 8, 11 DUE
                      CHAPTER 12: Gender and Sexuality
                      CHAPTER 13: Sexual Orientation….
                      CHAPTER 14: Variations in Sexual Behavior
WEEK 5 July 9         LAST CLASS DAY
          July 10      EXAM 4: Chapters 12, 13, 14 DUE
EXAM 4 is your Final.
There is not a comprehensive final for this class.
You are welcome J
Title IX Reporting: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and
gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual
misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual


misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have
experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members, including TAs, are considered
“Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they
are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
and the TAs are Responsible Employees and must report any Title
IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-
one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies
without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options
and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
