                       Department of Accounting
  ACC 311H -- Fundamentals of Financial Accounting: Honors
                                    Fall 2019 Syllabus
Instructor:                            Aysa Dordzhieva
E-mail:                                Aysa.Dordzhieva@Mccombs.uTexas.edu
Office:                                CBA 4M.230
Office Hours:                          TBD – See Canvas
Teaching Assistant: Yiying Chen yiying.chen@utexas.edu
                        Cody Strynadka cms1996@utexas.edu
TA Office & Office Hours:              TBD – See Canvas
                                       Email questions are also encouraged and office
                                       appointments can be set up via email.
Class times and
locations:                             Unique #02430 T/Th 9:30-11:00am CBA 5.328
                                       Unique #02435 T/Th 11:00-12:30pm CBA 5.328
                                       Unique #02440 T/Th 12:30-2:00pm CBA 5.328
Required Materials and Equipment:
             Textbook: Financial Accounting, 10th Edition, by Libby, Libby, and
              Hodge, (ISBN: 978-1259964947, McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2020). This is a
              customized version packaged with Connect access.
                  o On-Line Homework Manager: McGraw Hill Connect, packaged
                       with the textbook. Follow this link once you have purchased the textbook:
                       https://connect.mheducation.com/class/a-dordzhieva-fall-2019-tth
       Calculator: A financial calculator is required for this course. A financial
        calculator is one that has dedicated keys for convenience in working problems
        involving the time-value of money. The keys typically are labeled N (number of
        periods), I/Yr (required interest rate per period), PV (present value), PMT
        (payment per period), and FV (single future payment amount). If you already
        have such a calculator, you do not need to buy a new one. However, if you do not
        already have such a calculator, you should buy an HP 10bII+. This calculator is
        recommended by both the accounting and finance faculty of the McCombs School
        of Business.
       Note: You may NOT use calculators that have text memory (e.g. for programs) or
        cell-phone calculators on quizzes or examinations. Examples of PROHIBITED


        CALCULATORS are the TI-83, 84, 86 and 89. You may use simple 4-function
        calculators if an exam or quiz does not require TVM calculations.
Supplements
       Certain Homework Solutions (will be made available on Canvas)
       Instructor PowerPoint Slides and/or Notes (will be made available on Canvas)
       Supplemental materials (will be made available on Canvas)
       Canvas Website
Objectives of the course: To learn the following:
     A. The nature and purpose of accounting for businesses, with emphasis on
           corporate business entities.
     B. Accounting methods and their use as an orderly means of recording,
           classifying, and presenting useful information from a mass of data derived
           from transactions and events affecting businesses.
      C. The basic language of business as represented by business and accounting
           terminology.
      D. The concepts and standards underlying the measurements used in accounting
           to prepare the financial statements of businesses.
      E. The use and interpretation of financial reports (i.e., income statements, balance
           sheets, statements of stockholders’ equity, and statements of cash flows)
           prepared for users external to businesses (i.e., owners, creditors, government
           and investors).
Quantitative Reasoning Flag
    This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses
    are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types
    of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional
    life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
    your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
Course Conduct
    I will conduct the course by giving lectures, facilitating solutions to in-class
    exercises and conducting discussions in a manner that encourages class participation
    by students, consistent with the objectives of the course and the time available.
    Students are expected to study the chapter readings before topics are
    introduced in class and do assigned homework questions, exercises and
    problems to reinforce what they learn (you can’t effectively learn accounting
    without doing exercises and problems).
In-Class Participation
    During most classes, I will discuss topics assigned for the day. The goal of my
    presentations is to highlight important and/or complex aspects of the topics.
    Although my presentations are likely to be structured in a way that develops topic-
    content understanding, they are not intended to be the sole source for your learning.
                                              2


     The assigned textbook reading and problem-solving activities should also serve this
     purpose. The textbook provides a comprehensive analysis of topics and covers a
     wider range of topics in more detail than my presentations. You should regard my
     presentations as opportunities to (i) refine the knowledge you acquired from the
     readings, (ii) ask questions to resolve any confusion, and (iii) suggest observations
     that will test and deepen your understanding of the topics. I strongly encourage
     clarifying and probing questions. Your classmates will (usually) appreciate them if
     for no other reason than to slow me down.
Homework
     Homework is assigned from the chapters we cover. As the name implies, homework
     is meant to be completed outside of class. Textbook homework is further divided
     into problems to be submitted for grading and problems that are neither submitted
     nor graded. Graded questions are listed in bold-faced text on the Course
     Schedule and are managed through the Connect system. Graded homework must
     be completed individually, however you are permitted to collaborate with classmates
     on figuring out how to structure the solution to assigned questions. Graded
     homework is due by 12am on the day of class, and late homework will not be
     accepted. Connect changes the numbers in the problem for each student, so the data
     will differ from the textbook and your solution will not be the same as your
     classmates’ solutions. Connect will grade these problems, provide solutions and
     indicate areas where you need to do additional study.
     No homework assignments can be dropped in computing the final homework
     grade.
If you have difficulty using Connect or encounter a problem with it please first try to
resolve the problem with Connect Customer Support: 800.331.5094. If you have
questions about how to solve the exercises or problems, please see your instructor or
TA’s (listed above).
In-class group work and quizzes
    I plan to utilize in-class group assignments and quizzes (in or out of class). There
    will be approximately 8-10 assignments during the semester. If you miss an in-class
    assignment you will receive a zero for that assignment. No make-ups will be given
    for missed points. If you leave class after taking the in-class assignment but before
    the end of class, I reserve the right to discard any assignments for students not in
    attendance for the entire class period. You MUST come to the section in which you
    are officially registered to receive credit for an in-class assignment. I do not return
    group assignments, but they are kept in my office and you may come and examine
    yours and ask questions.
Class Protocol
    If for some reason you are running late, do not feel you should skip class. Please
    come in quietly and take a seat at the side or in the rear of the classroom. If you must
    leave class early, please tell me before class starts. I would appreciate it. Such
                                                3


   comings and goings during class should be rare—do not let them become a habit.
   If you need to miss a class or other required activity, including an examination, for
   any reason, please inform me as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that I
   can approve the absence as excused and arrangements can be made to complete any
   missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. If you miss a class or other
   required activity, including an examination, for reasons beyond your control,
   precluding prior notice, inform me of the circumstances as soon as you are able.
   All forms of distracting behavior are prohibited. Cell phones, laptop, tablets, and
   other electronic devices should be turned off unless instructed otherwise.
E-mail and Canvas
   The use of email and Canvas is required for this course. I will frequently
   communicate with the class with announcements and guidance and I will answer
   questions via email. When you email me, please be sure to include “ACC 311H”
   in the subject line. Otherwise, your email might be screened out. I check my e-
   mail at frequent intervals during weekdays and somewhat less regularly over
   weekends. I will use the email addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas. They
   are the email addresses that you have given the University for directory purposes. If
   you need to update your email address with the University go to your UT Direct page
   and, under personal info/all my addresses, change your email address. Before each
   class, I will post on Canvas any PowerPoint slides I intend to use. You can print
   them in handout style to save paper—either six slides to a page or, if you prefer, three
   slides accompanied by note-taking space. It is your responsibility to regularly check
   both your e-mail and the class website on Canvas.
Grading Questions or Appeals
   Do not wait until the end of the semester to question or appeal grade components
   other than the final examination.
   If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the grade components, or if you feel
   you need to bring to the attention of our Teaching Assistant or me other facts or
   circumstances that might affect the grade for that item, you will have ONE WEEK
   from the date the grade is posted on Canvas to take such action and have the matter
   resolved.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
   A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University
   must inform students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class
   roster: Since Fall 2001, web-based, password-protected class sites have been
   available for all accredited courses taught at The University. Class e-mail rosters are
   a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these
   electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the
   Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory
   information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-
   01/app/appc09.html        Privacy in Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by
   your UTEID login. Please be aware that I will use a merged Canvas site for all
   sections of the course that I am teaching this semester. This will allow students in
                                               4


   other sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from
   within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your email address and no other
   personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please
   contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from view of
   other students.
Academic Standards
    A high academic level will be maintained with respect to (a) the quality of the course
    and (b) grading. Semester grades will be determined using the following factors and
    relative weights:
               Homework                                                       10%
               Two (non-cumulative) Midterms:
                 First Midterm                                                20%
                 Second Midterm                                               20%
               Final Exam (comprehensive)                                     35%
               Group assignments and quizzes                                  15%
                                                                            100%
   Course grades will be such that the class average will be in the range of 3.0 – 3.2.
   Grades will be based on the total points earned in the course (as shown above).
   You may assess your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-,
   80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and below 60% = F. It is possible, but not
   guaranteed, that we will curve grades at the end of the course. No grades will be
   associated with scores on exams or quizzes during the semester. In addition, no
   individual exam grades will be curved during the semester.
   Incompletes will be given only in the RAREST of circumstances and only in
   accordance with university policy. There will be no opportunity to raise your course
   grade by doing “extra credit” work during or after the end of the semester—that
   would violate University policy.
Examinations
   There will be two midterm examinations and a comprehensive final examination.
    The Final Exam will be uniform (all sections at the same time) and comprehensive
    (covering the entire course). It will NOT be given on the dates and times listed in the
    UT course schedule. The actual dates and times will be announced later in the
    semester. NO EXAMS WILL BE GIVEN EARLY. IF YOU MUST SCHEDULE
    AIRFARE BEFORE THE EXACT DATE OF THE FINAL IS KNOWN PLEASE
    DO NOT SCHEDULE TRAVEL BEFORE THE LAST DAY OF FINALS.
    Examinations are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. All
    exams are also closed book/notes. Calculators that can store text are not allowed.
                                             5


     Only students with conflicts with other UT classes or UT exams, medical or other
     documented emergencies and special needs will be given exams at times other than
     the uniform exams. If you have a job or extra-curricular activities at the times of the
     exams, this is notice that you are responsible to be excused, miss or work around
     those other activities. Individual makeup exams must be taken within 72 hours of
     the original exam.
     Unexcused absence from any examination will result in a score of zero. If you miss
     an exam due to an illness or other emergency reason, you should notify me as soon
     as possible and provide me with written documentation (e.g., a note from the
     attending physician) after you return. I have final authority to determine if your
     absence should be excused and if I can give you a make-up exam. If you have an
     excused absence from a mid-term exam and I cannot give you a make-up exam, you
     will receive extra weight on your final to compensate for the missed examination.
     If you need to make early travel reservations for the end of the semester, you should
     make them for travel on December 20th or later—because we will not know until
     well into the semester exactly when our examination will be scheduled by the
     University. If you make non-refundable (or non-cancelable) arrangements for travel
     before December 20th they will not be an acceptable reason for taking the final exam
     early.
Dropping the Course
    Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who
    stops attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a grade of F. Consult
    the Academic Calendar on the Registrar’s website
    (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for specific deadlines.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty.
The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have
agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class,
you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the
                                               6


application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is
unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and
the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes
scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided
by the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
https://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
        required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation
        or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
        occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
        entering the building.
     Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in
        writing during the first week of class.
     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
        instructors.
     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention Services office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                               7


      2019                                                 Topic/Pre-Class Reading                                                     Homework, Quizzes & Exams
8/29  Th   Course Introduction
9/3   T    Ch 1: Financial Statements and Business Decisions (LLH: 1, A)
9/5   Th   Ch 2: Investing and Financing Decisions (LLH: 2)
9/10  T    Ch 2: Investing and Financing Decisions
9/12  Th   Ch 3: Operating Decisions and the Income Statement (LLH: 3)                                                     Chapter 3 Connect HW Pre
9/17  T    Ch 3: Operating Decisions and the Income Statement                                                              Chapter 3 Connect HW
      Th   Ch 4: Adjustments and Financial Statements (LLH: 4)                                                             Chapter 4 Connect HW Pre
9/19
9/24  T    Ch 4: Adjustments and Financial Statements                                                                      Chapter 4 Connect HW
9/26  Th   Ch 11: Owner’s Equity (LLH: 11)                                                                                 Chapter 11 Connect HW Pre
10/1  T    Ch 11: Owner’s Equity                                                                                           Chapter 11 Connect HW
10/3  Th   Catch-Up Day
10/8  T                                                                                                                    Exam I
10/10 Th   Ch 6: Reporting and Interpreting Sales Revenue, Receivables, and Cash (LLH: 6, A)
10/15 T    Ch 6: Reporting and Interpreting Sales Revenue, Receivables, and Cash                                           Chapter 6 Connect HW
10/17 Th   Ch 7: Reporting and Interpreting Cost of Goods Sold and Inventory (LLH: 7)                                      Chapter 7 Connect HW Pre
10/22 T    Ch 7: Reporting and Interpreting Cost of Goods Sold and Inventory                                               Chapter 7 Connect HW
10/24 Th   Ch 8: Reporting and Interpreting Property, Plant, and Equipment; Natural Resources; and Intangibles (LLH: 8, A) Chapter 8 Connect HW Pre
10/29 T    Ch 8: Reporting and Interpreting Property, Plant, and Equipment; Natural Resources; and Intangibles             Chapter 8 Connect HW
10/31 Th   Ch 9: Reporting and Interpreting Liabilities (Financial Calculator) (LLH: 9)                                    Chapter 9 Connect HW Pre
11/5  T    Ch 9: Reporting and Interpreting Liabilities                                                                    Chapter 9 Connect HW
11/7  Th   Catch-Up Day
11/12 T                                                                                                                    Exam II
11/14 Th   Ch 10: Reporting and Interpreting Bonds (LLH: 10)
11/19 T    Ch 10: Reporting and Interpreting Bonds                                                                         Chapter 10 Connect HW
11/21 Th   Appendix A: Passive investments (LLH: A)
11/26 T    Ch 12: Statement of Cash Flows (LLH: 12, B, C)                                                                  Chapter 12 Connect HW Pre
11/28 Th   Thanksgiving Break
      T    Ch 12: Statement of Cash Flows                                                                                  Chapter 12 Connect HW
12/3


 12/5   Th     Extra Day for Cash Flows and Review
               Final Exam
We will try to stick to this schedule as much as possible, but please know that it is subject to adjustment
                                                                     9


