ARC 520F INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO III: INTEGRATION                                          Fall 2018
MWF 1pm-6pm
Michael McCall
Office Hours TBD
mike@mccalldesign.com
PREREQUISITES
ARC 520E or 520G; ARC 415L; and ARC 333 with a grade of at least C in each.
CURRICULUM FLAG
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage students in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing a student
with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to
the student’s major. At least one-third of the grade will be based on independent investigation
and presentation of one’s own work.
STUDIO TOPIC
While desirable, the competent resolution of the spatial, structural and mechanical aspects of a
building is never a self-serving goal: Embedded in the very constitution of every building and its
technical solutions is always – whether conscious or not – an attitude towards the environment
it exists in, the people it serves, or the institution(s) it represents. If we believe in the agency of
architecture as a cultural practice, then the very tools of architectural production such as form,
space, structure, or material, can be seen to directly inform the possibilities for community and
interaction. Decisions about the internal logics and logistics of a building thus exist as a complex
exchange between scales and systems, between publics and users, and the conditions,
histories, and constitutions of the city.
A Sanctuary
This relationship is further complicated when these conditions, histories, and users do not add
up to form one single narrative, but present us with a series of individual stories, and – at times
contradictory – attitudes towards a place, program or building. This semester’s main project
and site – the former immigration station of Angel Island in San Francisco Bay – confront us
with such a place: during much of its history as an immigration station, the island was
effectively a place of isolation and internment as much as a sanctuary. How can the fraught
history today be transformed into a place of hope and contemplation? How can the individual
experiences of Angel Island’s past as well as the contemporary immigration process be
channeled towards a space of collective significance? How can the basic elements of
architecture such as structure, enclosure or material be employed in a meaningful way in
support of such a conceptual ambition?
With a relatively simple program for a gathering space for naturalization ceremonies and
community events, it will be our goal to go beyond the mere fulfillment of the performative
aspect of the project. In the context of Angel Island each design decision about material,
structure, or form, will have to be evaluated not merely based on performative aspects (“what
                                                                                                      1


does it do?”), but equally on conceptual and narrative grounds (“what does it say?”). We will
use iterative processes of precise structural, formal, and spatial inquiry to discover
unanticipated relationships between form, site, and cultural context. Through the precise
manipulation of these relationships we will address the challenge to develop an architecture of
collective significance.
The semester is divided into three assignments. The first two assignments (2-3 weeks each) will
temporarily isolate topics, methods, or scales of production, while the last assignment (9
weeks) extends previous design and research towards a comprehensive resolution of an
architectural project in the city.
INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO
Students pursuing the Bachelor of Architecture must complete four Intermediate Design
Studios during their second and third years. Building on the Foundation Design Studios taken
during the first year, the goal of the Intermediate Studios is to prepare students for Advanced
Design Studios in their fourth and fifth years.
Each Intermediate Studio will be structured around one of four broad themes of inquiry
(Operational, Environmental, Integration, and Speculation) and will offer a critical framework
and vocabularies for design and development into key issues emphasized in the theme.
Intermediate Studios will also serve as a platform to prepare students for the range of offerings
of the Advanced Studios (e.g. Comprehensive, Urban Design, Landscape Architecture, etc.).
Intermediate Studios will follow a similar structure, but each instructor will individually
determine the scope and design problem for each studio.
THEME: INTEGRATION
This studio emphasizes architecture as a tectonic expression through structural systems,
construction methods and materiality, assembly, spatial and formal compositions, etc.
STUDIO STRUCTURE
Assignment #1: Research and Analysis “Extraction” (2 weeks)
15% of final grade
Students will work in teams
Between the extremes of collective and individual, between gathering and quiet contemplation,
between openness and introversion, there is no one idea of what constitutes a “sanctuary”. In
this assignment students will work in teams to examine buildings that constitute sanctuaries of
different kinds. Each case will display specific operational and organizational strategies, a
formal and structural logic, and material attitude. Particular attention will be given to the role
of structure and material in relation to occupancy, hierarchy, and space. Case studies will be
scrutinized across scales, ranging from the city to the detail. At the same time, the case studies
provide a vehicle to situate the problem of the “sanctuary” within the evolution of the
                                                                                                 2


discipline. The goal of this research is to generate a reference catalogue for the entire studio,
which will introduce possibilities and limits of particular strategies, structures, and materials.
learning outcomes:       Critical Thinking, Graphic Skills, Collaborative Skills
media:                   structural model, diagrams, drawings
readings:                t.b.a.
Precedents (preliminary list, may be subject to change):
-        Kimbell Art Museum, Louis Kahn
-        Chichu Art Museum, Tadao Ando
-        Sammlung-Goetz Gallery, Herzog & de Meuron
-        Andalucia’s Museum of Memory, Alberto Campo Baeza
-        Capilla del Retiro, Santiago, Undurraga Devés Arquitectos
-        Wheels of Heaven church, Also van Eyck
-        Vals Thermal Baths, Peter Zumthor
-        Youth Center in Amsterdam, Atelier Kempe Thill
-        Bruder Klaus Chapel, Peter Zumthor
-        Shibaura House, Kazuyo Sejima & Associates
-        Kunsthaus Bregenz, Peter Zumthor
-        Sunset Chapel, Acapulco, BNKR
-        Serpentine Gallery Pavilion, Peter Zumthor
Assignment #2: “Site / Projection” (2.5 weeks)
20% of final grade
Students will work in pairs
Assignment 02 will transition from the extraction of an operational strategy from a case study
to its implementation facing the constraints of a specific site.
Step 1 - Site:
Students will start to gather relevant information on the site and its multiple context(s) –
historical, cultural, ecological, geological, formal, infrastructural etc… We will begin by assessing
the site through “objective” documentation, (drawings, models, diagrams) and then move
towards a “subjective” appropriation of site and environment which will be conveyed through
carefully constructed “affect” drawings.
Step 2 - Projection:
Working with selected strategies from the first assignment, student teams will creatively
explore the possibilities of a given (structural/formal/material) logic against the pushback of the
site. Where the first assignment extracted a set of systemic rules from a specific precedent, this
assignment explores opportunities and limits for each strategy when facing the constraints of a
                                                                                                    3


specific site. (A rigorous pushing of boundaries – even if eventually resulting in its ‘failure’ - is
highly encouraged. Students’ inquiries should be guided by the question: “What if?”)
learning outcomes:      Critical Thinking, Design Composition Skills, Graphic Skills, Collaborative
                        Skills
media:                  study model, drawing, diagram
readings:               t.b.a.
Assignment #3: A Sanctuary (9 weeks);
65% of final grade
Students will work individually
The main project for this semester will be the design of a “Sanctuary” on Angel Island in San
Francisco Bay to both commemorate the history of immigration in the United States and
perform as a contemporary gathering space to combine functions of a visitor and event center
and facility for naturalization ceremonies. Program and site are the 2019 Lyceum-Fellowship
Competition (http://lyceum-fellowship.org/2019-competition.html):
        “The competition aims to explore how landscape and architecture as sanctuary and
        refuge can be coalesced to develop a place of multi-sensory contemplation and
        reconciliation. In broad terms, a sanctuary can be considered a place of refuge and
        protection, both in physical and psychological terms.”
        “Proposals should provide a non-denominational, sanctuary to support past and present
        immigrants to the United States and SF Bay Area. They should provide places for quiet
        contemplation as well as areas to gather in community groups of various sizes.”
        “The program will be approximately 4,000–6,000 square feet of delineated
        contemplation and gathering spaces as well as support functions, incorporating built and
        natural features of the adjacent landscape.”
                                                             (from the Competition brief)
In addition to the primary assembly space for a gathering of approximately 1,000, the program
includes secondary spaces for smaller groups, individual contemplation spaces, and a small
administrative hub. The program will demand a decisive conceptual attitude in relation to site
and program. At the same time it provides opportunities for students to develop unique visions
for how a “sanctuary” in the context of both historic and current immigration can be conceived.
The final project will be developed in three stages:
Phase 01:        Conceptual Strategy
Phase 02:        Architectural Strategy
                                                                                                    4


Phase 03:        Development
Each stage will have its associated scale(s) of inquiry and deliverables. In stages 1 and 2
students will develop conceptual, formal, and structural strategies for the entire site and
program, while phase 03 will be the detailed development of the project at a higher resolution.
Students interested in submitting their project to the 2019 Lyceum Fellowship Competition will
have time to independently develop their projects towards the submission deadline of March
22, 2019.
learning outcomes:       Code Analysis , Site Analysis and Design, Design Composition Skills,
                         Graphic Skills, Understanding Sustainable Practices, Design Integration
                         Skills
media:                   drawings, diagrams, models
readings:                t.b.a.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will be exposed to a series of learning goals several times and from different angles
over the four Intermediate Studio sequence. The goal is that similar issues are repeated from
studio to studio but from different angles, allowing students to find, within the diversity of the
topics, a “common thread” as they go through the sequence of the four studios. The level of
expectation will grow as students go from being introduced to an issue, to becoming competent
at it. Some issues would be only mentioned in passing in one studio but will be studied in more
depth in another.
     •  Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and
        space, both exterior and interior; building envelope
     •  Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of
        materiality, structures, construction, and environmental system
     •  Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant
        contextual; environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project
     •  Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents;
        research skills
     •  Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of
        media strategy and level of skill displayed
     •  Basic grasp of accessibility and egress
     •  Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all
        activities of the studio
                                                                                                   5


STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning
encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio
offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals,
which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the
public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members,
and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and
spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where
project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and
commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental
mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the
design conversations taken place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc).
Students are encouraged to participate and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS
students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (three per semester by lead
practitioners from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio that
follow are important for the holistic education of intellectually engaged students and
participation will have an impact on students’ grades (see below).
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion
of each grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades
are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the
discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal
weight:
    Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
        • The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant
            method of inquiry
        • The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software,
            sketch drawing and models, etc.) in the development of the design
        • Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go
            beyond what is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration
            of the design?
                                                                                                  6


    Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge
    introduced in companion courses.
        • A strong and clearly stated design objective
        • Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of
            programmatic elements – and sectional development
        • Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as
            demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures
            and construction, structural and environmental system integration, building
            materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
        • Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness,
            floor plates, and assembly
    Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and
    finesse in the final design presentation.
        • Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media
            strategy and level of skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the
            design process; technical documentation
    Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group
    discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a
degree in the School of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C-
will not satisfy degree requirements.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-           Excellent
               Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual
               language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
               concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
               complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-        Above Average
               Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
               completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in
               effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
               demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C           Average
               Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not
               pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
                                                                                                  7


C-/D+/D/D- Poor
              Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
              presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the
              required competence and knowledge base.
F             Fail
              Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
              acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive
              unexcused absences.
X             Excused Incomplete
              Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
              completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It
              may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an
              agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the
              second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to
              the School of Architecture policy.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3)
unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter
grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written
documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one
(1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or
absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or
absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A
student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence
and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student
is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
                                                                                                     8


By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your
way, there are options available for help:
    • In-house CARE counselor (see below)
    • For immediate support
            o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
            o CMHC Crisis Line:
                24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    • Free services at CMHC:
            o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
            o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
            o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
            o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health
support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty
and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her.
Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
                                                                                                    9


Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of
the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the
careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other
substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is
accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio
without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio
mates accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and
reuse to reduce material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue
bins or any other containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system
for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication
coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology
Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the
Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls
can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts
and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
    • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
    • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and
        building they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one
        used when entering the building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
        class instructors.
    • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin
        Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention Services offices.
                                                                                                   10


Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
RECOMMENDED RESOURCES:
Ideas
-      Allen, Edward, The Architect’s Studio Companion: Rules of Thumb for Preliminary Design
       (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2007)
-      Allen, Stan, Points + Lines: Diagrams and Projects for the City (excerpts) (New York:
       Princeton Architectural Press, 1999).
-      Banham, Reyner, The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment (excerpts)
       (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969).
-      Burns, Carol J., and Andrea Kahn, eds., Site Matters: Design Concepts, Histories, and
       Strategies (New York: Routledge, 2005).
-      Frampton, Kenneth, Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of Construction in
       Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture, John Cava, ed. (Cambridge, MA: The
       MIT Press, 1995).
-      Kiel Moe Integrated Design in Contemporary Architecture (New York: Princeton
       Architectural Press, 2008)
-      Thomas, Randall, ed., Environmental Design: An Introduction for Architects and
       Engineers (New York: E & FN Spon, 1996)
Systems
-      Allen, Edward, Fundamentals of Building Construction: Materials and Methods
       (New York: Wiley, 1999).
       ---. The Architect’s Studio Companion: Rules of Thump for Preliminary Design (Hoboken,
       NJ: Wiley, 2007)
-      Brookes, Alan, and Grech, Chris, Connections: Studies in Building Assembly (New York:
       Whitney Library of Design, 1994)
-      Brown, G.Z., Sun, Wind & Light: Architectural Design Strategies (New York: Wiley, 2001).
-      Ching, Frank, Cassandra Adams, Building Construction Illustrated (New York, Wiley,
       2001)
-      Finley, Dawn, and Mark Wamble, “Notes on System Form: The Rest of the World Exists,”
       in Perspecta, Vol. 34 (2003), pp. 110-117.
-      Ford, Edward, The Details of Modern Architecture, vols. 1 & 2 (Cambridge, MA: MIT
       Press, 1990 & 1996)
-      Kieran, Stephen, and James Timberlake. Loblolly House: Elements of a New Architecture
       (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2008).
       ---. Refabricating Architecture: How Manufacturing Methodologies Are Poised to
       Transform Building Construction (New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 2004).
-      Kwok, Alison and Walter Grondzik, The Green Studio Handbook: Environmental
       Strategies for Schematic Design (New York: Architectural Press, 2006)
-      Oesterle-Liev-Lutz Huesler, Double Skin Facades, Intergrated Planning (London: Prestel,
       2001)
                                                                                             11


Materials
-      Ball, Philip, Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21st Century (Princeton, NJ:
       Princeton University Press, 1997).
-      Bielefeld, Bert, and Isabella Skiba, Technical Drawing (Basel: Birkhäuser, 2007).
-      Brookes, Alan, and Grech, Chris, The Building Envelope
-      Brownell, Blaine, ed. Transmaterial: A Catalog of Materials that Redefine Our Physical
       Environment (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2006).
-      Kolarevic, Branko, and Kevin R. Klinger, eds., Manufacturing Material Effects: Rethinking
       Design and Making in Architecture (New York: Routledge, 2008), pp. 25-46.
-      Schulitz, Helmut C., Steel Construction Manual (Basel & Boston: Birkhäuser, 2000).
-      Schittich, Christian, Glass Construction Manual (Basel, Birkhäuser, 2007)
-      Fuchs Matthias, Construction Materials Manual (Basel, Birkhäuser, 2006)
Codes
-      Ching, Francis D.K., and Steven R. Winkel, Building Codes Illustrated: A Guide to
       Understanding the 2000 International Building Code (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2003).
-      International Building Code (Country Club Hills, IL: International Code Council).
Periodicals
-      Detail
-      El Croquis
-      The Plan
-      GA: Global Architect
                                                                                               12
