INSIDE Utopia
School of Architecture                                                                  ARI 350R: 00369/ARI 386M: 00414
The University of Texas at Austin                                                       ARC 350R: 00751/ARC 386M: 00876
Instructor: Nerea Feliz
Contact: nereafeliz@utexas.edu
When: F 9:00 – 12:00_SPRING 2020
Where: WMB 3.100-Materials Lab
“The design of imaginary, conceptual or radical buildings is as old as the practice of architecture itself. Whether to
explore new spatial or philosophical possibilities, or to test our understanding of built form, architects have for centuries
drawn on their abilities to produce breath-taking works of the imagination.” Neil Speiller
Utopian projects have stimulated the architectural imaginary, transformed our discipline and ultimately influenced
professional practice. Students in this seminar will speculate on how a selection of these utopian buildings may be
inhabited. What is it like to be INSIDE Utopia?
Utopia’s key feature is its critical consideration of the present, for this reason, it has often been used by designers as
a vehicle to critic the status quo. A primary goal of design education is to equip students with the tools to reflect on
and actively affect our rapidly changing environment. With the purpose of empowering students with the ability to
think critically and to speculate about a somewhat unpredictable future, this seminar uses Utopia as the frame for
discussion.
Via readings, lectures and in class discussions, students will be introduced to seminal experimental projects from our
discipline that challenge conventional notions of interiority. In doing so, students will learn how the authors of these
projects have addressed through design some of the major preoccupations of our time. During the course, students
will explore the visualization of the space within these proposals in one drawing. Both, writing and drawing will be
treated as generative design tools and instruments of individual investigation and experimentation. With the ambition
of fusing, visualization and argumentation in the design process, the course requires students to develop ideas
simultaneously on these two fronts. Participants in this seminar will produce two complementary outcomes: a brief
text component and a drawing.


Course Objectives:
           • To become familiar with major design works and the theory behind them.
           •    To interrogate inhabitation practices.
           • To develop an understanding of how spaces are shaped by and reflect cultural values and social
                organization.
           • To become familiar with factors which have influenced architecture and interior design over the last
                decades.
           •    To explore drawing and writing as generative design tools.
           •    To foster graphic representation as a vehicle to communicate design aspirations.
           •    To engage students in a process of spatial and graphic inquiry.
           •    To foster an extended understanding of the discipline in relation to the dominant and more technical
                problem-solving approach to design.
           •    To establish critical relationships between spatial design and broader cultural preoccupations.
COURSE OUTLINE:
The course will be structured in two phases, study and production.
I. Paper Site Visit
Reading discussions of seminal unbuilt projects followed by a short exercise (drawing or writing) about the topics
discussed. A complementary slide show will include visual material sufficient to understand the author’s argument.
Start with assigned readings and expand to additional sources as needed. Reflect on the use of graphics and how it
relates to the design concept.
2. Augmented narrative + Technical drawing development
Construct your own spatial narrative based on the ideas of the precedent study. Both writing and drawing will be
treated as generative design tools and instruments of individual investigation and experimentation. With the ambition
of fusing, visualization and argumentation in the design process, you will develop ideas simultaneously on these two
fronts.
IN CLASS CONDUCT/WORK ETHIC:
Students are expected to work in class diligently on the assignments unless excused by individual faculty for research,
field trips, etc… Professional conduct is expected from all students.
During class hours, you are expected to be actively and productively engaged in your work. To facilitate this:
     • Turn off cell phones and other messaging devices
     • Turn off facebook and other social networking sites
     • This is an independent Inquiry course designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a
           semester, providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or
           project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
           the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.


Consultation: You are expected to make regular progress on assigned exercises. Faculty will consult with you during
class if you have new work to show; faculty is not obligated to consult with you if you have no new work.
Course Communication: All students in this course will be required to maintain a university e-mail account and will be
required to access online course material. Students are expected to check their utexas.edu e-mail on a daily basis for
studio updates.
Required Materials: You are required to obtain appropriate tools and materials for the course. A lack of tools and
materials is not an acceptable excuse for incomplete or weak work.
Readings: Assigned readings will be listed in Project Statements. Electronic copies will be distributed.
Archive: All aspects of all projects should be saved until after the end of the term. All work should be protected for
exhibit purposes.
     • Deadlines: Deadlines for exercises/course projects will be listed on written project statements in addition to
           being announced in class. All projects will be due at the beginning of class on the due date unless otherwise
           indicated. Projects submitted after the due date will be evaluated but will receive a point penalty; if the work
           is B+ quality, the grade will be dropped to a B.
GRADING
     • Class participation (reading discussions): 20%
     • Short assignments: 30%
     • Final Project: 50%
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic
areas. While each exercise contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion
of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of issues. Grading for this course is broken into three
components for each given mark:
1/3 grasp (the ideas and understanding of the project at hand, combined with an appropriate process of inquiry),
1/3 process (the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas) and
1/3 resolution (the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through representation).
Your work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the semester.
Grade Descriptions:
A/A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor,
and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class.
B+/B/B- : above average
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed. Student pursues ideas and
suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C/C- : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. (Note:
C- does not meet the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree.)
D+/D/D- : below average
Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-appropriate.
Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.


F : failure
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned with excessive
unexcused                                                                                                         absences.
X : excused incomplete
Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments are not a cause for assigning
this grade. An incomplete is assigned after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices. Incomplete coursework
must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter
grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with
written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed
due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence.
Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify
instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this
subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be
made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the
Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.                 University       Code      of      Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct


MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing
thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
     • In-house CARE counselor (see below)
     • For immediate support
                o Visit/call         the       Counseling       and       Mental        Health       Center      (CMHC):
                     M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
                o CMHC                                                Crisis                                         Line:
                     24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     • Free services at CMHC:
                o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
                o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
                o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
                o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or
schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling
emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer
students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is unavailable
by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from
the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY
for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the
beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be reported
to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t
feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
          a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
          class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.


week     date        activity
                     9:00-10:30                                             10:40 – 12:00
1        F 01.24     Course intro
2        f 01.31     Ugo La Pietra: Inside/Outside (1977-2013)
3*       F 02.07     Dan Graham: Alteration to a suburban House (1978)
                     Reyner Banham + Francois Dallegret,
                     A home is not a House (1965)
4        F 02.14
                     Buckminster Fuller & Shoji Sadao
                     Dome Over Manhattan (1960)
5        F 02.21     Sean Lally: The air from other planets (2014)
6        F 02.28     Archizoom Associati: No Stop City (1969)
7*       F 03.06
8        F 03.13     Rem Koolhaas: Exodus (1972)
9        F 03.20     Spring Break
10       F 03.27     Final Project: Augmented Narrative
11       F 04.03     Final Project: Augmented Narrative
12       F 04.10     Final Project: Visualization, Technical Development
13       F 04.17     Final Project: Visualization, Technical Development
14       F 04.24     Final Submission (TBC)
15       F 05.01     Last class day
* This schedule is for planning purposes only. The instructor may revise the calendar as necessary. Students will be notified
on any changes at least one class meeting in advance.
