        BIOLOGY 446L Human Microscopic and Gross Anatomy
GENERAL COURSE INFORMATION
Lecture: MTWThF, 10:00 - 11:30
Room: PAI 3.02
Prerequisites:
Biology 311C; Biology 325 or 325H with a grade of at least C-; Chemistry 301 with a
grade of at least C-; and one of the following courses with a grade of at least C-:
Mathematics 408C, 408K, 408N, 408R, Statistics and Scientific Computation 302.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the natural science and technology (Part
I or Part II) component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following
four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board:
communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and empirical and quantitative
skills.
Lecture Instructor and Course Director:
William J. Babler, PhD                 Email: wbabler@utexas.edu
Office: PAI 3.10-B                     Office Hours: WThF 11:45 - 12:45
Phone: 317-965-9700
Lecture TA:
Soroosh Sadeh                          Email: soroosh.sadeh@utexas.edu
Office hours:
Delis Torres                           Email: Delistorres@utexas.edu
Office hours:
Laboratories: MW 1-5, T Th 1-5, MW 5-9
Room: PAI 3.22, 3.20, 3.22
Lab Director/Instructor:
Tim Fleisher                           Email: tim.fleisher@gmail.com
Office hours:                          Room: PAI 3.10
Lab Instructors:
Brett Baker                            Email: brett.baker@utexas.edu
Office hours:                          Room:


Szyan Wu                                Email: szyanwu@utexas.edu
Office hours:                           Room: BEL 946
Tracey Garcia                           Email: tracygarcia26@gmail.com
Office hours:            Room:
Richelle Lewis                          Email: richelle_lewis@yahoo.com
Office hours:            Room:
Haley Wilson                            Email: haley.wilson@utexas.edu
Office hours:            Room:
Course Overview:
Human Microscopic and Gross Anatomy (BIO 446L) is an upper division lecture and lab
course designed for biology and health careers majors. This course will provide students
with an intensive survey of the microscopic and gross anatomy of various human tissues
and organs. The relationship between microscopic anatomy (histology) and gross
anatomy will be stressed. The course will use a systems approach, with an emphasis on
integrated structure-function relationships at the cell, tissue and organ level, as well as
an emphasis on clinical applications of the material at all levels. Lecture and lab study
materials will include a virtual microscopic slide library, animal tissue for dissection,
skeletons, models and 3D computer models. On completion of the course, students will
be able to identify and describe: the different types of human tissues, the structure and
location of different organs, their specific functions, and their relationships with each
other in the human body.
This semester you will have the opportunity to dive deeply into the intriguing field of
human anatomy and physiology. It can be one of the most satisfying subjects you will
ever study because it brings together so much material you have learned from other
courses and it can be applied to understand so much that you encounter in your daily
life. You will certainly use both the facts and the skills you develop in this course in your
future careers. Have an open, engaged mind, work hard and ENJOY!
Course Objectives:
This course is as much about how to learn as it is about human anatomy and physiology.
It requires that you are able to understand and apply the material as well as memorize
it. Students who complete this class should be able to:
     1. Explain the inseparable relationship between microscopic and gross anatomic
        structure and function; and be able to apply that understanding to new
        situations/images.
     2. Use systematic, logical thinking processes to correctly identify tissues at the
        microscopic level.


     3. Provide knowledge of the ultrastructure and function of the eukaryotic cell and
         its organelles.
     4. Provide knowledge of the microscopic anatomy and function of the four basic
         tissues; epithelium, connective tissue, muscle tissue and nerve tissue.
     5. Identify and describe gross and microscopic anatomical details of the major
         tissues, organs, and organ systems of the human body.
     6. Explain the functions of the organ and the structural mechanisms that allow the
         organ to carry out its functions.
     7. Compare and contrast structure and function in various organ systems.
     8. Use anatomical terminology of the major body regions and its cavities, and the
         directions and planes of section of the human body to communicate 3-
         dimensional complexity accurately and succinctly to others in writing and in
         speech.
The following six objectives will not be directly assessed but are objectives for your
course experience and will enhance your grade:
     9. Organize, memorize, and integrate significant amounts of information in a
         framework that you can use.
     10. Recognize what you do not understand.
     11. Improve critical reading and thinking skills.
     12. Maintain composure and focus when faced with problem solving and questions
         on material you have not studied directly.
     13. Cooperate with classmates and work effectively in teams.
     14. Examine in detail the fascinating structure and workings of the human body.
LEARNING RESOURCES
Class Canvas Site
All information pertinent to course content, (syllabus and course schedule,
announcements, grades, and other information) will be posted on the Canvas web site.
The Grade tab in Canvas is not the official grade record and is for student information
only. Grades that are changed may not be updated immediately in Canvas. You can find
the site by going to your courses on your UT Direct page or by going to
canvas.utexas.edu . – HUMAN MICROSCOPIC AND GROSS ANAT- 446L. It is absolutely
critical that you check the Home Page, Announcements, PowerPoint Slides and your
Grades on this site frequently.
Email and Canvas are the official means of electronic communication for this class. It
is University policy that all students have a functioning email address on record and that
they check email at least once a day. Full email IN boxes or failing to check email are not
excuses for missing an assignment or an important announcement.


Textbooks: Required
         1) Junquiera’s Basic Histology, 14th edition, by Anthony L. Mescher. 2016 (ISBN
             978-0-07-184270-9)
         2) Complete Anatomy Application, 3d4Medical Limited, 445 Marine View Ave,
             Suite 110 Del Mar, CA 92014
     *Purchase through University Co-op or through 3d4Medical.com. You must have a laptop or personal
     device (Mac or Android) to operate this. The lab manual is built within this platform.
Additional text reference books (Optional)
         1) Essential Clinical Anatomy, 5th edition by Keith L. Moore, Arthur F. Dalley,
         Anne M.R. Agur, 2015 (ISBN 978-1-4511-8749-6)
         2) Human Physiology, an Integrated Approach, 7th edition, by Dee Unglaub
         Silverthorn, 2007
         3) Human Anatomy and Physiology, 8th edition, by Elaine N. Marieb, 2010.
         4) Human Anatomy, 4th edition by Michael P. McKinley, et al. 2015.
         5) The Anatomy Coloring Book, 4th edition by Wynn Kapit/Lawrence M. Elson,
         2014 (ISBN-13: 978-0-321-83201-6)
CLASS PREPARATION AND PARTICIPATION:
Active class participation and regular class attendance are essential because we will be
covering material that is not in the texts. Assignments, quizzes, and attendance from
class and discussion are worth 10% of your grade. Please come prepared daily with a
few plain white 3x5 cards, and either the PowerPoint of pertinent figures that I will post
before class or the textbook. You are responsible for reading the text assignments
before coming to class. Any material in the assigned reading may be used for in-class
quizzes and on tests. If you are late to class and miss an assignment or quiz, there is no
make-up.
You need to be willing to ask for help when you need it, and you will need to study every
day, not cram at the last minute. It is important to let instructors know that you are
serious about learning. This can be demonstrated by questions and discussion in class,
attendance and participation at office hours . Students who must pass BIO 446L to
qualify for graduation at the end of the current term MUST see Dr. Babler within the
first week of the term to discuss your strategy for success.


Assessments/Evaluations/Grades:
Evaluation Components:
BIO 446L is designed to facilitate your learning through multiple learning experiences in both
lecture and laboratory activities. Accordingly, sixty-five percent of your course grade will be
derived from the lecture portion of the course and thirty-five percent will be compiled from
laboratory assessments.
Several assessment/examination tools will be used in this course and will vary in format
from standard assessments with which you may be familiar. Our goal is to have you
learn anatomy (gross and microscopic) in a professional context that focuses on your
developing ability to recall, communicate and problem solve. The assessment /
examination tools used in the course are explained below.
Exams:
There will be three in class lecture exams during the semester, two lab exams (one in
the evening and one late afternoon), and a comprehensive lecture final exam. Tests will
cover factual material, but also emphasize application and synthesis of material,
anatomical relationships, physiological processes and problem solving. You may be
asked to apply your knowledge in a scenario that was not specifically discussed in class.
You may NOT use an alphanumeric calculator, iPod or related device, or a cell phone
during an exam. Study guides for each lecture exam will be posted one week before the
exam. The tests and exams will include information from the reading, questions and
discussions. It may also include questions that have not been covered directly in the
lecture but that you should be able to answer based on the material you have studied.
Quiz questions and the Exam Study Guide will help you prepare for exams. Written
exams will include multiple choice questions and a few short answer questions.
Daily Quizzes:
Each class session will begin with a quiz covering the reading assignment for the day.
Each quiz will consist of three (3) multiple choice questions. You will need to bring a 3x5
card to each lecture to complete the quiz. You need to also write your name and the
date on the card. You may not make-up a daily quiz. If you are late for a quiz, it is a zero
and cannot be made up. There will be 17 quizzes. We will drop the lowest two. This
means there will be 15 quiz scores used to compute your quiz grade.
Attendance:
Attendance in class is mandatory. Each class is worth 1 point. If you arrive after the
daily quiz, do turn in a card with your name and date so that you get your attendance
point. For attendance we will drop two zeros, i.e. you have up to 2 excused absences in
the course.


Student Laboratory Presentation
Students will be formed into teams to present a PowerPoint presentation to the lab.
Further information on the presentation is provided in the Laboratory Manual.
Grading Policy:
BIO 446L Grade distribution:
 Lecture midterm exams (3)                        36%
 Final exam                                       19%
 Quizzes                                           5%
 Attendance                                        5%
                                                             Lecture total 65%
 Lab exams (2)                                    25%
 Lab quizzes                                       5%
 Lab attendance and participation                  5%
                                                             Lab total       35%
Course grades cannot be calculated until the end of the term because all test data have
to be collected and entered. Your scores, as mentioned previously will be calculated as
points earned/points possible x the weight of that testing item. In the past, the class
mean at the end of the term has been used as the B/C cut-off and the standard
deviation has been used as the range of grades for B, C, and D. If the class mean is 79.5%
or higher, a straight scale will be used in grading, i.e. 80-89 = B, 70-79 = C, etc. The
cutoffs for pluses and minuses will be the highest and lowest 3 scores in each range,
respectively.
In the event that the overall performance of the class dictates an adjustment in the B/C
cutoff, the new grade cutoffs will not be rounded up. For example, if 78% is the final
average required for a letter B grade, a 77.5 will NOT be rounded up to 78%. Rather, a
78.0 will be the minimum final grade average required for a B.
We do not “bump” scores or add extra points at the end of the term. If you have
questions about your course grade, please contact Dr. Babler BEFORE the end of the
term.
Exam Conflicts: Students with a conflicting University class or examination must submit
a request for a different test time in writing at least one week prior to the scheduled
date of the exam. The request must state the class number, meeting time, and
professor’s name. People taking non-UT classes such as MCAT prep courses are not
allowed to take early exams, nor are students attending professional interviews off
campus.


Missed exams: A missed exam will be excused only if: 1) the student can produce a
verifiable, written medical excuse OR there has been a verifiable death in the immediate
family, AND 2) the student has contacted the instructor PRIOR to the exam. You may
email or leave a phone message as soon as you realize you must miss an exam. Again,
no makeup exam will be given. No exceptions. If you have a valid excused exam, your
final exam score will count for the missed exam. Note the final exam date and time
immediately. ALL students will be required to be present and take this exam. No
exceptions. Students with an excused absence for the final exam will receive an
incomplete (X) for the semester and will take the final exam in the next term the
course is offered.
Special Accommodations: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY. In
addition, inform Dr. Babler at least one week before the first exam that you will need
special accommodations.
Exam regrades: Questions about grading on the tests must be taken up with the lab TA
or the instructor no later than 1 week after the test is returned. Be sure you have ample
justification. For any re-grades other than arithmetic errors, the entire test will be
regraded and you may lose points as well as gain them. If there is any question that the
student may have altered the exam after getting it back, there will be no credit given for
the answer. Tests written in pencil will not be regraded if there is any sign of erasure.
Tests with “white-out” will not be regraded. The key for each lecture exam will be
posted in Canvas as soon as possible following exams. Scantron answers, rather than
answers circled on exam paper will be the answers accepted.
The following policies will be in effect for all exams
    1. No talking except to the instructor.
    2. Eyes on your own paper, not your neighbor's. If you want to think with your eyes
         off your paper, look at the ceiling. Students with wandering eyes will receive one
         warning before your exam is collected.
    3. Books, backpacks, coats, etc. must be closed and placed along the classroom
         walls. Purses beneath your seat. No hats except baseball caps turned backwards.
    4. No calculators unless specifically permitted. No memory calculators, ever. No cell
         phones, PDAs, or pagers, computers, or other electronics. All electronic devices
         must be turned OFF and secured in closed backpacks.
    5. Do not write exams in colored ink. No "white-out."
    6. No one may leave the room once the exam has started unless s/he has finished
         the test. This policy applies for the final exam as well. Please take care of
         restroom needs in advance.
    7. Nothing is permitted at your seat except tests, pens/pencils, Kleenex, and
         calculators (if allowed). No food or drink. No headphones.
    8. It is critical that all instructions related to an exam be followed. Students failing


       to follow instructions for lecture exam #1 will receive a warning. For each exam
       after that, the penalty is 1 point off your exam score for not following
       instructions. Instructions for exams can be found in your study guides and on the
       exam paper itself.
Religious Holidays: UT-Austin policy requires that you notify us at 14 days prior to dates
on which you will be absent or miss assignments due to observation of a religious
holiday. You will be given reasonable time after your absence to complete any missed
work.
