                             THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                  ACC 380K.12 Computer Audit & Systems Security (02675)
                                          Course Syllabus
                                             FALL 2018
                                   (Professor)                           (TA)
                                   Bob George                             Florence Sung
                                   Department of Accounting
                           Phone: (512) 471-0787
                           Office: CBA 3.250 (McCombs)
                           E-Mail: Bob.George@mccombs.utexas.edu florence.sung@.utexas.edu
                           Office
                           Hours: M 1:30 – 3:00 pm, by appointment        By appointment
                           Class: (Sept 11 – Dec 11) M 3:30 – 6:30 PM
                                   UTC 3.112
             I prefer e-mail as a means of contact outside of class and office hours.
The course TA will assist with grading and, after graded material is returned, schedule office
hours for any needed discussions.
                                             “Canvas”
The web-based University of Texas at Austin “Canvas” software will be actively used for this
course, including the discussion forums. Please check Canvas frequently and before every
class since it will be used extensively to post announcements and files for downloading.
PowerPoint slides for lectures will be available under each class module section on Canvas
before class together with required supplemental readings and assignments.
Canvas discussion forums benefit everyone and can be used to post comments, articles of
interest, questions and responses to others’ posts. If you have a question, comment or article
of general interest (i.e., not a personal matter), please use the Canvas discussion forums, not
e-mail.
                                        Class Environment
Your active participation in class discussions is encouraged and expected to enhance the
learning experience for you and your fellow students. As in any professional situation,
courtesy and respect will contribute to a positive, constructive environment. The objective is
for us to work together to achieve a relaxed and informal environment that will maximize your
enjoyment of this course.
Please let me have your feedback as the course progresses regarding things you like or dislike
about the course.


ACC 380K.12 (02675)
Computer Audit & Systems Security
Fall 2018
 – Bob George                                                                              Page-2
                                        REQUIRED MATERIALS
          (1) ACC 380K.12 (02675), Computer Audit & Systems Security: Readings, Fall 2018.
              Available from the McCombs copy center located on the third floor.
          (2) Course files. PowerPoint and other files (including required supplemental readings)
              that will be used in class discussions will be provided on Canvas.
                                         COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course will provide students with a basic understanding of IT:
     •    Terminology                                        •  Outsourcing and Service
     •    Governance                                            Organization Controls Reporting
     •    Control Frameworks                                 •  Computer Audit Assistance
     •    Audit Process                                         Techniques (CAATS)
     •    Risks and Risk Management                          •  Disaster Recovery and Business
     •    General Controls                                      Continuity
     •    Application Controls and                           •  Data Privacy
          Segregation of Duties                              •  Cloud Computing
     •    Fraud Prevention and Detection                     •  Cybersecurity
These and other topics will be covered through lectures, readings, case studies and
presentations by leading industry practicitioners.
                                    EXAMINATIONS AND GRADING
                 POINTS
                 Exam #1                                        125
                 Exam #2 (not cumulative)                       125
                 Assignments                                    100
                 Class Participation and Contribution            50
                       TOTAL POINTS                             400
I DO NOT HAVE ANY FIXED POINT OR PERCENTAGE CUT-OFFS IN MIND REGARDING LETTER GRADES. I
WILL MAKE THESE DETERMINATIONS AT THE END OF THE COURSE BASED ON BOTH RELATIVE AND
ABSOLUTE PERFORMANCE CONSIDERATIONS.
EXAMS. Exams will emphasize concepts and issues discussed in class, although any material
from assigned readings is “fair game” for testing. Exams may consist of a mixture of objective,
short answer, and problem questions.


ACC 380K.12 (02675)
Computer Audit & Systems Security
Fall 2018
– Bob George                                                                              Page-3
Assignments. Assignments will be posted on Canvas in the relevant class module
approximately one week before their respective due dates. All assignments must be
completed independently by each student (i.e., assignments are not group projects).
CLASS PARTICIPATION AND CONTRIBUTION. IT IS NOT ONLY IMPORTANT FOR YOU TO ATTEND CLASS,
BUT THAT YOU ALSO ACTIVELY PARTICIPATE. ADVANCE PREPARATION IS CRITICAL TO DO THIS
SUCCESSFULLY. CONSEQUENTLY, YOU SHOULD CAREFULLY READ, ANALYZE, AND THINK ABOUT
ASSIGNED READINGS BEFORE COMING TO CLASS. FIFTY (50) points will be based on my largely
subjective assessment of your cumulative participation and contribution (read carefully the
grading criteria below).
Additionally, there may be periodic assignments and quizzes to help ensure your
understanding of the course material.
Criteria to earn points for class participation and contribution:
      •   Ask and answer questions and offer insights during class discussions
      •   Actively participate in discussions led by guest speakers
      •   Submit written questions to me in advance (via e-mail NO later than noon on the
          Saturday before class) for guest speakers
      •   Post questions and insights to Canvas discussion forums
      •   Answer others’ posts to Canvas discussion forums
      •   Post sample test questions to exam discussion forums based on class presentations
          (No later than one week prior to the scheduled exams)
 Both classroom and Canvas participation are important. However, to earn all of the points
 available, substantive classroom participation is required. Attendance also will be
 considered in determining your participation and contribution score.
 If at any point you have a concern about your performance in the course, please come by
 during office hours or make other arrangements to discuss with me. I will be happy to provide
 suggestions on how you might improve your performance.
                                      Canvas Discussion Forums
 You are strongly encouraged to take advantage of the Canvas discussion forums. Postings
 can relate to class discussions, assignments, exams, or other topics/issues that are relevant
 to this course. Substantive Canvas discussion forum participation will be part of your class
 participation and contribution grade.
 Canvas discussion forum ground rules:
      •   For questions or comments of general interest to the class (i.e., non-personal matters),
          please use the discussion forums, not e-mail. I will not consider personal e-mails to me
          in assigning class participation and contribution grades.
      •   Such electronic forums are commonly used in business environments so this will
          provide you with an opportunity to practice professional business communication skills.
          Be relevant, constructive, respectful and concise.
      •   Add your own insights and contributions and be responsive to comments posted by
          others.
      •   Access the discussion forums frequently, including before each class, assignment due
          dates and exams. I will also use the discussion forums to communicate important
          announcements and clarifications.


ACC 380K.12 (02675)
Computer Audit & Systems Security
Fall 2018
 – Bob George                                                                                 Page-4
      •   Special Canvas discussion forums will be established for each exam and assignment.
          Please use such forums for assignment and exam related questions, not e-mail.
                                        Student ISACA Memberships
      You are encouraged to become student members of the Information Systems Audit and
      Control Association (ISACA). Joining ISACA provides access to a wealth of resources
      about the topics we will cover in class. With student membership, you gain access to
      articles in the Information Systems Control Journal, various IT audit & security toolkits,
      discounts on ISACA certifications (CISA, CISM), events, conferences, etc. Joining ISACA
      will also enable making connections with professionals around the world who are currently
      working and hiring for positions ranging from IT security, audit, control, risk, privacy,
      compliance and advisory services. To learn more, please check out
      www.isaca.org/student.
                           Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
 Medical emergencies, family emergencies and university-sponsored conflicts are the only
 valid reasons for missing an examination or due date of an assignment. In any such instance,
 supporting documentation will be required, such as a signed note from a physician. At that
 point, I will decide the best make-up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a
 make-up exam or recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed component.
 Examinations or assignments that are missed for reasons other than emergencies or
 university-sponsored conflicts will generally receive no credit. In the case of a university-
 sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of the conflict and before the
 examination date or assignment due date. Interviews, recruiting events and office visits
 are not valid reasons for missing an examination or turning in an assignment late.
                                            Religious Holidays
 Religious holidays sometime conflict with examination and assignment schedules. If you miss
 an examination or assignment due date for the observance of a religious holy day, you will be
 given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence.
 It is the policy of the University that you must notify me at least fourteen (14) days prior to
 the exam or assignment due date that you will be absent to observe a religious holiday.
                               University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
 Students should become familiar with The University’s official e-mail student notification
 policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep The University informed as to changes in his or
 her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
 order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
 communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily. The
 complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
 http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
                                          ACADEMIC HONESTY
Accounting Department Policy:
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibility of both students and faculty with respect to scholastic dishonesty are described


ACC 380K.12 (02675)
Computer Audit & Systems Security
Fall 2018
 – Bob George                                                                                 Page-5
in detail in the department’s Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. I
have agreed to observe all of the faculty responsibilities described in that document. By
enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described
in that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is
unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
The student responsibilities embodied in the department’s Policy Statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty are consistent with the GSB Honor Code and the University’s General Information
catalog. However, you should obtain and read the department’s Policy Statement to ensure
that you understand my responsibilities.
                                       Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students.
                                                 Privacy
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at The
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that
may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging
in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a
component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic
class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar. For
information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi02-03/app/appc09.html.
                                             Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding The University of Texas at Austin
Campus Safety and Security, (512) 471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
              ➢ Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
                 to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
                 announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
              ➢ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
                 occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used
                 when entering the building.
              ➢ Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in
                 writing during the first week of class.
              ➢ In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
              ➢ Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions to do so by the following:
                 Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
                 Fire Prevention.
              ➢ Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): (512) 232-5050


ACC 380K.12 (02675)
Computer Audit & Systems Security
Fall 2018
 – Bob George                                                                                          Page-6
                                           ACC 380K.12 (02675)
                                 Computer Audit & Systems Security
                                    Anticipated Course Schedule
                                                   Fall 2018
The class schedule is subject to change, based on the needs of students. Assigned readings are identified in this
syllabus and can be found in 1) ACC 380K.12 Computer Audit & Systems Security Readings (02675), Fall 2018
(available from the McCombs copy center located on the third floor) and 2) on Canvas. It is important to
remember that other required readings and files will supplement this material and be added from time to
time.
IMPORTANT: Please complete each day’s assigned reading before class so that you will have the
understanding to actively participate in classroom discussions so that you can maximize your learning experience
and your class participation grade.
M         September 10 CLASS 1 – Grant Thornton
TOPIC: Course Overview/introductions; Introduction to Information Technology Audits
READINGS:
     1. Course syllabus
     2. IIA Global Technology Audit Guide (GTAG) – 11: Developing the IT Audit Plan (pages 1-22)
     3. IIA Practice Guide (PG): Integrated Auditing (pages 1-7)
M         September 17            CLASS 2 – Deloitte
TOPIC: IT Risks and IT Auditing
READINGS:
     1. GTAG-1: Information Technology Risk and Controls (pages 1-25)
     2. GTAG-4: Management of IT Auditing (pages 1-14)
ASSIGNMENT: Case Study #1
M         September 24            CLASS 3 – PwC
TOPIC: Auditing General Controls
CASE STUDY #1 DUE AT BEGINNING OF CLASS (ONE PAPER COPY)
READINGS:
     1. Guide to the Assessment of IT Risk (GAIT) Methodology: A Risk Based Methodology for Assessing the
          Scope of IT General Controls (pages 1-28)
ASSIGNMENT: Case Study #2
M         October 1               CLASS 4 – Deloitte
TOPIC: Auditing Application Controls and Segregation of Duties
Case Study #2 Due AT BEGINNING OF Class (ONE PAPER COPY)
READINGS:
     1. GTAG-8: Auditing Application Controls (pages 1-17)
     2. GTAG-14: Auditing User-Developed Applications (pages 1-21)
M         October 8               CLASS 5 – E&Y
TOPIC: IT Outsourcing and Service Organization Controls Reporting
READINGS:
       1. GTAG-7: Information Technology Outsourcing (pages 1-23)
       2. AICPA Statement on Standards for Attestation Engagements SSAE No. 16, Reporting on Controls at a
           Service Organization (AT sec. 801.1 to sec. 801.58, Appendix A sec. 801.A68 and Appendix B sec.
           801.A69)
M         October 15              CLASS 6
TOPIC: Exam 1


ACC 380K.12 (02675)
Computer Audit & Systems Security
Fall 2018
– Bob George                                                                                    Page-7
M         October 22              Class 7 – EY
TOPIC: Cybersecurity
READINGS:
     1.   AICPA Overview of Cybersecurity Risk Management Reporting (2 pages)
     2.   EY: Cybersecurity Considerations for Audit Committees (8 pages)
     3.   EY: Cybersecurity Reporting (8 pages)
     4.   EY: GISS Report (28 pages)
M         October 29              CLASS 8 – PwC
TOPIC: IT Fraud & Forensics
READINGS: GTAG-13: Fraud Prevention and Detection in an Automated World (pages 1-18)
ASSIGNMENT: Case Study #3
M         November 5              CLASS 9 – Deloitte
TOPIC: Crisis Management and Business Continuity
CASE STUDY #3 DUE AT BEGINNING OF CLASS (ONE PAPER COPY)
READINGS: GTAG-10: Business Continuity Management (pages 1-31)
M         November 12             CLASS 10 – Protiviti
TOPIC: Data Privacy and PCI
READINGS:
     1. AICPA Generally Accepted Privacy Principles (pages 1-10)
     2. Practice Guide: Auditing Privacy Risks (pages 1-24)
     3. Case Studies of Using GAIT-R to Scope PCI Compliance (pages 1-3)
     ASSIGNMENT: Case Study #4
M         November 19             Class 11 - NO CLASS WORK DAY
TOPIC: Case Study #4 Work Day and Exam 2 Preparation
M         November 26             CLASS 12 – Weaver
TOPIC: Cloud computing, mobile computing and data analytics
CASE STUDY #4 DUE AT BEGINNING OF CLASS (ONE PAPER COPY)
READINGS:
          1. ISACA: “Cloud Computing: Business Benefits With Security, Governance and Assurance
              Perspectives,” An Emerging Technology ISACA White Paper, 2009 (pages 4-10)
          2. ISACA: “Risk Landscape of Cloud Computing,” ISACA Journal, Volume 1, 2010
          3. GTAG-16: Data Analysis Technologies (pages 2-21)
M         December 3              CLASS 13 – Husch Blackwell LLP
TOPIC: IT Laws & Regulations
READINGS: TBD
          December 10 Class 14
TOPIC: Exam 2 (NOT CUMULATIVE)
