         ACCOUNTING CAREERS EXPLORATION (ACE)
                               Accounting 151
                        Fall 2018 Course Syllabus
                        Instructor: Stephen Smith
                               COURSE INFORMATION
Class Time: 5:00 – 6:30 p.m.
Wednesday, August 29 – November 14
Location: UTC 2.102A
Course Website: Located on Canvas
http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Instructor:
Stephen Smith
512-471-8185
                                           Career Services Team:
stephen.smith@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Hours: and                          Jo Chauvin
By Appointment                             512-232-7728
                                           Jo.Chauvin@mccombs.utexas.edu
TAs:
                                           David Meintrup
Paige Parent
                                           512-471-3180
Pnparent@utexas.edu
                                           David.Meintrup@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Hour: Time (MPA Office)
Nicholas Baquera
Nicholas.Baquera@utexas.edu
Office Hour: Time (MPA Office)
                                                                             1


                                      COURSE GOAL AND OBJECTIVES
The purpose of the Accounting Careers Exploration (ACE) course is to develop your awareness of the
career opportunities that await you. Your first chance to exercise this knowledge will occur with internship
recruiting in a few weeks. Therefore, this course has immediate relevance to significant decision you will
face very soon.
ACE develops a comprehensive framework through exposure to multiple talented professionals and
experienced fellow students. A comprehensive framework has multiple advantages.
              1. It enables you to explore and better understand the job opportunities that you may wish
                   to pursue in your internship and immediately thereafter.
              2. The framework maps into your MPA track options.
              3. In your first job, you will better understand other businesses with which you interact and,
              4. You will gain perspective on career options for long term career planning.
The class is also designed to help improve your professionalism, resume writing, networking, and
Microsoft Excel skills. This skill set is critical to your success in your internship and your future career as a
professional.
                                                   CLASS FORMAT
The format of this class is unlike any other MPA class.
The class will bring in a variety of professionals from leading companies and give you an opportunity to
ask questions and learn about different career opportunities. We will also have a variety of educational
components that will be team-taught.
Your efforts and dedication will enrich your ability to learn about the dynamic professional choices that will
be available to you.
Important Note: Many of the participant firms will be interviewing students on campus in the near future.
This class gives you a chance to show your knowledge, enthusiasm, and professionalism. It gives you a
chance to make a great first impression and be favorably remembered!
                                     AMENDMENTS TO THE SYLLABUS
This syllabus may be amended at any time during the semester at the instructor’s discretion. You are
responsible for all information that has been distributed or communicated in class. You are also
responsible for checking Canvas for any announcements, changes, or updates that affect assignment
due dates or changes in topics covered in class.
                                              ATTENDANCE POLICY
  Your TA will record your attendance based on your attendance in your assigned section and the course
           instructor will evaluate attendance based on this record. Class will begin at 5:10pm.
There are no automatic excused absences. For full attendance credit, you must be in your seat and
ready to go no later than the start of your class time (5:10pm). You must remain fully attentive until the
session is adjourned. Gathering materials, packing backpacks, and viewing your smartphone, tablet or
laptop during class are discourteous to our guests and may result in point deductions. Be attentive and
respectful until each session is officially adjourned.
Full credit will be awarded each session if you:
              1. Arrive and are ready to start by the beginning of class, and
              2. You are attentive (and not disruptive) until the class is adjourned
              Point deductions will result if you fall below this standard, including zero credit for non-
              attendance.
                                                                                                                2


Excused absence(s)
You will be excused from class if there is a “legitimate reason.” More than one excused absence will be
subject to review. An excused absence(s) requires:
             1. An email request in advance sent to your TA or the instructor
             2. Documentation that supports the reason for your absence, and
             3. A “legitimate reason,” which may include one of the following:
                      Your illness or injury
                      The illness, injury, or death of a family member
                      The observance of an official religious holiday
                      The birth of your child
                 Examples of items that are not “legitimate reasons” include:
                      Office visits and recruiting events
                      A “tight” exam schedule
                      Preparing for an exam or project in another class
                      Extracurricular activities (i.e.: cheerleading practice, intramural sports)
                      Family reunions
                      Sporting events
                      A transportation failure
                      And other events not listed under “legitimate reasons”
An unexcused absence will result in a 50-point reduction to your timely and full attendance grade.
                                                HOMEWORK
Homework assignments will be posted on Canvas and are indicated in the course schedule and
explained on the following page.
Please note there are no group assignments (including the Microsoft Excel Projects). It is
expected that all assignments will be done on an individual basis and not in conjunction with
other students. Acts of scholastic dishonesty will be reported to the Dean of Students.
Assignment 1: Your Industry Night Preferences (10 points). You will receive a survey link via your UT
email address and be asked to list your industry night preferences. Due August 30 at 11pm.
This assignment calls for you to research, select and rank order four of the entities from the companies
listed below. You will enter the preferences in the survey.
For example:
                                 1.  Phillips 66
                                 2.  Intel
                                 3.  Dell
                                 4.  ExxonMobil
The following companies will be present at the Industry Night on September 12 (subject to change):
                                   BASF
                                   Caterpillar
                                   Chevron
                                   Concho Resources
                                   Dell
                                   Dow Chemical
                                   ExxonMobil
                                   Intel
                                   Phillips 66
                                   Stryker
                                   Texas Instruments
                                                                                                         3


Assignment 2: Company Research Activity (3 exercises - 60 points total) Due September 12 at 5pm.
Upload your project workpapers to Canvas. The workpaper templates for this exercise will be
available in Canvas.
         Exercise 1 (20 points): Pick an industry that is of interest to you. Research overall industry trends in
         that industry citing references from at least two of the five market research databases listed on the
         worksheet. Combine those insights and your own reflections and list them.
         Exercise 2 (20 points): Pick the one U.S. state that you are most likely to live in after graduation. Use
         the best COMPANY & INDISTRY DATABASES on the worksheet to locate five companies within that
         state that fall into the industry you selected in Exercise 1. Display the information in the columns listed
         on the worksheet for each of the 5 companies.
         Exercise 3 (20 points): Pick two of your targeted companies from exercise 2 and utilize the listed
         databases to uncover major current events within those companies that happened within the last year.
         Please cite the databases you pulled your information from following your comments.
Assignments 3 & 4: Resume. The following summary will be explained further in our class on
September 5.
Assignment 3 (50 points): Complete a draft of your resume and upload a copy to Canvas.
Due: September 12 at 5:00pm. Your resume will be evaluated and you will receive suggested
corrections.
Assignment 4 (100 points): Make the necessary corrections to the resume and submit to Canvas for
final evaluation. Due October 24 at 5:00pm.
Assignment 5: Your Career Portfolio (150 points) - This is the project that ties it all together. You will
create a comprehensive portfolio that includes a detailed plan and a set of tools for navigating your career
journey. This assignment will be discussed further on September 5.
ACE Portfolio-
     1) Title Page
     2) Table of Contents
     3) Career and recruiting goals:
         My career interests:
               First 5 years
               Long-term
               Dream job
         My recruiting plan:
               3rd Year – Fall
               3rd Year – Spring
               4th Year – Fall
               4th Year – Spring
               5th Year – Fall
               3th Year – Spring
     4) STAR Stories x 3
     5) Informational interview summary - Conduct 2 informational interviews with off-campus contacts.
               Name
               Company
               Title
               Email
               What did you learn?
               Were you able to facilitate a LinkedIn connection?
               Do you have plans for a follow-up?
                                                                                                                   4


     6) ACE Learning Outcomes Response – please complete the template in Canvas and outline the
          following:
               a. Three things you learned about yourself in this class
               b. Favorite session – why?
               c. Least favorite session – why?
               d. What will you do differently because of participating in this class?
Microsoft Excel Projects (16 Projects) (320 points)
You will use the Cengage SAM system to develop and improve your Microsoft Excel skills. The deadlines
for each project are listed on the course calendar (see page 8).
Please make sure that you are completing projects not trainings or exams.
To receive full credit: you must have each Excel test completed by the assignment deadline with a score
of 80% or better.
You will receive half credit if you completed the Excel test and received a score below 80%. You will
receive no credit if you have not completed the test by its deadline or scored below 50%.
Note: If your score is below 80%, you may resubmit prior to the deadline. I would encourage you to do so,
since your Excel skills will be extensively utilized in your upcoming internship.
                                     EXPERIENTIAL CREDIT OPTIONS
Choose 3 options. Credit may be earned once for each option. (30 points each)
Please note that options and dates are subject to change. Some options require appointments or RSVP
and have limited availability. To obtain credit, you must sign official event logs.
    MPA Careers in Focus - The MPA Careers in Focus Series provides a chance for you to learn more
     about the actual work done in a given position. You will meet a variety of employers, see live
     demonstrations, and have an open forum to ask questions. (RSVP Needed)
          o September 17            CBA Events Room 3.304            11:00am-12:15pm
          o October 17              CBA Events Room 3.304            11:00am-12:15pm
          o TBD
    Energy Industry Lunch and Learn
     This event will give you key insights into Texas’s #1 industry. Experts will be on hand to lead the
     discussion and answer your questions. Lunch will be served.
     September 12, 11:00 AM – 12:00 PM, CBA Events Room (CBA 3.304)
    MPA Mock Interview Marathon Practice interviewing with real employers and gain valuable
     feedback that you can apply immediately. Sign-up through Recruit McCombs.
     September 4 - Ford Career Center (Interview Suites)
    MPA Resumania Are you struggling with how to articulate your experience on a resume? Join the
     MPA career services team for 5-7 minute walk-in resume critique sessions in the MPA conference
     room to help you produce a dynamic resume.
     September 10, 17, 24 & October 1, 3:30 – 5:30 PM, MPA Program Office
    MPA Recruiting Confidence Workshop: By attending this workshop you will learn to communicate
     professionally, work in a team, and keep a conversation progressing and present your body language
     in a confident manner. Sign-up through Recruit McCombs.
     See Canvas for Dates, Times & Locations
                                                                                                         5


    Telling Your Career Story (STAR development): You will learn how to master behavioral
     interviewing and construct relevant and compelling stories that recruiters will remember.
     See Canvas for Dates, Times & Locations
    MPA Dress for Success Webinar & Quiz: This webcast has helpful tips for both men and women
     as they dress for social events, business casual and business professional.
     Anytime in Canvas
    Career Consulting Appointment: Meet with an MPA career professional or peer career consultant
     (After August 29).
                                             EXTRA CREDIT OPTIONS
    50 Points - Ethics Unwrapped Modules - Implicit Bias, Self-Serving Bias, Appropriation and
     Attribution, and Media Representation – See Canvas for Dates, Times & Locations
                               LATE ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING POLICIES
    Accounting 151 is graded on a letter grade basis, with each assignment worth a specified number of
    points. All Accounting 151 assignments must be completed independently, unless otherwise
  directed by your instructor. Assignments are due at the beginning of class on the specified due
 date. No late assignments will be accepted. If you have an emergency, notify your Accounting 151
  instructor immediately. The instructor will determine if the assignment will be accepted. If you cannot
 attend class, it is still your responsibility to turn in a hard copy of the assignment prior to the beginning of
                                          class on the specified due date
                                    POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities
of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA
Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-
Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that
document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of the Statement of Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its
assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and procedures on
scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
                                                                                                                 6


                                      STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                           RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                               CAMPUS SAFETY
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
        Occupants of buildings on the University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
         buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
         assembling outside.
        Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
        Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first
         week of class.
        In event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
        Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
        Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                       FINAL GRADE COMPONENTS
            Assignments                        Date Due                             Points
              Attendance                     All Semester                             220
   Assignment 1: Industry Night                   8/30                                 10
         Preferences Survey
       Assignment 2: Company                      9/12                                 60
          Research Activity
   Assignment 3: Resume Draft                     9/12                                 50
   Assignment 4: Final Resume                    10/24                                100
  Assignment 5: Career Portfolio                 11/14                                150
            Excel Projects                    Throughout                              320
                                               Semester                (20 points per Excel Project)
                                            (See Schedule
                                              for Details)
  Experiential Credits (choose 3)                11/14                                 90
                                               Total Points:                         1,000
                                                                                                              7


                          FALL 2018 SCHEDULE
Week Date           In Class Topics                    Assignments Due
            ACC 151 Course Introduction,
 1   8/29    Career Pathways Overview                         N/A
                    Code of Ethics
 2    9/5     Resume Writing, Employer         Assignment 1: Industry Night
              Research, Career Portfolio       Preferences (Due 8/30 11pm)
                      (Overview)
 3   9/12         MPA Industry Night               Assignment 2: Company
                                                       Research Activity
                                                      Excel Projects 1&2
 4   9/19              No Class                  Assignment 3: Resume Draft
                                                      Excel Projects 3 & 4
 5   9/26   Recruiter Straight Talk Panel &          Excel Projects 5a & 5b
               Student Recruiting Panel
 6   10/3    Careers in Audit: Internal v.              Excel Project 6
                        External
 7   10/10   Careers in Banking/Finance                 Excel 7a and 7b
 8   10/17    Careers in Tax: Domestic,         Excel Projects 8a, 8b, 9a & 9b
              International & State/Local
 9   10/24    Careers in Consulting and                 Excel Project 10
                   Advisory Services
 10  10/31             No Class                  Assignment 4: Final Resume
 11  11/7      MPA Networking: Making                Excel Project 11 & 12
                     Connections
 12  11/14 Spring Recruiting, Class Wrap-up     Assignment 5: Career Portfolio
                            GRADING SCALE
                     Grade               Grade Points
                        A                   940-1,000
                        A-                   900-939
                       B+                    870-899
                        B                    840-869
                        B-                   800-839
                       C+                    770-799
                        C                    740-769
                        C-                   700-739
                       D+                    670-699
                        D                    640-669
                        D-                   600-639
                        F                     <600
                                                                               8
