                             UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
            ACC 358C / ACC 380K.4, Auditing and Assurance Services
                    Course Syllabus for Kachelmeier Sections, Spring 2020
Time and Location:
   TT 9:30 - 11:00, UTC 1.130 (unique 02345 for ACC 358C; 02465 for ACC 380K.4)
   TT 11:00 - 12:30, UTC 1.130 (unique 02355 for ACC 358C; 02475 for ACC 380K.4)
   Note: Please attend the section in which you are enrolled. If special circumstances prevent
       you from attending your section on any particular day, please notify me beforehand and I
       may allow you to attend the other section that day, but not on a regular basis.
Instructor
   Steven Kachelmeier, Ph.D., CPA (licensed in New Mexico)
   Randal B. McDonald Chair in Accounting
   Office: CBA 4M.236; Ph.: 471-3517; E-mail: kach@mail.utexas.edu
   Office hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays 4:00 - 5:30, or as announced, and by appointment.
Teaching Assistants
   Dan Rimkus, CPA (Illinois) - Ph.D. student, Daniel.Rimkus@mccombs.utexas.edu
       Dan’s office hours and location: Mondays, 2:30 – 4:30, CBA 3.332U
   Dylan Luo (5th year IMPA student), dylan.luo11@gmail.com
       Dylan’s office hours and location: Wednesdays, 11:00 – 12:30, location TBA
   TA office hours are subject to revision; please check Canvas for updates.
   Note: The TAs will grade the cases, so they are a great resource for case questions. The TAs
       can also assist you with homework, class questions, or career/recruiting questions.
Canvas
   In addition to posting announcements and documents on Canvas
   (https://utexas.instructure.com), I use the Canvas discussion board feature to provide you
   with a resource for questions or comments at any time, seven days a week. Please get in the
   habit of checking our Canvas site before every class.
   The discussion board benefits you and me. You can use it to post questions, comments, and
   responses to others’ posts. Responses then help the entire class, not just the person who asked
   the question. If you have a question of general interest, please use the discussion board,
   not email. That way everyone benefits.
   Canvas Privacy Notice: Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be
       aware that I use a merged Canvas site for the sections of this course that I am teaching
       this semester. The reason is to enable a combined discussion board that benefits all
       students equally. A combined Canvas site allows students in multiple sections to see that
       you are enrolled in the course and to send you an email directly from Canvas. However,
       other students will not be able to learn your email address or other personal data from
       Canvas. If you have any concerns about this arrangment, please let me know and/or
       contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from the view of
       other students.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                          2
SPRING 2020
Required Course Materials
    Course files. I will upload to Canvas the Powerpoint files and other materials we will use in
        class discussion. My Powerpoint slides often have blank areas for your notes from class,
        making it important for you to attend each class session.
    Auditing and Assurance Services: A Systematic Approach, 11th ed., by Messier, Glover, and
        Prawitt (McGraw-Hill, 2019).
    Note: You may obtain this text by whichever means you prefer. I suggest the “looseleaf”
        option, which is considerably less expensive than the hard-cover textbook, while still
        providing you with a printed copy. You are also welcome to rent or access the text
        electronically, at your option. However, to make sure you have the latest updates and
        correct homework problems, it is important that you have access to the U.S. version of
        the 11th edition.
Course Objectives
At the end of the semester, you should have a better and deeper understanding of the following:
1. The role of auditing in a market economy.
2. U.S. and international regulation of auditing.
3. Auditor independence and ethical responsibilities.
4. Risk assessment.
5. Internal controls and the integrated audit.
6. Basics of audit sampling.
7. Audit applications of data analytics and technology.
8. Basic framework for audit evidence in general and in the revenue and purchasing cycles.
9. Evaluating and correcting errors.
10. Entity-wide audit considerations (e.g., going concern, subsequent events).
11. Audit reporting.
12. Fundamental issues arising in recent accounting and auditing scandals.
We will achieve these objectives through a mixture of class discussions, cases (including a
data analytics case), homework, and an end-of-semester group presentation project.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                           3
SPRING 2020
Teaching Philosophies
 • This course is not just another requirement to graduate. Rather, insofar as most students in
   this course will either be auditors or will deal with auditors, the primary objective of this
   course is to help you to succeed after graduation.
 • I am not wedded to any single teaching method. Rather, I prefer to select among a variety of
   teaching methods and materials, as appropriate for different class objectives.
 • I prefer an informal atmosphere. Learning should be enjoyable.
 • I would rather be interrupted than for you to be confused.
 • I prefer trust over suspicion, but especially in an auditing course, we cannot tolerate anything
   less than absolute integrity. If you help us maintain an atmosphere of trust and integrity, we
   will have more fun and get more out of the course.
 • People tend not to be late to things that are important to them. It is your responsibility to
   arrive on time.
 • I appreciate feedback. Tell me what you like and what you do not like.
 • Although evaluation and grading are necessary for accountability, what you learn from this
   course is more important than what grade you get. Put differently, grades are a byproduct of
   learning, not the objective of learning. I do realize that grades are important to you, however,
   so my grading policies are described on the next page.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                           4
SPRING 2020
Grading
Course grades will be based on a 500-point scale, as follows:
                                                                                Points
                                                                              Possible
             In-class examination 1, Tuesday, February 25, 2020                  100
             In-class examination 2, Tuesday, April 7, 2020                      100
             Final examination                                                   125
             Wed., May 13, 2 p.m. – 5 p.m., for the 11:00 section
             Sat., May 16, 9:00 a.m. – 12:00 noon, for the 9:30 section
             Cases (see details later in this syllabus)                            85
             End-of-semester group presentation                                    70
             In-class end-of-semester presentation summaries                       20
               Nominal points possible                                           500
             Extra credit for participation and effort                       Up to 35
               Total points possible, including extra credit                     535
In awarding final grades, I start by considering the traditional 90% = A, 80% = B, and 70% = C
cutoffs based on the 500 nominal points listed above. I sometimes award grades that are more
generous than these cutoffs, depending upon the end-of-semester point distribution, to reflect the
following interpretations:
     “A” or “A-” = Exceptional performance, generally exceeding my expectations. While
        several students will likely earn an “A” in this class, students should understand that an
        “A” is a reward, not an expectation.
     “B+” or “B” = Fine performance, meeting my expectations. The ability to distinguish
        outstanding from very good performance is undermined if everyone gets an “A,” so I
        anticipate that a “B” will be the grade most frequently assigned.
     “B-,” “C+,” or “C” = Performance that falls short of expectations. These grades should be
        infrequent, but that being said, there is no such thing as an “automatic B” in the MPA
        program. If you do not put in the effort necessary to attain a reasonable degree of
        proficiency in attaining the course objectives, I cannot award you a “B.”
     “C-,” “D,” or “F” = Performance that falls far short of expectations, usually reflecting lack
        of effort. A failing grade can also result from severe cases of scholastic dishonesty.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                              5
SPRING 2020
Plus/Minus Grading
I use +/- grading in an approximately “GPA neutral” manner. What this means is that I award
plus or minus grades for borderline cases at each grade cutoff (primarily the A/B cutoff), but I
strive to do so in a way that does not significantly alter the grade-point average for the class as a
whole. Thus, the number of students who get an A- instead of an A will be approximately equal
to the number of students who get a B+ instead of a B. Plus-minus grading simply allows a finer
distinction between different levels of performance.
Examinations (two midterms worth 100 points each; final exam worth 125 points)
Examinations will emphasize issues and concepts discussed in class, although material from the
textbook (particularly as it relates to the assigned homework) and other assigned readings is also
fair game. Exams will involve a mixture of objective and written-answer formats.
The two midterms emphasize new material (i.e., they are not cumulative). In contrast, the final
exam is weighted approximately two-thirds on new material covered after the second midterm
and one-third to reinforce the most important concepts tested on the midterm exams.
Cases and Research Exercises (85 points)
To refine written communication skills as well as judgment skills in dealing with a more realistic
and less structured variety of auditing problems than can be found in a textbook, we will
complete five case assignments based on timely issues from the practice of auditing. The last
case will use an educational version of Ernst & Young’s “Helix” software to illustrate how data
analytic technology is being implemented in auditing.
All cases except the data analytics case will be graded for depth of analysis, originality, writing,
and professional impression. These cases involve subjective issues for which multiple views can
be defended. The data analytics case (Case 5) will be graded for completeness, accuracy, and
professional documentation.
I value the interchange of ideas. Thus, in the formative stage of a case assignment, you are
welcome to ask questions or offer comments about the case on the Canvas discussion board. That
being said, I also value individual accountability. Copying from another student’s prepared
solution is scholastic dishonesty, and will be dealt with accordingly. See the “Policy on
Scholastic Dishonesty” later in this syllabus for clarification.
The assigned cases and their due dates are listed on the next page.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                         6
SPRING 2020
Cases and Research Exercises, continued
            Case                        Source                      Topic            Due Date
  1.   Debating Audit         Case by S. Kachelmeier,         Auditor             Tue., Feb. 4
       Quality (15 points)    2020, based on recent           responsibilities
                              commentaries by Palmrose        for quality
                              and Kinney (2018) and by        financial
                              DeFond, Lennox, and             reporting
                              Zhang (2018)
  2.   About that Next        Case by S. Kachelmeier,         Gender and          Tue., Feb. 18
       Recruiting Event …     2020, based on a recent         personality
       (15 points)            research paper by Fanning,      biases in
                              Williams, and Williamson        recruiting by
                              (2019)                          public
                                                              accounting firms
  3.   Gessle Band            Original case by                Designing an        Thu., Mar. 5
       Boosters               S. Kachelmeier                  internal control
       (15 points)                                            system for a
                                                              simple
                                                              organization
  4.   Koss Corporation       Adapted from a case by          Fraud, internal     Thu., Mar. 26
       (15 points)            Daugherty and Neeley,           controls, and
                              American Accounting             substantive audit
                              Association, 2011               testing
  5.   Peach State            Adapted by S. Kachelmeier       Data analytics      Thu., Apr. 16
       University Hotel       and D. Rimkus from an
       (25 points)            Ernst & Young Foundation
                              case based on an
                              educational version of EY’s
                              “Helix” audit software
Discussing cases is an important part of the course, so be prepared to discuss and defend your
case responses in class. You are also welcome to discuss and clarify case issues by posting to the
discussion board on Canvas.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                           7
SPRING 2020
University Writing Center
If you experience difficulty with written assignments, consider scheduling a free appointment
with a writing consultant at the UT-Austin University Writing Center (UWC). The UWC
employs free consultants who will work with you to improve your written assignments in ways
that preserve the integrity of your work. For further details, see https://uwc.utexas.edu.
Group Presentation – “Pick a Scandal” (70 points)
The capstone project at the end of the semester will involve groups of four students. Each group
will investigate a major accounting / auditing scandal to identify (1) the underlying financial
reporting issue(s), (2) what the auditors should have done differently, and (3) the consequences
to management and to the auditors.
Groups will present the results from these investigations in 20-minute presentations at the end of
the semester (see course schedule later in this syllabus). Group members and presentation dates
and times will be determined randomly. Each group must also submit the Powerpoint or similar
file used to facilitate their presentation, along with a list of references.
Later in the semester, I will provide further details on this assignment and a list of suggested
scandals.
In-Class Presentation Summaries (20 points)
To provide an incentive to attend class and learn from the group presentations at the end of the
semester, I will distribute a concise form during class to elicit your feedback on each
presentation. I will collect these forms and give you credit for them, allocating the points among
the presentation dates to account for a maximum of 20 points possible. Students who arrive late
will lose some of the points available for that date’s summaries.
Alternative assignment for excused absences:
If you are forced to miss one of the presentation dates (other than the day you are presenting) due
to an excused medical or family emergency, religious holiday, or university conflict, I will
arrange an alternate assignment for you to obtain the points you missed that day, at your
discretion. This option is available only for excused, documented absences due to a medical
emergency, family emergency, religious holiday, or university-sponsored conflict. The firms that
will be recruiting you for internships have agreed that a recruiting activity is not an acceptable
reason to miss class.
Even if allowed, the alternate assignment will involve more work than simply attending class and
completing the in-class presentation summary sheet. Therefore, it is in your best interest to
obtain the presentation summary points in class if at all possible.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                            8
SPRING 2020
Extra Credit for Participation and Effort (up to 35 additional points)
To reward your attentiveness and participation, I reserve the right to award extra credit points at
the end of the semester based on my subjective (but honest) assessment of your cumulative
participation in this class.
    •   Up to 10 extra credit points can be awarded for your professionalism, punctuality, and
        attentiveness, as evidenced in part by consistent, on-time attendance.
    •   Up to 15 extra credit points can be awarded for in-class participation. I do not expect
        students to participate constantly, nor do I reward students “by the word.” Nevertheless,
        students can earn a few extra credit points over the course of the semester by asking
        insightful questions, answering questions that I ask in class, offering different
        perspectives, participating in case discussions, and showing interest in others’ comments.
    •   Up to 10 extra credit points can be awarded for productive use of the online discussion
        board, as evidenced by posts and especially by constructive replies to others’ posts. I do
        not merely count the number of posts. Rather, I try to evaluate the quality of posts in
        contributing to the class experience.
In awarding extra credit points at the end of the semester, I am generous in awarding some
points, but increasingly stringent in awarding more points. Thus, the extremes of 0 extra credit
points or 35 extra credit points are very rare. A typical student will earn about 15-20 total extra
credit points.
Discussion board
        Along with the other tools available on the course “Canvas” site, I encourage you to take
advantage of the online discussion board for this course. Posts can relate to class discussions,
case issues, exam-related questions, or any other topics/issues that are relevant to students in this
course, including recruiting and career issues. I monitor the discussion board on a regular basis,
and I take this activity into account when considering possible extra credit points for class
participation (see above). Some of you will participate more effectively in class, and others will
participate more effectively on the discussion board. Both kinds of participation are helpful.
        You can think of the discussion board as continuous “office hours.” Thanks to this
technology, you can ask a question or volunteer an insight at any time.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                          9
SPRING 2020
Ground rules for discussion board:
1.   For questions or comments of general interest to the class, please use the discussion board,
     not email!
2.   Be professional and courteous. You do not need to be overly formal, but forums such as this
     offer a good opportunity to practice professional business communication.
3.   Any topics of interest to students taking this course are welcome, including questions or
     comments related to recruiting.
4.   Do not be a free rider! If you benefit from reading other’s posts, consider adding your own
     insights. Also be brave and reply to inquiries from your fellow students. I will correct and
     clarify any misinformation in a tactful manner, without embarrassing you.
5.   Even if you have nothing to post, get in the habit of accessing the discussion board before
     each class session. I will use Canvas to communicate important announcements and
     clarifications.
Homework
Each chapter in the text is followed by several multiple choice and other homework problems
that you can complete for practice. The last page of this syllabus lists the assigned homework
problems for each chapter.
Homework will not be collected! Hence, homework does not directly count as part of your
course grade. However, completing the homework will indirectly benefit you, as I take the
assigned homework into account when writing examinations. Thus, students who put diligent
effort into the homework will be rewarded with higher exam scores. Homework solutions will be
available so that you can check your work.
Policy on Notifications via Email and via Canvas
I sometimes post important announcements on Canvas, so strongly suggest checking our Canvas
site before every class.
In addition, when necessary, I will contact you by email, consistent with the UT-Austin policy on
email as an authorized vehicle for official University communication. Typically I will use
Canvas to this, so please monitor the email address registered for your name with Canvas. For
more information on the UT-Austin email policy, see: https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-
electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                           10
SPRING 2020
Student Safety and the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
Please see http://www.utexas.edu/safety to familiarize yourself with campus safety initiatives
and resources. Also see http://emergency.utexas.edu for emergency notifications. Regarding
behavioral issues, if you have concerns or are worried about someone who is acting differently,
consider using the UT-Austin Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss your concerns. This
service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center, the Employee Assistance Program, and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-
concerns-advice-line. You are also welcome to discuss any concerns with me, but please see the
next paragraph regarding my responsibilities as a University of Texas at Austin faculty member.
Harassment and Faculty Responsibilities
While I welcome all conversations with students, please be aware that, by University policy,
State law, and Federal law, faculty members are required to report to the appropriate University
office any and all instances of possible sexual harassment, assault, violence, and stalking that
may come to the faculty member’s attention. Please see https://titleix.utexas.edu/sb212 for
further details. The reason for this requirement is to do everything we can to keep all members of
the University community safe and secure.
Policy on Inclusiveness and Respect
Ethics are an integral part of auditing, and ethical issues can sometimes be sensitive. For
example, Case 2 in Spring 2020 considers recent research involving gender and personality
biases in public accounting. I welcome an open discussion from different perspectives, but I ask
that all expressions of view, including mine, are made tactfully and professionally with respect
for others who may hold different views. Along this line, if you find any comments in this class
offensive, please inform me so that we can take appropriate action to remedy the situation and
maintain an environment of mutual professionalism and respect.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
My general policy is that medical emergencies, family emergencies, religious holidays, and
university-sponsored conflicts are the only valid reasons for missing an examination or
assignment due date. For each such case, I require some form of supporting documentation, such
as a signed note from a physician or a letter/note from the relevant University office. I will then
determine the best make-up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a make-up
exam, slightly extended due date, or recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed
component, depending on circumstances. Examinations or assignments that are missed for
reasons other than those indicated above will generally not be accepted. In the case of a conflict
due to a university-sponsored event or religious holiday, please notify me at least 14 days before
the examination date or assignment due date.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                          11
SPRING 2020
Policy on Students with Disabilities
It is my policy to comply with guidelines set forth by the UT-Austin Office of Services for
Students with Disabilities (http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/current-students/). If you have an
SSD-registered accommodation letter, please see me to provide me with your letter and discuss
the accommodations you need for this course. Please understand that I can provide
accommodations only to students with approved SSD letters. For SSD accommodations
requiring additional examination time, students must provide at least 14 days in advance of the
exam a suggested time block to take the exam during the hours the McCombs Testing Center is
open (generally, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.). The suggested time block should generally be on the
day of the exam, but scheduling on the day after the exam can be considered if conflicts from
other classes prevent scheduling on the day of the exam, which should be rare. Please note that
the McCombs Testing Center can fill up during peak examination periods, so reservations at the
requested date/time may not be possible without sufficient advance notice.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Course Assignments
The Master in Professional Accounting Program has adopted a Code of Conduct, a Career
Services Code of Ethics, and a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty. It is important for you
to be familiar with all three documents, which are available on the web at
https://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-Codes-of-Ethics.
The following statement applies to each class in the UT-Austin MPA programs:
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the department’s Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the
MPA Program (which includes the integrated five-year MPA program and the traditional
MPA program). By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty
responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that
Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification.
In simple terms, integrity is a public good from which we all benefit. I view the above statement
as a commitment to integrity, not as a threat against students. It is my intent to conduct this
course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only achieve this goal if you join me in
maintaining an atmosphere of absolute ethical integrity in this course and in our MPA program.
Personal Policy on Working Together (applies only to this course)
I believe that learning takes place through a healthy exchange of ideas. Therefore, for this class,
you are welcome to discuss issues related to assigned cases and homework problems with other
students. This is especially appropriate on the Canvas discussion board, as Canvas is a forum that


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                          12
SPRING 2020
I can observe and from which all students can benefit. However, I expect the final product of
each assignment to reflect your individual effort (with the exception of the capstone project that
is assigned in groups of four). You may not copy or paraphrase from others’ solutions. To
clarify this policy, below are some examples of collaborative efforts that I do not tolerate, drawn
from past situations I have encountered. In each such case, I pursued a Scholastic Dishonesty
charge with the Dean of Students and imposed an appropriate penalty.
• Student X completes a case before student Y. Y asks X for X’s solution. Y’s solution is based
  on X’s solution, changing a few words to make it look original. This plagiarism takes
  advantage of student X and does not evidence any meaningful learning on the part of student
  Y. Both X and Y are guilty of scholastic dishonesty.
  In addition to the changes I make to the cases each semester, students should be aware that
  assignments submitted online via Canvas are subject to plagiarism-detection software. This
  software works by cross-referencing submitted materials with an archived database of cases
  submitted by other students, as well as journals, essays, newspaper articles, books, and other
  published works. Other methods may also be used to determine originality. Plagiarism
  software does not replace or substitute for the faculty member’s judgment regarding detection
  of plagiarism, but it is a tool that I use to maintain integrity on written assignments.
• A student finds a source relevant to a case or presentation and copies from it, without using
  quotation marks, indentation, or other references to acknowledge the source. This is another
  example of scholastic dishonesty from plagiarism.
• A student completes the data analytics case on the computer, and gives the solution file to
  another student. Blatant copying of this nature is a serious form of scholastic dishonesty.
• Any collaboration or breach of security on a course examination is scholastic dishonesty of the
  most severe variety, with penalties up to the possibility of an “F” for the course.
For more information on University policies and procedures regarding scholastic dishonesty, see
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/index.php.
When in doubt, ask me.
Thank you for reading this far! The fact that you took the time to read 12 pages of syllabus
material shows that you care about this class and want to succeed. History suggests that only
about half of all students read the entire syllabus, so I want to give you a small token of my
appreciation for being in that half. Accordingly, I have set up an online link that will award you
one extra credit point just for typing in your name, if you do so by Tuesday, January 28, 2020.
Thanks! To get your point, go to: https://mccombs.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_bvysPtfPlB3ZOE5
The remainder of this syllabus contains the course schedule and assigned homework problems.


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                    13
SPRING 2020
Course Schedule
Assigned chapters are from Auditing & Assurance Services: A Systematic Approach, 11th ed., by
Messier, Glover, and Prawitt (McGraw-Hill, 2019). Various other readings and course files will
supplement the text.
IMPORTANT: Please complete each day’s assigned reading before class. The readings
    provide necessary background for understanding classroom discussion.
                                                                              Reading
         Date                                     Topic
                                                                             Assignment
 Jan.     21  Tue.      Introduction
          23  Thu.      Overview of the auditing profession             Ch. 1
          28  Tue.      How auditing became a regulated industry        Ch. 2
          30  Thu.      Sarbanes-Oxley Act and PCAOB inspections        CAQ guide
                                                                        Klein report
 Feb.      4  Tue.      Auditing standards
                        CASE 1 (Debating Audit Quality) DUE
                        TODAY
           6  Thu.      Auditor independence                            Ch. 19
          11  Tue.      Audit ethics                                    SEC Order (KPMG)
          13  Thu.      Audit planning and materiality                  Ch. 3
          18  Tue.      Risk assessment                                 Ch. 4
                        CASE 2 (About that Next Recruiting Event …)
                        DUE TODAY
          20  Thu.      Fraud and strategic risks
          25  Tue.      EXAM 1 (in class)
          27  Thu.      Internal controls: COSO framework               Ch. 6
 Mar.      3  Tue.      Internal controls: Auditor responsibilities     Ch. 7
           5  Thu.      Audit sampling                                  Ch. 8, excluding the
                        CASE 3 (Gessle Band Boosters) DUE TODAY         “adv. modules” on
                                                                        pp. 285-286


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                             14
SPRING 2020
                                                                  Reading Assignment
        Date                              Topic
 Mar.    10   Tue.  Audit sampling, continued
         12   Thu.  Basics of audit evidence                     Ch. 5 (all)
 Mar. 16 – 20       SPRING BREAK                                 Enjoy!
         24   Tue.  Data analytics                               Appendix B of text +
                                                                 KPMG paper
                                                                 AICPA/Deloitte paper
         26   Thu.  The revenue cycle                            Ch. 10
                    CASE 4 (Koss Corporation) DUE TODAY
         31   Tue.  Finish revenue cycle; begin purchasing cycle Ch. 11, excluding the
                                                                 “adv. module on
                                                                 pp. 408-410
 Apr.     2   Thu.  Finish purchasing cycle
          7   Tue.  EXAM 2 (in class)
          9   Thu.  Error correction
         14   Tue.  Contingencies and going concern              Ch. 17
         16   Thu.  Subsequent events
                    CASE 5 (Peach St. Univ. Hotel) DUE TODAY
         21   Tue.  Basics of audit reporting                    Ch. 18
         23   Thu.  Critical audit matters, reviews, and         Ch. 21, pp. 721-726
                    compilations                                 only (LO 21-7)
                                                                 Maurer paper + reports
                                                                 Smith/Fulchino paper
         28   Tue.  Group presentations
         30   Thu.  Group presentations
 May      5   Tue.  Group presentations
          7   Thu.  Group presentations
         13   Wed.  Final exam, 2 - 5 p.m., for 11:00 section
         16   Sat.  Final exam, 9 - 12 noon., for 9:30 section


ACC 358C / 380K.4 SYLLABUS (KACHELMEIER)                                                           15
SPRING 2020
Homework
Homework will not be collected. However, completing the homework and reviewing the
solutions will help you understand the material and do better on the exams, which can draw from
this material. The topics and chapters listed below are in the order we will cover them.
Purpose of an audit and audit regulation
   Ch. 1: 1-3, 1-4, all multiple choice (1-13 to 1-23), 1-28.
   Ch. 2: 2-1, 2-5, 2-10, 2-12, 2-14, all multiple choice (2-15 to 2-23), 2-25.
Auditor independence and ethics
   Ch. 19: 19-8, 19-9, all multiple choice (19-14 to 19-26), 19-28, 19-29, 19-30, 19-34.
Audit planning and risk assessment
   Ch. 3: 3-2, 3-5, 3-14, all multiple choice (3-16 to 3-25), and 3-31.
   Ch. 4: 4-1, 4-2, 4-11, all multiple choice (4-13 to 4-22), 4-24, 4-25, 4-27, 4-31.
Internal controls
   Ch. 6: 6-3, 6-5, all multiple choice (6-12 to 6-24)
   Ch. 7: 7-2, 7-11, 7-12, 7-14, all multiple choice (7-19 to 7-33), 7-35, 7-39.
Audit sampling
   Ch. 8: 8-2, 8-5, 8-7, all multiple choice (8-11 to 8-20), 8-22, 8-25, 8-26, 8-27, 8-28, 8-30, 8-32.
Audit evidence
   Ch. 5: 5-7, 5-8, 5-16, all multiple choice (5-17 to 5-29), 5-30, 5-32, 5-34.
The revenue cycle
   Ch. 10: 10-1, 10-3, 10-10, all multiple choice (10-12 to 10-23), 10-26, 10-27, 10-30.
The purchasing cycle
   Ch. 11: 11-11, all multiple choice (11-13 to 11-23), 11-24, 11-29, 11-30.
Assessments at the end of the audit
   Ch. 17: 17-4, 17-5, 17-8, all multiple choice (17-13 to 17-21), 17-22, 17-25, 17-26.
Audit reporting + reviews and compilations
   Ch. 18: 18-6, 18-7, all multiple choice (18-10 to 18-21), 18-22, 18-23.
   Ch. 21: Multiple choice 21-19, 21-20, 21-22, and 21-22.
