                                   CE 341
          INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
                               Summer 2019
                                SYLLABUS
UNIQUE NUMBER:    75875
INSTRUCTOR:       Dr. Lynn E. Katz and Dr. Mary Jo Kirisits
                           ECJ 9.102H/ECJ 8.216
                  Phone: 471-0071/232-7120
                  E-mail: lynnkatz@mail.utexas.edu or Kirisits@utexas.edu
OFFICE HOURS:     M/Th 11:00-12:00 and by appt. Note that office hours will take
                  place in the office of the professor who is scheduled to lecture on
                  that day, where the schedule is shown in the Course Topics section
                  of this syllabus.
COURSE TIME:      MWTh 12:00-2:30
PLACE:            ECJ 1.322
OBJECTIVES:       This course is designed to introduce the student to the principles of
                  environmental engineering. Topics include material balances,
                  environmental chemistry, risk assessment, air quality, water
                  quality, and wastewater treatment. Course Description from the
                  2016-2018 Catalog: Quantitative evaluation of the environmental,
                  economic, and technical problems involved in control of pollutants
                  of the air, water and land.
PREREQUISITES:    CH 302 and 319F, or consent of instructor.
COMPUTER:         Proficiency with computers and familiarity with a spreadsheet
                  program like Excel is expected. Ability to use the Internet is also
                  expected.
TEXT:             The required text is Environmental Engineering:
                  Fundamentals, Sustainability, Design by James R. Mihelcic and
                  Julie Beth Zimmerman (available as an e-book and can be
                  rented from Amazon.com)
 ACADEMIC GOALS   This course will introduce the student to the various areas within
                  environmental engineering and their associated principles. Topics
                  include mass balances, environmental chemistry, risk assessment, air
                  quality, water quality, drinking water treatment, and wastewater
                  treatment. By the end of the course, you will be able to do the
                  following major tasks (a more detailed outline of goals is provided at
                  the end of this document):


   1. Write and solve mass and energy balances in the appropriate units.
   2. Balance chemical reactions; write and solve the associated chemical equilibria and rate law
      expressions.
   3. Mathematically describe the mass transfer and partitioning of contaminants between phases.
   4. Quantify health risks for exposure to a contaminant.
   5. Identify sources of aqueous pollution and indoor and outdoor air pollution; calculate pollutant
      concentrations within natural and engineered environments.
   6. Describe a typical treatment train in a drinking water or wastewater treatment plant.
CLASS FORMAT:                 Lectures supplemented with reading, homework, and exams.
CLASS OUTLINE:                See attached.
GRADING:                      Quizzes                                50%
                              Final Exam                             25%
                              Homework                               12.5%
                              Paper                                  10%
                              Professionalism                        2.5%
                              Any problems, personal or otherwise, affecting grades should be
                              brought to the instructors’ attention. We will use +/- grading.
HOMEWORK POLICY: On most homeworks, unless otherwise stated, you may work in
                              groups. However, each student must turn in their own assignment.
                              Using homework or homework solutions from previous
                              semesters is not allowed.
                              Homework will be graded using the following scale and the grader
                              will subtract 1 point for a problem that is sloppy or has a lack of
                              systematic presentation.
  Points                                          Description
 5          Correct solution, both methodologically and numerically; carefully presented,
            easy to follow.
 4          Correct methodologically, but with minor computational or table look-up errors,
            leading to erroneous final result.
 3          Some conceptual error(s) but correct general approach.
 2          Major conceptual errors.
 1          Completely missed the point of the problem but made some attempt at a solution.
 0          Did not attempt problem.


EXAMINATIONS:     There will be four 45-minute quizzes and a final exam. Each
                  examination will be closed book and will be given in class on the
                  date indicated. The exams will cover lecture material and assigned
                  reading material. A class crib sheet will be prepared and distributed
                  prior to the exam. Missed examinations may be made up only if the
                  reason for missing was illness or some other documented
                  emergency. The last exam will take place during finals. While this
                  exam will focus heavily on the material presented in the final
                  portion of the class, it will be cumulative; the final will require you
                  to apply the fundamental principles developed earlier to the more
                  advanced topics presented at the end of the semester.
COURSE EVALUATION An evaluation of the course and instructors will be conducted at the
                  end of the semester using the approved UT Course/Instructor
                  evaluation forms.
DISHONESTY        Be honest. Academic dishonesty includes the following: lying,
                  copying another person’s homework or using old
                  homework/solutions, cheating on exams, allowing another person
                  to copy your homework or exam (i.e., complicity in academic
                  dishonesty), and plagiarism. If you are caught in an act of academic
                  dishonesty, you will receive a grade of 0 for that assignment or
                  exam. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
                  dishonesty are subject to additional disciplinary penalties,
                  including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
                  from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
                  other students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
                  scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For additional
                  information, see the Dean of students’ website and University
                  General Information Catalog at:
                  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ and
                  http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-
                  c/student-discipline-and-conduct/
ATTENDANCE        Show up to class on time. Regular, on-time class attendance is
                  expected in accordance with the University's General Information
                  catalog and the Cockrell School of Engineering policy (see the
                  section on Attendance in the Undergraduate Catalog). The
                  professors will not repeat material for students who miss class
                  without a valid reason. Attendance will be taken into consideration
                  for the professional evaluation grade. Occasionally, a student may
                  be able to earn extra points during classroom activities; these extra
                  points will not be available to students who miss class without
                  informing the professors of the valid reason for their absence
                  BEFORE class.


PRIVACY ISSUES     Web-based, password-protected class sites are associated with all
                   academic courses taught at the University. Syllabi, handouts,
                   assignments, and other information may be available at these sites.
                   Site activities may include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class
                   discussions, and exchanging files. In addition, electronic class
                   rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want
                   their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict
                   their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Student
                   Academic Records window, Main Building, Room 1. For
                   information on restricting directory information, see the Course
                   Schedule or General Information Catalog at:
                   http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/.
DISABLED STUDENTS  The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request,
                   appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
                   disabilities. For more information, contact the Division of Diversity
                   and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
                   Disabilities, 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
                   http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
IMPORTANT DATES    From the 1st through the 4th class day, an undergraduate student
                   can drop a course via the web and receive a refund, if eligible.
                   From the 5th through the university’s academic drop deadline, a
                   student may Q drop a course with approval from the Dean, and
                   departmental advisor.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS By UT-Austin policy, a student who misses classes or other
                   required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
                   religious holy day should inform the instructors as far in advance
                   of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to
                   complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
                   http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-
                   and-procedures/attendance/
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PLAN
                   Emergency Preparedness means being ready takes an effort by all
                   of us to create and sustain an effective emergency preparedness
                   system. You are your own best first responder. Please use
                   https://preparedness.utexas.edu/welcome-emergency-preparedness
                   as a resource to better understand emergency preparedness at the
                   university, and how you can become part of and contribute to the
                   preparedness community. To monitor emergency communications
                   for specific instructions go to utexas.edu/emergency. To report an
                   issue (none emergency) call 512-471-4441. In case of emergency,
                   call 911.


                                          SCHEDULE
                    Event                                            Date
                      (1)
                         Quiz 1                                    June 13
                     (1)
                        Quiz 2                                     June 20
                      (1)
                         Quiz 3                                    June 27
                      (1)
                         Quiz 4                                    July 3
   (1)
      Quizzes will take place on the days noted unless otherwise announced by the instructor in
                                               class.
                                         Course Topics
LECTURE #         DATE          TOPIC                   HOMEWORK                    Lecturer
1                 6/6/18        1-Intro and Units       Hmk 1 assigned              Katz/Kirisits
2                 6/10/19       2-Mass Balance I        Hmk 1 due                   Katz
3                 6/12/19       3-Mass Balance II       Hmk 2 assigned, Topic       Katz
                                                        Selection Due
4                 6/13/19       4-Mass Balance III      Quiz 1 on Units             Katz
5                 6/17/19                               Hmk 2 due                   Katz
                                5-Energy Balance
6                 6/19/19                               Hmk 3 assigned              Katz
                                6-Environ Chem I
7                 6/20/19       6-Environ Chem I        Quiz 2 on Mass Balance      Katz
8                 6/24/19       7-Environ Chem II       Hmk 3 due                   Katz
9                 6/26/19       7-Environ Chem II       Hmk 4 assigned              Katz
10                6/27/19       8 - Risk Assessment     Quiz 3 on Environmental     Kirisits
                                                        Chemistry I
11                7/1/19        9 – Environmental       Hmk 4 due                   Kirisits
                                Microbiology
12                7/3/19        10- Water Qualiy I      Quiz 4 on Environmental     Kirisits
                                                        Chemistry II, Risk and
                                                        Environmental
                                                        Microbiology
13                7/8/19        11-Water Quality II     Hmk 5 Assigned              Kirisits
14                7/10/19       12-Drinking Water       Major Highlight Due, Hmk    Kirisits
                                and Wastewater Trmt     5 due


15            7/11/19        13 – Air Quality and    White Paper Due             Kirisits
                             Review
Final         7/12/19        Final Exam              9 am to noon                Kirisits
                                COURSE OBJECTIVES
      Units/Mass Balances/Energy Balance
      1. Understand the concepts of mass, moles, concentrations, and mass and molar flow
          rates.
      2. Understand the types of units that are used to characterize those concepts listed in
          Item (1).
      3. Know how to use and convert between units of measurement for gas and liquid
          systems.
      4. Be able to perform a mass balance on a plug flow system, a CSTR and a system
          consisting of two or more reactors in series.
      5. Be able to determine which type of system (e.g., plug flow or a CSTR) best
          represents a natural system such as a lake or river.
      6. Be able to incorporate a zero-, first- and second-order reaction term into the mass
          balance.
      7. Understand the meaning of steady state, accumulation, and conservative and non-
          conservative materials.
      8. Be able to distinguish forms of energy, write and use energy balance equations,
          calculate temperature rise from energy flux.
      9. Understand the relationship between heat and enthalpy.
      10. Understand thermodynamic processes and systems.
      Environmental Chemistry
      1. Know how to balance chemical reactions.
      2. Know how to determine the amount of product formed and/or reactants used
          based on stoichiometry.
      3. Be able to write equilibrium expressions for chemical reactions and to use the
          results to calculate the equilibrium distribution of chemical species.
      4. Be able compare and discuss the magnitude of the equilibrium constant.
      5. Understand the concept of pH and be able to calculate pH and use it to solve for
          the distribution of products in acid/base reactions.
      6. Be able to distinguish between equilibrium and kinetics.
      7. Be able to write rate law expressions from reactions, both elementary and non-
          elementary reactions.
      8. Be able to write rate law expressions (elementary and non-elementary).
      9. Be able to solve zero-, first- and second-order rate law expressions.
          Be able to incorporate rate laws into mass balance expressions and solve.


Environmental Microbiology
1. Be able to define key words including pathogen, indicator organism, virus,
   bacteria, protozoa.
2. Be able to identify the key microorganisms associated with waterborne disease.
3. Be able to describe the methods for removing each type of pathogen from water.
4. Be able to describe how each the concentration of each pathogen type is
   measured.
5. Be able to identify the key properties of an indicator organism.
6. Be able to describe how microorganisms are regulated by EPA.
Mass Transfer between Environmental Phases
1. Understand the concepts of equilibrium partitioning and mass transfer between
   phases, and be able to distinguish between the two concepts.
2. Understand the concept of aqueous solubility; what it means, where it is
   important, factors that affect it, and how it is used in environmental engineering
   calculations.
3. Understand the concept of vapor pressure; what it means, where it is important,
   factors that affect it, and how it is used in environmental engineering calculations.
4. Understand the concept of Henry’s Law; what it means, where it is important,
   factors that affect it, and how it is used in environmental engineering calculations.
5. Understand the concept of octanol-water partition coefficient; what it means,
   where it is important, factors that affect it, and how it is used in environmental
   engineering calculations.
6. Understand the concept of adsorption and be able to apply various adsorption
   equations to quantify the mass of adsorbent required or the equilibrium
   concentration that will be achieved under various scenarios
7. Understand the fundamental principles associated with cross-media mass transfer;
   relevant rate expressions, influencing factors, and applications.
Risk Assessment
1. Be able to quantify daily intake, carcinogenic risk and non-carcinogenic risk.
2. Be able to interpret and explain the utility and limitations associated with
   dose/response curves. Understand the meaning of terms such as NOAEL,
   LOAEL, and RfD.
3. Be able to identify and quantify exposure pathways to be able to estimate risk
   using mass balance approaches.
Natural Water Contaminant Transport
1. Be able to describe the different types of point source and non-point source water
   pollution problems.
2. Be able to describe the various types of water quality contaminants found in
   water.


3. Be able to describe the importance of oxygen in water and the impact of other
    nutrients.
4. Be able to explain oxygen demand in an aqueous system and how it is measured.
5. Be able to calculate BOD5 and ultimate BOD from laboratory data.
6. Be able to calculate the steady-state oxygen transport in a stream.
7. Understand the importance of, and be able to describe the types of particulates
    that occur in natural waters, how they are measured, and their impacts on water
    quality.
Water and Wastewater
1. Be able to identify and describe various pollutants that are of concern in drinking
    water.
2. Be able to distinguish primary and secondary standards and MCLs and MCLGs.
3. Be able to describe a typical flow train through a water treatment plant and the
    objectives of various stages of treatment.
4. Be able to describe a typical flow train through a wastewater treatment plant and
    the objectives of various stages of treatment.
Air
1. Be able to identify the major sources and effects of the criteria air pollutants.
2. Be able to determine whether a region is in compliance with a NAAQS standard.
3. Be able to describe the major pathways for ozone formation. Be able to discuss
    how NOx and hydrocarbons contribute to ozone formation.
4. Understand the general nature of the earth’s atmosphere and its important layers.
5. Be able to identify greenhouse gases and understand the theory behind the
    greenhouse effect.
6. Be able to identify sources of indoor air pollution and to calculate the
    concentration of pollutants in indoor environments.
7. Be able to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of various renewable energy
    sources.


                                            Term Project
Project Description
During this semester, each student will explore the feasibility of one renewable energy or
renewable fuel alternative. The project will include several components (1) a literature review
stage, (2) analysis and interpretation of the information, and (3) preparation of a 2-3 page short
white paper summarizing how this energy source is produced, the potential benefits/drawbacks
of the alternative, the environmental impacts of the production and use of the alternative, an
estimate of the potential production in the U.S. and globally, and the risks and reliability of the
source. Several intermediate deadlines will include:
    1. Selection of alternative energy fuel
    2. Brief outline that is detailed enough for me to understand the flow of your paper. In other
        words it must include specific details, topics or ideas within the Introduction, State of the
        Art, Technology Analysis, Application Potential and Summary sections.
    3. A major highlight (1-2 sentences) that describes something interesting about your topic
        and includes at least one reference. For example,
            • Topic: solar panels;
            • Highlight: Significant advances have occurred in the area of storage (Cazeba,
                2018), but dust buildup on solar panels reduces efficiency and represents a
                challenge to the field (Bergin et al., 2017).
    4. White paper
Avoid plagiarism: Your paper must be written in your own words. Using someone else’s words
directly, without quotation marks and a citation, is plagiarism. Professor Hillary Hart suggests
that quotation marks are needed if you take “more than 5 words in a row from another source.”
Thus, avoid cutting and pasting fragments from various websites to patch together your
paper.
Grading criteria:
                         Paper should meet the following criteria.
 Turned in on time
 Paper objectives clearly stated
 Content fulfills objective and is accurate
 Effective organization
 No plagiarized content
 References are verified and from scientific literature (not Wikipedia)
