      RTF 303
 Summer 2020
Introduction to Media and
 Entertainment Industries


                            Course Description
Media industries have been challenged by large social forces such as globalization and
technological advancements from analog to digital, wired to wireless, and desktop to
cloud. Web 2.0 and social media facilitate audience members to actively participate in
media production. While legacy media learn to adapt to a new landscape, new media
experiment with and search for viable business models and legitimacy. Great
challenges bring unprecedented opportunities and risks for organizational innovations,
entrepreneurship, and social change. Drawing on literature from media studies,
management, sociology, and communication, this course helps students to develop an
understanding of media industries and entrepreneurship. We start with a survey of key
social science theories and concepts from the media landscape. We then examine the
social, political, and economic contexts in which media are produced, distributed, and
monetized. Special attention is paid to new media and communication technologies
such as Web 2.0, social media, gaming, and mobile media and the implications of
these disruptive innovations for media organizations and professionals. Case examples
in old and new media industries from different countries will be analyzed.
Contact Us!
                      Instructor:
                      Richelle M Crotty [she, hers]
                      richelle.crotty@utexas.edu
                                                               Us when students come
                      Oﬃce Hours: Mondays 12-2PM via
                                                                      to oﬃce hours!
                      email, Zoom, or by appointment
                                                                [Seriously. We want you to
                       Teaching Assistant:
                                                                 utilize our oﬃce hours so
                       Maria Skouras [she, hers]                 that we can best help you
                                                                 with this course and your
                       maria.skouras@utexas.edu                       experience at UT!]
                       Oﬃce Hours: Wednesdays 9-11AM
                       via email, Zoom, or by appointment


                                                 How to access the textbook for
          Required
                                                 free from UTexas Libraries:
                                                   -  Navigate to lib.utexas.edu
         textbook:                                 -  Search: The Media Economy
                                                      2nd edition
                                                   -  Click on the ﬁrst result
                                                   -  Click on the link “Taylor &
  Albarran, A. B. (2017).                             Francis Ebooks (EBA)”
   The media economy                               -  This should open a new
  (2nd ed.). Routledge.                               window - you will need to
                                                      login with the same login
                                                      you use to access Canvas
                                                   -  You should be able to
                                                      download the PDF or read
                                                      online
                                                 Please email us if you encounter
                                                 any diﬃculties in accessing this
                                                 required textbook. All other
                                                 readings will be supplied in each
                                                 module.
  How to use Canvas for this course:
-   As this course is entirely online, it is your responsibility to have access to the
    course Canvas site, Canvas email, a stable Internet connection, and the ability to
    create video, text, voice, and visual assignments.
-   Each week has one Module. Click on “Modules” in the left hand menu of the
    course site.
-   Within each Module you will see the primary page for that Module and any
    assignments due during that particular week.
-   On the primary page for the Module you will see all the readings, the lectures,
    and the videos you are required to read/watch. At the bottom of the page will be
    any assignment due that week.


   Inclusion Statement
Your success in this course is important to me. We will work together to create a
supportive, inclusive online environment that welcomes all students regardless of their race,
ethnicity, gender identity, sexuality, religious beliefs, physical or mental health status, or
socio-economic status. Diversity, inclusion, and belonging are all core values of this course.
If there are circumstances that may aﬀect your performance in this course, please speak
with me as soon as possible so that we can work together to develop strategies that
meet your needs and the requirements of this course.
As a ﬁrst generation college student I know how diﬃcult navigating relationships with your
professors can be, but please don’t hesitate to reach out if you need assistance.
If you require particular accommodations, please let me know. For students with documented
disabilities, you can obtain speciﬁc accommodations through UT Services for Students with
Disabilities. Please share your accommodations letter with me during the ﬁrst weeks of class or
as soon as possible.
   Course Objectives
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
● Understand key social science theories, concepts and methods on the
complicated interaction between media and society.
● Recognize various opportunities, challenges, and responses media industries
have to address due to globalization and technological advancements.
● Understand government policies and industry practices that aﬀect the formation
and function of media organizations.
● Understand the trajectory and development of various legacy and new media
industry sectors.
● Evaluate entrepreneurial opportunities, challenges, and process in the media
industries facilitated and constrained by institution and culture.


 Late Policy: All assignments are due on Fridays at 5pm.
 Weekly quizzes will not be accepted late. All other assignments
 will be docked 20% each day; assignments more than 3 days late
 will not be accepted and will receive a zero.
                                               A 100-94                 C 76-74
Grading Policy:
                                               A- 93-90                 C- 73-70
Grades are earned based on
performance. Grades will not be                B+ 89-87                 D+ 69-67
changed on the basis of need or
                                                B 86-84                 D 66-64
eﬀort. The ﬁnal grade uses a
plus/minus system according to                 B- 83-80                 D- 63-60
the following scale:
                                               C+ 79-77              F 59 or lower
                         Grade Breakdown:
         Assignment                    Points                       Deadline
    Introduction Video +
                                        5 pts                June 12 Friday 5pm
          Comment
     Weekly Quizzes**                  40 pts                Various Fridays 5pm
    Media News Update                  15 pts                  July 3 Friday 5pm
         Zoom Chat                      5 pts                 July 17 Friday 5pm
  Media Entrepreneurship                                        Visual: August 7
  Research Paper + Visual              35 pts              Paper + Comment: August
     Project + Comment                                                 14
            Total                       100
                      ** Your one lowest quiz will be dropped**


                           The Assignments
                     Who are you? Introduction Video +
                                 Comment 5 pts
● Record a 30-60 second video on your phone or computer
● Include an interesting fact about yourself
● Include a connection you have to the media industries (For example: what is
  your favorite text, creator, technology, etc.?)
● Post in the appropriate "discussion" of this site
● Comment on at least one other student’s post and introduce yourself!
● Your video is worth 4 pts + 1 pt for your comment on other student's video
                          DUE: Friday at 5pm on June 12
                            Weekly Quizzes 40 pts
 ● Most weeks, it will be a typical quiz of 5-10 multiple choice, true/false, or
    short answer questions (worth 5 points total per quiz)
 ● Quizzes will close at 5PM on Fridays - no late quizzes will be accepted.
 ● You will have 20 minutes to complete the quiz from the time you open it.
    (It will be timed in Canvas and will shut oﬀ after 20 minutes.)
 ● Questions reﬂect the week's readings, videos, and lectures.
 ● Feel free to use your notes, lecture slides, etc. but this is independent
    work.
 ● Quizzes for Modules 8 and 10 will help you with your ﬁnal project and will
    not be multiple choice and will not be timed.
 ● Your one lowest score will be dropped.
                        DUE: (almost) every Friday at 5pm


                                  The Assignments
                               Media News Update 15 pts
The topics covered in this course are relevant in the news each day, your assignment is to:
● Pick a media company (ex. Netﬂix, TikTok, Vox). Can be outside the United States as well.
● Use “Google News” to search for 5 recent news articles about your company.
● Your articles MUST be:
     ○ From credible sources (Washington Post, New York Times, Broadcasting & Cable, Wall
       Street Journal, etc) - if you are not sure if your source is credible ask ahead of time!
     ○ Recent! Articles older than 1 year will not count.
● Cite these 5 articles in APA style, 7th edition, and include them with your video in the
  “discussion” post.
● In the discussion post you will upload a video of yourself giving a newscaster-esque
  update about your company; use your 5 articles to give news style updates. If you would
  like to include some brief background information about your company please do so but
  any additional sources for background information do not count towards the 5 required
  recent news articles.
● Your video needs to: be at least 4 minutes long (but no longer than 6 minutes); Connect
  to at least 2 course concepts, theories, or themes; and be creative!
● You must also comment on a classmate’s video
● See rubric and discussion board link for more details.
                                   DUE: Friday at 5pm on July 3rd!
                                       Zoom Chat 5pts
● Schedule at Zoom meeting with either                ● Record the meeting and upload to
  ○ Me - Your Instructor                                discussion board
  ○ Maria Skouras - Your TA                           ● Every student must submit even if they
  ○ Or a classmate                                      Zoom with a classmate - both students
● Meeting must last at least 5 minutes                  should submit their own recording of
● Talk about how you are feeling about the              the video chat
  course so far, ideas for ﬁnal project, etc          ● See rubric and discussion board link
● Talk about at least ONE course concept that           for more details.
  you found particularly interesting and
  explain why
                  DUE: Friday at 5pm on July 17th, Feel free to schedule early!


              The Assignment: Media Entrepreneurship Research
                  Paper + Visual Project + Comment 35 pts total
For this assignment, you, or you and a partner, will develop a media company and/or media
product for American consumers and prepare a research paper outlining your business idea and
plan and you will prepare a visual pitch, as if you were going on the television show Shark Tank.
Must demonstrate understanding of course material in your paper. .
The ﬁrst part of this assignment will be the Project Proposal Sheet which will be submitted as
Quiz 7. This sheet will help you plan and start working on your project early but it does not count
towards this grade. More information about each of these components and their rubrics are on
Canvas.
                                     The Visual Project 12 pts
 ● Create a visual project using PowerPoint, Google Slides, or Prezi that includes at least 10
    slides explaining and pitching your company to the Sharks with a voice over
    recording. Be creative!
 ● If you would like, feel free to incorporate a up-to 3 minute commercial for your media
    company or product to accompany your presentation. (This is not required but if it
    would be fun for you please do it, it is also fun for me!)
 ● Upload your video to the discussion board - video must be properly uploaded (either via
    Canvas or embedded from YouTube) and playable by your instructor and classmates.
                                 DUE: Friday at 5pm on August 7!
                                    The Research Paper 20 pts
  ● Explanation of your media/entertainment company/product and business rationale,
     describe your background info, business plan, media policy issues, and key challenges.
  ● Research on your two main competitors
  ● Explanation of why your media company/product deserves Shark Tank funding.
  ● Works Cited Page in APA 7th Edition (with in-text citations!)
  Must be a minimum of 6 pages, 12 pt font, TImes New Roman, double-spaced, standard
  margins. No cover page, and section headings are not required (but may be useful to you).
                                  DUE: Friday at 5pm on August 14!
                                       The Comment 3 pts
You will need to comment on a classmate’s visual project. Your comment should be more
substantive than “I like it” to receive full credit.
                                DUE: Friday at 5pm on August 14!


                 For each weekly module:
                   -   Complete all the required readings by
                       Monday evening
Expectations       -   Watch the required recorded lectures and
      for
                       videos by Thursday evening
 Students:         -   Complete the weekly quiz and all
                       assignments by
                       Friday at 5pm
                 You will notice that all due dates for all assignments
                 are Fridays at 5pm. Sometimes more than one
                 assignment will be due at the same time, plan
                 accordingly.
                 Reading load per week: 25 pages on average (highest:
                 60 pages)
                 Watching load per week: 90 minutes on average
                 (highest: 160 minutes)
                 To demonstrate that you have read the syllabus,
                 please email me 1-2 expectations that you have
                 for me as your instructor. It can be anything from
  Expectations   “please respond to my emails” or you can just
 for Instructor: introduce yourself to me :)
                 All students who send this email and mention they
                 saw these instructions in the syllabus will get, a
                 one time, 1 point of extra credit. This will be the
                 only extra credit oﬀered this semester.


 Course Schedule
         Unit 1 - Media Landscape: Globalization, Tech, Policy
  ●  Understand theories and concepts of media industries
  ●  Recognize media industries opportunities and challenges due to
     globalization and technology
  ●  Understand policies and practices that aﬀect the formation and function
     of media organizations
Module 1 - Introduction (Start: Thursday June 4)
Read                   Watch                To-Dos due on Friday June 5
                                             1.  Familiarize yourself with the
                       Richelle’s
                                                 Canvas site and all due dates:
                       Welcome Video
                                                 hint it is always Friday at 5pm
 1. Read Syllabus      And Dr. Chen’s
                                             2.  Start Introduction Video
                       Course
                                                 Assignment
                       Introduction
                                             3.  Submit Module 1 Quiz
Module 2 - Media Industries - Basic Theories and Concepts
Read by Monday         Watch by
                                            To-Dos due on Friday June 12
June 8                 Thursday
 1. Hesmondhalgh                             1.  Submit Module 2 Quiz
    Introduction       Module 2 Videos       2.  Submit Introduction Video
 2. Albarran Ch 3                                Assignment


 Course Schedule
      Unit 1 - Media Landscape: Globalization, Tech, Policy
Module 3 - Media Globalization
Read by Monday         Watch by           To-Dos due on Friday June 19
June 15                Thursday
 1. Albarran Ch 7      Module 3 Videos     1. Submit Module 3 Quiz
                                           2. Start News Media Update
Module 4 - Media Old and New
Read by Monday         Watch by           To-Dos due on Friday June 26
June 22                Thursday
 1. Albarran Ch 6      Module 4 Videos     1. Submit Module 4 Quiz
                                           2. Wrap up News Media Update
Module 5 - Policies and Ownership - Law and Regulation
Read by Monday         Watch by           To-Dos due on Friday July 3
June 29                Thursday
 1. Albarran Ch 8      Module 5 Videos     1. Submit Module 5 Quiz
 2. Hesmondhalgh                           2. Submit News Media Update
    Ch 6


 Course Schedule
           Unit 2 - Media Management and Entrepreneurship
  ●    Understand key economic and management theories and concepts on
       media economy, management, and organization
  ●    Understand and evaluate entrepreneurial opportunities, challenges, and
       process in media industries
Module 6 - Media Management - Finances, Organization, and Labor
Read by Monday          Watch by
                                          To-Dos due on Friday July 10
July 6                  Thursday
                                           1.   Submit Module 6 Quiz
 1.  Albarran Ch 10
                        Module 6 Videos    2.   Schedule Zoom Chat
 2.  Albarran Ch 11
                                                Assignment
Module 7 - Media Entrepreneurship
Read July 13            Watch             To-Dos due on Friday July 17
                                           1.   Submit Module 7 Quiz
 1.  Hollifield et al
                        Module 7 Videos    2.   Submit Zoom Chat
     Chapter 4
                                                Assignment


 Course Schedule
                Unit 3 - Legacy Media and Digital Media
  ●   Understand the development of legacy media sectors
  ●   Understand key terms used in legacy media industry
  ●   Understand business models, process and practices in legacy media
      industry
  ●   Understand the development of digital media sectors
  ●   Understand key terms used in new media industry
  ●   Understand business models, process and practices in new
      media industry
  ●   Understand how technologies change entrepreneurship
Module 8 - New Media & Social Media
Read by Monday        Watch by
                                           To-Dos due on Friday July 24
July 20               Thursday
                                            1. Submit Module 8 Quiz
                                            2. Start Visual Project
 1.  Zuboff pp.
                      Module 10 Videos      3. Start Media
     75-89
                                               Entrepreneurship Research
                                               Paper
Module 9 - CHOOSE EITHER Film Industry OR Television Industry
Read by Monday        Watch by
                                           To-Dos due on Friday July 31
July 27               Thursday
 1.  Vogel Ch 3
                                            1. Work on Visual Project AND
     (FILM)
                                               Media Entrepreneurship
     OR               Module 8 Videos
                                               Research Paper
 2.  Vogel Ch 8
                                            2. (No quiz this week!)
     (TELEVISION)


 Course Schedule
Module 10 - CHOOSE EITHER Video Game Industry OR Mobile and Apps
Read by Monday       Watch by
                                        To-Dos due on Friday August 7
August 3             Thursday
 1.  Video Game
     Reading:
     Zackariasson &                      1.  Submit Module 10 Quiz
     Wilson                              2.  Submit Visual Project
     Introduction    Module 10 Videos    3.  Wrap up Media
OR                                           Entrepreneurship Research
 1. Mobile                                   Paper
     Reading: Chen
     & Ling
Module 11 - Work on Media Entrepreneurship Research Project
Read by Monday       Watch by
                                        To-Dos due on Friday August 14
July 27              Thursday
                                         1.  Email Richelle or Maria with
 1.  Re-read                                 any questions!
     assignment                          2.  Submit Media
     Instructions    No Videos               Entrepreneurship Research
 2.  Assignment                              Paper
     Rubrics                             3.  Submit Comments on Visual
                                             Projects


Course Policies and Student Resources
Moody College Writing Support
Even the best writers sometimes struggle when learning the unique language of communication
professionals. Don’t sweat. We can help. You may come in to brainstorm story ideas, to work on
problems or to polish specific skills. Return as often as you like, knowing that we don’t charge a penny.
Everyone working for the Moody Writing Support Program embraces the mission of giving students a
boost in skills and the encouragement to succeed. We’re here for you whether you’re writing your first
news story or advertising copy or you’re polishing a screenplay. And that unique language of
communication professionals? We speak it.
Moody College Writing Support is accepting virtual appoints from undergraduate students. Feel free to
make an appointment at https://sites.utexas.edu/moodywriting/ to receive help on any of your upcoming
writing assignments.
Perry-Castaneda Library
PCL is offering remote support during this time:
https://www.lib.utexas.edu/research-help-support/remote-services-and-resources
Additionally, University of Texas Libraries has a research guide especially for RTF:
https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/RTF
The University Writing Center at PCL
The University Writing Center (phone 471-6222, http://uwc.utexas.edu/) offers free, individualized help
with writing for any UT undergraduate, via online appointments at this time. The UWC consultants are
trained to work with you on your writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your work and help you
become a stronger, more independent writer.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
College and life in general present a number of challenges, both expected and unexpected - and we are
living in unusual times. The Counseling and Mental Health Center offers counseling and other services
that can help. CMHC will continue to provide counseling and psychiatric services to support students
throughout this time, though our services will be delivered over the phone or video. Click here for a list
designed to give students information about how we are modifying services. The list may change in the
future as the situation evolves. Their 24/7 crisis hotline is (5120 471 - 2255.


  Course Policies and Student Resources
UT Outpost
UT Outpost has suspended its physical operations and moved to an online order and delivery
operation. The UT Outpost food pantry will provide the food assistance to currently enrolled
students living within in the City of Austin. For additional food assistance, please visit the Central
Texas Food Bank and Feeding America.
Services For Students With Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, email ssd@austin.utexas.edu, call
512.471.6259, or visit: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process.
Academic integrity is important for your education. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not
limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a
test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two
courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed
to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesyt damages both the student’s
learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on
scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs


Course Policies and Student Resources
Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a work
assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an
opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy
of the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen
days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail
address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be
time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html. In this course e-mail will be used as a means of
communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class
work and announcement
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected
site is created for each course
        Students are expected to upload files that are readable and accessible by
        your instructor by the due date to receive credit.
        Your instructor cannot access .pages files, PDFs are ideal.
 Thanks for reading! Looking forward to this
                                         semester!
