ALD 119                                       Fridays 1 - 2                                             Spring 2020
                                  MAYMESTER SEMINAR: INDIVIDUAL
                                      DIFFERENCES IN TAIPEI
         “The world worries about disability more than disabled people do.” Warwick Davis
Your Instructors                      Welcome to the
                                      world of disability
Katie Klingler Tackett, Ph.D          and difference.
                                      You’ve actually
katietackett@austin.utexas.edu
                                      always been in the
Office: SZB 440J                      world of disability
                                      and difference, but
Office Hours: Wednesdays 1-2:30pm
and by appointment
                                      for most of you, this
                                      will be your first
About Me: I am a former general       formal introduction.
education and special education
                                      Our main objectives
teacher. I’m a parent (through both
biology and the foster care system).  for this class are for
My responsibilities here at UT        you to learn that no
include teaching in and overseeing    one is normal,
the SPED undergrad program.
                                      different does not mean bad, people with disabilities
Alexandrea Pena                       can be jerks, and that you can alleviate difficulties that
                                      exceptionalities cause without pathologizing difference.
alexandrea.pena@utexas.edu
                                      All of these learning objectives will become clearer as
About Me: I am originally from        we go through the semester.
Albuquerque, NM and have been
living in Austin for 2.5 years. I     This introductory course will get us ready for our time in
previously taught in special
education programs that served
                                      Taiwan in June 2020!
students with Intellectual and
Developmental disabilities.
                                      Cultural Diversity Flag
Currently, I am a 2nd year doctoral
student here at UT in the Special     This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States.
Education Equity and Diversity        Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity
program                               with a variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
                                      should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
Parker Pflaum                         from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at
                                      least one US cultural group that has experienced persistent
ppflaum@austin.utexas.edu
                                      marginalization
About Me: I work at Education
Abroad/Texas Global to manage UT
study abroad programs. I lead
cultural immersion and study abroad
programs for more than eight years
in many developing world countries.
ALD 119                                          SZB 292                                                          1


  ALD 119                                         Fridays 1 - 2                               Spring 2020
  Course Objectives
   This course aims to do the following:
      • Introduce students to the study abroad course content
      • Value the importance of international education and the exposure to different cultures
      • Foster student-faculty and student-student interactions prior to the travel
      • Make the students aware of the health, safety/risk, and other issues pertinent to
            international travel
Important Notes
• We use Announcements to communicate with the class. We encourage you to set your Canvas
  up so that you receive an email when an Announcement is made.
• Track your progress on Canvas. This way you can ensure that all of your coursework is turned in
  and recorded on Canvas.
• Laptops are allowed in class as long as they are being used for course purposes. Be
  responsible with your laptop usage; using your laptop for other purposes (shopping, chatting,
  emailing, working on other assignments) negatively affects your learning AND the learning of
  those around you. It’s not worth it. At times, we may request that laptops be put away.
• We will use the class Facebook Page to post articles, video clips, etc. You do not have to
  engage by pinning or commenting. We will not friend you on FB; we use FB as it is a relatively
  easy platform to use, and most of us are somewhat familiar with it.
• Life happens. Please let us know if things beyond this course may be affecting your ability to
  complete work for this class in a timely manner.
• This class works best when you participate. We make it as engaging as we can, and we are
  open to ways to make it more engaging. That said, we can’t do it alone. You have to help.
• Our job is literally for you to be successful in this class. We have designed this class to
  accommodate a wide range of student needs. We are willing and able to accommodate any
  learning needs that a student might have. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you
  from learning or exclude you, please let us know as soon as possible. We encourage
  students with disabilities to register with the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) and
  inform Dr. Tackett, in writing. http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
  ALD 119                                           SZB 292                                             2


ALD 119                                         Fridays 1 - 2                              Spring 2020
                                 ASSIGNMENTS
“The severity of one’s disability does not determine their potential. The greatest barriers… are
                          not steps or curbs, it’s expectations.” Karen Clay
We will discuss each assignment in class. The following descriptions serve merely as an overview
of the expectations for each assignment.
                               1. Presence (Attendance & Participation): 22 points. Your
                               involvement in class will add to your learning and to the learning of
 Assignments at a
          Glance               those around you. You are expected to attend class sessions and
                               access the assigned content. That said, attendance alone (in other
                               words, just being physically in the room) is not considered
 1. Presence (Attendance       engagement. You will receive full points by being engaged with the
     & Participation)          content. This engagement can and will look different on different
 2. Journals                   days – writing, speaking in large and small groups, taking notes,
                               completing in-class activities, etc.
 3. What I May Want to be
     When I Grow Up-           2.What I May Want to Be When I Grow Up - Teacher Edition: 15
     Teacher Edition
                               points. This assignment requires you to think about where you are in
 4. AIT Lab Orientation        terms of your career plans. Why do you want (or not want) to be a
 5. Group Presentations        teacher? Have you ever considered working with people diagnosed
                               with disabilities/teaching special education? Why or why not? Write a
                               brief paper (double-spaced, 2-3 pages) or record a brief video (less
                               than 4 minutes) about what you may want to be when you grow up (in
                               regard to teaching and people with disabilities), your experiences
    with people with disabilities, and the learning needs you currently have. A rubric is provided
    on Canvas and will be discussed in class. You may choose to complete this assignment orally in
    person; email Katie to set up a time to do this.
3. Journals: 28 points. In order for us to get to know you better, to be able to answer your
    individual questions or address concerns in a timely manner, and give you opportunities to
    interact with course content, you’ll turn in weekly journals via Canvas. Some of the journals will
    have prompts; others will be open-end. Regardless, please don’t just phone these in. Journals
    will open on Monday, and you’ll have until 11:59 pm on Sunday night to turn it in. Late journal
    entries will not be accepted. You may choose to complete your journals by writing or by
    recording videos.
ALD 119                                           SZB 292                                              3


 ALD 119                                         Fridays 1 - 2                              Spring 2020
“Your kids are going to stare. And that's perfectly okay ... If you tell
  them not to stare, or discourage them from asking questions because
  you think it might upset us, you're teaching them that looking
  different is something to be ashamed of. It's not.” Stella Young
 4. Assistive and Instructional Technology Lab visit: 10 points. A site visit to the Assistive
    and Instructional Technology (AIT) Lab in SZB 518e will acquaint you with the use of
    assistive technology (AT) across a number of settings for individuals with special
    needs.Specific information will be posted on Canvas regarding how to sign up for the
    orientations. After completing the orientation, turn in the AIT Lab Orientation Site Visit
    Form (on Canvas) and upload a screen shot indicating you finished the online survey. You
    may choose to turn in the form electronically or as a hard copy. You may (and are
    encouraged to) turn this assignment in as soon as you complete it. A rubric is provided on
    Canvas.
 5. Group Presentations: 10 points. To better prepare for the trip, students will work in
    groups to provide pertinent information on selected topics below. As a group, students
    will perform a 10-15 minute presentation on the issue below. Be prepared to engage the
    rest of the class in Q&A and discussions. You do not need to be overly academic. Be
    entertaining in your presentation.
          Group 1: History of Taipei
          Group 2: Taiwan’s relationship with China
          Group 3: Person-first language vs identify-first language
          Group 4: Must visit places in Taipei that everybody talks about a
          Group 5: Medical model of disability vs social construct model
          Group 6: Must visit places in Taipei that nobody talks about
 Evaluation
 Students should always bear in mind
 that grading is primarily a judgment
 about your performance on a
 particular assignment. Grades are
 designed to indicate your success in
 completing assignments, not the
 level of effort you put into them.
                                          Type to enter a caption.
 ALD 119                                           SZB 292                                            4


ALD 119                                      Fridays 1 - 2                                   Spring 2020
Course Policies
Academic Integrity: Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of
Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at
UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible
for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be
found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
acint_student.php
Religious Holidays: A student who is absent from a class for the observance of a religious
holy day may complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence, if proper
notice has been given in writing via email to Dr. Tackett.
Emergency Evacuations: In light of an emergency, please familiarize yourself with all exit
doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door
may not be the one you used when entering the building. In the event of an evacuation,
follow our instructions. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following:
Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office.
Personal Pronoun Use: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with
respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics,
sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to
the instructor with the student’s legal name. We will gladly honor your request to address you
by an alternate name or gender pronoun.
Behavior Concerns: If you are concerned about any individual’s behavior in class, please
contact us and/or call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
Health and self-care: It is important that we take care of ourselves inside and outside of class
and in our life by learning how to care for our mind, body, and spirit. Toward that end, there
are many different kinds of support services on campus. If you are concerned about yourself
ALD 119                                         SZB 292                                                5


ALD 119                                            Fridays 1 - 2                                 Spring 2020
or a friend who is struggling, the UT CMHC is a helpful resource for getting access to campus-
based support. https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
 Class/Date                   Focus/Topic                                 Assignments Due
 1/January 24                 Welcome, Course Overview
 2/January 31                 Logistics
 3/February 7                 Online
 4/February 14                Online                                      What I May Want to Be When I
                                                                          Grow Up - Teacher Edition*
 5/February 21                Pre-Departure Orientation #1
 6/February 28                Disability in the US
 7/March 6                    Online
 8/March 13                   Travel Tips in Taipei
                                                 Spring                                  Break!
 9/March 27                   Group Presentations #1 and #2
 10/April 3                   Group Presentations #3 and #4
 11/April 10                  Group Presentations #5 and #6
 12/April 17                  Pre-Departure Orientation #2
 13/April 24                  Pre-Departure Orientation #3
 14/May 1                     Course wrap-up and goodbyes until           AIT Lab Orientation*
                              Taipei!
*Students are encouraged to complete and submit these assignments early.
Note: Syllabus is subject to change as needed. Common sense and instructor discretion will be the
governing forces in dealing with any circumstances that may arise that are not explicitly addressed in this
syllabus.
ALD 119                                              SZB 292                                                6
