                 THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:          SW n360K/n395K                 Instructor: Dr. Nick Winges-Yanez
Unique Number:          88695/88830                    Email: nwingesyanez@utexas.edu
Semester:               Summer 2019                    Office: Texas Center for Disability Studied
Meeting Time/Place: By Appointment                             10100 Burnet Rd., Bldg. 137, L4000
Office Phone: 512 232-0744                                     Austin, TX 78758
                                                       Office Hours: By appointment
                               Sexuality and Disability
I.      STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
In this course, we will review the intersection of sexuality and disability and the complex
historical influences that impact discussions of sexuality in relationship to disability. The
intersection of sexuality and disability is rarely acknowledged or analyzed. People with
disabilities have been viewed as asexual, hypersexual, or as victims, where their agency as
sexual beings is overlooked. This course will explore the social justice issues surrounding
disability and sexuality using the perspective of social work values and ethics to guide learning.
Particular attention will be given to the concepts of diversity and inclusion in relation to
disability and sexuality.
II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Learning objectives for this course are as follows:
    •   Demonstrate understanding of how sexuality has played an integral role in defining
        society’s understanding of disability.
    •   Identify ways people with disabilities are excluded from discussions of sexuality.
    •   Demonstrate understanding of the social justice issues surrounding sexuality and
        disability.
    •   Demonstrate understanding, affirmation, and respect for persons from different
        backgrounds, including age, gender, race, ethnicity, culture, class, religious belief or
        spirituality, family structure, sexual orientation, physical or mental ability, national
        origin, or other issues of diversity related to disability and sexuality.
    •   Identify current movements associated with challenging the barriers people with
        disabilities face interacting with and expressing their sexuality
    •   Demonstrate understanding of the complexity of human sexuality and
        intersectionality.
    •   Demonstrate skills in engagement, assessment and intervention planning around
        sexuality issues and disability.
                                                                                                   1


III.    TEACHING METHODS
This class is entirely online and includes no in-person classroom time.
IV.     REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
    •   McRuer, R. & Mollow, A. (Eds.). (2012). Sex and Disability. Durham, NC: Duke
        University Press.
Additional texts and materials for weekly class assignments will be available online, either via
links or as documents available on the course Canvas page. Students will need to access additional
sources for their final projects, such as via the University library system or online.
Each weekly module in Canvas will be published for class access on Thursdays, at which point
students can access the materials and prompts for that week. All assignments will be due each
Wednesday by 11:59 p.m., which gives students a full week to complete them. Note, however, that
students are encouraged to complete assignments in a timely manner and are welcome to submit
them at any time during a particular module.
V.      COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Weekly Assignments: Students will complete all readings or other assigned materials (including
videos or additional topical research) for each weekly session. In addition, students will complete
weekly assignments to demonstrate their understanding of these readings and course materials.
Details will be provided each week so that these activities can best address the topics at hand.
Most weekly assignments will be writing exercises. Students’ weekly grades will also include
participation in targeted online discussions about the week’s themes. Together, these weekly
assignments are critical for developing an understanding of the intersections of disability and
gender. Again, each weekly assignment will be due by Wednesday at 11:59 p.m. at the latest,
unless otherwise specified.
ASSIGNMENTS
There will be no exams for this class. Students will demonstrate their understanding of the
materials and proficiency in the course learning objectives through weekly assignments, as well
as through a series of additional progressive assignments (detailed below) culminating in a final
research project. Students will receive additional instructions regarding the following
assignments:
    •   Assignment 1: Each student will identify either: government, subject, biopower, or
        normalization to analyze for their final project using current media. For this assignment,
        each student will provide a one-page write-up identifying their chosen concept,
        explaining the rationale for their selection, and brainstorming potential areas of interest to
        connect this concept with. Examples include: Podcast (more than one episode must be
        used), Blog, TV/Web Series (more than just one show from the series must be used).
        This connection must discuss sexuality and disability in a broad sense as illustrated
        throughout this course. Students will receive written feedback to assist with further
        developing their final projects.
    •   Assignment 2: Final research project. Students will elect to complete either a research
        paper (4-6 pages for undergraduate; 6-8 pages for graduate), create a narrated PowerPoint
                                                                                                     2


        or Prezi that could be used for an applied project, OR provide another form of final that
        has been preapproved by instructor (such as a zine, graphic novel, podcast, etc).
Students grades will be determined based on the following:
    • Weekly assignments**:                   50%*
    • Assignment 1:                           10%
    • Assignment 2:                           40%
*Weekly grades will be broken down as follows: 30% for the weekly activity (mostly written
assignments), and 20% for participation in online discussions.
            • The Weekly writing assignment is a two-page paper (3 for Graduate students)
                answering the prompt for the assignment. All papers must be double-spaced
                and include references to the week’s material with in-text citations following
                APA formatting.
            • APA formatting guideline
            • All papers are to follow APA formatting, 12-point font, double-spaced with a
                reference page; NO title page, abstract, or running head
            • All assignments have a rubric for transparency in grading
**Graduate students will have a weekly writing assignment in addition to online discussion posts.
Undergraduate students need to complete 4 of 6 weekly writing assignments before end of term
and weekly online discussion posts.
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and Above             A
        90.0 to 93.999              A-
        87.0 to 89.999              B+
        84.0 to 86.999              B
        80.0 to 83.999              B-
        77.0 to 79.999              C+
        74.0 to 76.999              C
        70.0 to 73.999              C-
        67.0 to 69.999              D+
        64.0 to 66.999              D
        60.0 to 63.999              D-
        Below 60.0                  F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Late Work: Late work will not be accepted unless extenuating circumstances are a factor (e.g.,
family emergency, severe illness). Contact the professor for any questions regarding exceptions to
this policy. Whenever possible, contact the professor in advance of any anticipated excused late
work.
Class Participation: Students are expected to participate in any required activities or assignments.
Failure to do so will have a negative impact on one’s grade. Since this is an online course,
                                                                                                   3


student participation will be assessed via weekly assignments and online discussions and, in
addition, through the assignments detailed later in this syllabus.
Behavior Expectations: All students are expected to carry themselves in a civil, respectful, and
professional manner.
Communication: Students are encouraged to contact the professor with any questions or
concerns. Email will be the primary form of communication, and the professor will respond to
emails received on weekdays (Monday-Friday) within 24 hours.
Grades: Grades received are final and are not subject to negotiation. There will be no
opportunities for extra credit in this course.
The professor reserves the right to make changes to course readings, assignments, and due dates
detailed in this syllabus.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities,
religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect
to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social
Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did
not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment
we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas
expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with
civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
                                                                                                    4


networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of
electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
                                                                                                     5


with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information, visit:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, instructors, agency-based field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, or sexual misconduct.
Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be
reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Deputy for the SSW,
Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents
or to obtain information. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX,
may also be found at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-
sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
                                                                                                    6


SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone
who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
        of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
        Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
   Module                Topic             Assignment                    Readings Due
                                                Due
    Week 1:       Mapping the                               Adams Ruins Everything -
  06/06-06/12     Course: Disability &       Discussion     Circumcision
                  Sexuality                     Post
                                                            Winges-Yanez, N. (2018). A
                                                                     Foucaultian discourse analysis
                                                                     of person-centered practice
                                                                     using a genealogical
                                                                     framework of intellectual
                                                                     disability.
                                                            McWhorter, L. (2009). Two great
                                                            dangers.
    Week 2:       History of Sexuality    Weekly Writing    Jarman, M. (2012). Dismembering the
  06/13-06/19        and Disability                         lynch mob: Intersecting narratives of
                                                            disability, race, and sexual menace.
                                                                                                   7


                                 Discussion
                                 Post           McWhorter, L. (2009). Managing
                                                evolution.
  Week 3:   History of Sexuality Weekly Writing O’Connel, R. (2012). “That cruel
06/20-06/26 and Disability pt. 2                spectacle”: The extraordinary body
                                 Discussion     eroticized in Lucas Malet’s The
                                 Post           History of Sir Richard Calmady.
                                                Buck v. Bell
                                                Whatcott, J. (2017). Sexual deviance
                                                and “mental defectiveness” in
                                                eugenics era California.
                                                Serlin, D. (2012). Touching histories:
                                                Personality, disability, and sex in the
                                                1930s.
  Week 4:       Sexuality as     Weekly Writing Desjardins, M. (2012). The sexualized
06/27-07/03      Dispositif                     body of the child: Parents and the
                                   Discussion   politics of “voluntary” sterilization of
                                      Post      people labeled intellectually disabled.
                                                Flores, E. (2019). The #metoo
                                                movement hasn’t been inclusive of the
                                                disability community.
                                                #DisabilityToo Video
                                                The Sexual Assault Epidemic No One
                                                is Talking About -NPR Podcast
  Week 5:     Normalization      Weekly Writing smith, s.e. (2019). Skin hunger and the
07/04-07/10                                     taboo of wanting to be touched.
                                 Discussion
                                 Post           Maurya, A.K. (2016). Beyond
                                                penetration: Why touch is so
                                                important.
                                                Sandie Yi (artist)
                                                Wilkerson, A. (2012). Normate sex
                                                and its discontents.
                                                                                        8


  Week 6:    Discourse and  Discussion     Blake, M. (2019). Here’s what Dr. Phil
07/11-07/17     Subject     Post           got wrong in his episode on interabled
                                           relationships.
                            ASSIGNMENT
                            1 DUE          Tastrom, S. (2019). Sex work is a
                                           disability issue. So why doesn’t the
                                           Disability Community recognize that?
                                           Neal, D.C. (2019). The saccharine
                                           sweet lies of Special, a Netflix original
                                           series.
                                           Kafer, A. (2012). Desire and disgust:
                                           My ambivalent adventures in
                                           devoteeism.
  Week 7:    Biopower and   Weekly Writing McMahon, C. (2018). Sex Education
07/18-07/24   Government                   is for everyone. Even disabled kids.
                              Discussion   Marrone, K. (2016). The importance
                                 Post      of expanding sex-ed to people with
                                           developmental disabilities.
                                           Scarlateen!
                                           Wade, H.A. (2002). Discrimination,
                                           sexuality, and people with significant
                                           disabilities: Issues of access and the
                                           right to expression in the United
                                           States.
  Week 8:   A New Discourse Weekly Writing Siebers, T. (2012). A sexual culture for
07/25-07/31                                disabled people.
                            Discussion
                            Post           Sins Invalid Film
                                           (available in UT Library Kanopy)
                                           Sakellariou, D. (2011). Sexuality and
                                           disability: A discussion on care of the
                                           self.
  Week 9:       Future      Discussion     Davidson, M. (2012). Pregnant men:
08/01-08/07                 Post           Modernism, disability, and biofuturity.
                                                                                  9


                                                            Loeser, C., Pini, Barbara, & Crowley,
                                                            V. (2018). Disability and sexuality:
                                                            Desires and Pleasures.
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY (not complete)
Jarman, M. (2012). Dismembering the lynch mob: Intersecting narratives of disability, race, and
       sexual menace. In R. McRuer & A. Mollow (Eds.), Sex and Disability (pp. 89-107).
       Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Kafer, A. (2012). Desire and disgust: My ambivalent adventures in devoteeism. In R. McRuer
       & A. Mollow (Eds.), Sex and Disability (pp. 331-354). Durham, NC: Duke University
       Press.
McWhorter, L. (2009). Racism and sexual oppression in Anglo-America: A genealogy.
       Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
O’Connell, R. (2012). “That cruel spectacle”: The extraordinary body eroticized in Lucas
       Malet’s The History of Sir Richard Calmady. In R. McRuer & A. Mollow (Eds.), Sex and
       Disability (pp. 108-122). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Serlin, D. (2012). Touching histories: Personality, disability, and sex in the 1930s. In R.
       McRuer & A. Mollow (Eds.), Sex and Disability (pp.145-162). Durham, NC: Duke
       University Press.
Siebers, T. (2012). A sexual culture for disabled people. In R. McRuer & A. Mollow (Eds.), Sex
       and Disability (pp. 37-53). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
smith, s.e. (2019). Skin hunger and the taboo of wanting to be touched. Retrieved from:
       https://catapult.co/stories/skin-hunger-and-the-taboo-of-wanting-to-be-touched
                                                                                                 10


Wade, H.A. (2002). Discrimination, sexuality, and people with significant disabilities: Issues of
      access and the right expression in the United States. Disability Studies Quarterly 22(4),
      9-27.
Whatcott, J. (2017). Sexual deviance and “mental defectiveness” in eugenics era California.
      Retrieved from: http://notchesblog.com/2017/03/14/sexual-deviance-and-mental-
      defectiveness-in-eugenics-era-california/
Wilkerson, A. (2012). Normate sex and its discontents. In R. McRuer & A. Mollow (Eds.), Sex
      and Disability (pp. 183-207). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Winges-Yanez, N. (2018). A Foucaultian discourse analysis of person-centered practice using a
      genealogical framework of intellectual disability. Retrieved from
      http://ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/login?url=https://search.proquest.com/docview/2109015230
      ?accountid=7118
                                                                                                11
