                                                          Spring - 2019
                            AET310: Foundations of Creative Coding – Unique #: TBC
                                                       Michael McKellar
                                             mmckellar@austin.utexas.edu
                                                 Office Hours: by appointment
                                             Tuesday & Thursday 8:00 – 9:30 am
                                                             Room TBC
                                                 REQUIRED assets for Class:
                                                        A notebook & pen
                                        Personal Laptop running windows or MacOS
 This class will use ‘Learning Processing, 2nd ed, by Daniel Shiffman’ – A PDF link to the full textbook will be
                               shared during class, you may prefer to gain a physical copy.
OVERVIEW
In this class we look at building the foundations of creative thinking and practical coding. The class serves as an
introduction to coding and creative process on a whole. Examining the use of computers as an artist medium in
contemporary art.
Using the graphical language ‘processing’ we develop the key skills required to program and realise an artistic or creative
vision via code.
Later weeks explore future of creative coding and alternative outlets for artistic creation that are utilised throughout the
AET major’s main disciplines.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This practical lab class introduces students to use code to realise and implement artistic vision.
Exploration of the uses of computers in the development and creation of contemporary art and design, students will leave
with a practical understanding of the uses of creative coding in the real world.
Development and learning in the graphical language ‘processing’ will give students a foundation in using code for artistic
creation.
Later weeks will develop a practical understanding of further creative coding applications and alternative development
environments.
At the conclusion of this course, students will meet the requirements for a number of upper AET courses and classes.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of the semester, students will be able to:
      •     Critically analyse and discuss the qualities of computer-generated art;
      •     Develop and understanding of the foundations of coding practise;
      •     Demonstrate practical development, creation and implementation of creative coding;
      •     Gain experience in various industry software;
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
      •     Participation (10%): Students should be prepared to raise ideas, critique designs and add to class discussions, this
            is expected weekly
      •     Attendance (5%): Attendance is taken during every class
      •     Technical challenges (25% across 6 challenges): Compounded learning from class in the form of homework/lab
            challenges to implement and develop upon discussed techniques. These challenges are given out from week 2
            onwards, expected to be return the following Thursday (9 days per challenge). They are graded Pass/Fail.


       •    Two-week Projects (15% * 4 projects): Created during lab sessions and finished through self-development,
            students will develop finished products from across the AET major. One project for each of the main divisions
            (PLAI/Gaming/Sound/Visualisation)
       •    BONUS – (5%): Awarded for correctly documenting, hosting and displaying work created in class in an online
            portfolio during the final week of class
CLASS POLICIES
UT ELECTRONIC MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students. Students are
 expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related
 communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked
 daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or her official e-
 mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned to
 the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable
 messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action
 required of the University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
ATTENDANCE
Attendance and punctuality are professional attributes. This class is designed to provide students skills for a more practical
and professional future career.
You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for in-class assignments
or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up.
However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please
inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving
class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being absent.
Unexplained absences beyond the three outlined above will result in a penalty to your final grade. Normally a single grade
drop per unexplained absence. (E.g. A, becomes A-, C+ becomes C etc.)
Learning, research and development within the class all build on knowledge gained from previous lessons, you are
responsible for making up for work missed during any absence. It is your responsibly to obtain any notes or assignments
from one of your classmates.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be
absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
(from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-
6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations
promptly.
CLASSROOM ETIQUETTE
       1.   Be on time at the start of class time and after any breaks
       2.   This class is a place for artistic discussion and critique, not texting on your phone – please turn them on silent
       3.   Discussion is good, distraction is bad – I reserve the right to reduce marks for participation for repeat offenders


              4.  Consider bringing headphones/earphones for any periods of solo work, such as class work sessions – any other
                  time, these are never seen
       COURSE COMMUNITACTION
       The syllabus and assignments will be posted on the course Canvas site. All communications outside class hours will take
       place via canvas.
       This class is designed around discussion and group learning, it will help everyone if you post questions in the discussion
       area wherever possible. I will post, comment and otherwise add to the discussion wherever relevant, or with topics to help
       steer general discussion in class.
       I will attempt to respond to all private communications within 24 hours on weekdays.
       I normally check emails twice per day, once in the afternoon, once in the evening.
              •   Always ask questions where there is doubt. Do not make assumptions.
       ASSIGNMENTS
              •   All assignments will be given out and discussed during class time and available to view on Canvas.
              •   Some classes will have specific technical assignments with focus on students learning specific skills in a software
                  or working with a hardware. Additional smaller assignments may be made throughout the semester as the need
                  arises.
              •   You are responsible for making up for any class work missed – specifically technical challenges completed during
                  class time as these, and the homework assignment contribute heavily to the final grade.
              •   It is your responsibility to ask and inquire if you are unclear about what is required or when.
              •   If an assignment will make use of lab accessible technology. You are responsible for making sure you leave
                  appropriate time to access all the required technology for a given assignment.
       ASSIGNMENTS DEADLINES
              • It is vital that you do not get behind in this class as all work builds upon previous work.
              • As a general rule all projects, reading, research and homework assignments must be completed before the
                  beginning of each class period. However, many class assignments have a due date and time in the evening before
                  class. This allows time for review and feedback, as well as discussion based upon the submitted work during the
                  next lesson. Any work not submitted on time will still receive feedback but will not benefit from peer review in
                  class time.
              •   All work is due as specified in the assignment listed on canvas. Work not completed before the canvas deadline
                  will be considered late.
              •   Any work turned in late, without prior consent and valid reason, will be accepted for a week past the original due
                  date penalized with a full grade drop from the deserved reward (an A submission will reward a B etc).
              •   Technical challenges are given out week 2 onwards, with weekly deadlines
              •   Two-week Projects are given out week 8 onwards, with bi-weekly deadlines
              •   You will be shown your estimated class participate grade during mid-term week (normally week 7) based on
                  current engagement. Use this as a chance to evaluate your engagement and participation in discussions and
                  critiques and whether a change on your part is required.
       CLASS SCHEDULE
       Due to holidays, university breaks and other external factors some dates from the below table may change slightly from
       semester to semester.
W/C  Week     Lecture (Tuesday)                         Lab (Thursday)                            Reading       Assignment          Assignment
Date                                                                                                            Given (Tues)        Due (Thurs)
Jan  1        •    Course Introduction                  •    Drawing patterns & shapes (copy      Chpt 1-3      Challenge 1 –
21            •    Assignment overview                       this pattern)                                      design an alien
              •    Learning principles
              •    Lecture
                         o The IDE
                         o Pixels
                         o Shapes
                         o Single render


Jan 2         •    Lecture                          •     Animation, patterns and shapes         Chpt 4-6        Challenge 2 –     Challenge 1
28                       o    Variables                   (Moving objects)                                       Variables only
                         o    Conditionals                                                                       alien
                         o    Loops
Feb 3         •    Lecture                          •     Interaction, control & fun             Chpt 7-8        Challenge 3 –     Challenge 2
4                        o    Functions                   (Bouncing balls)                                       Make an Alien
                         o    Interaction                                                                        Object
                         o    Objects
                         o    Data Types
Feb 4         •    Lecture                          •     Multiple objects, button press         Chpt 9          Challenge 4 –     Challenge 3
11                       o    Arrays                      (ball objects, button pressing)                        Create an
                         o    Algorithms                                                                         interactive alien
                         o    Debugging                                                                          game
Feb 5         •    Lecture                          •     Using libraries & integrations         Chpt 10-12      Challenge 5 –     Challenge 4
18                       o    Libraries                   (adding sound at right time)                           Add sound to
                         o    Sound                                                                              minigame
Feb 6         •    Lecture                          •     Images and videos to our               Chpt 13-14                        Challenge 5
25                       o    Images                      sketches
                         o    Video
                         o    Sprites
Mar 7         •    Lecture                          •     Polar / Cartesian box objects &        Chpt 15-16      Challenge 6 –
4                        o    Alternative Maths           vertices                                               Interactive
                                   ▪    Modulus                                                                  Review
                                   ▪    Polar
                         o    Custom Shapes
Mar 8         •    Lecture                          •     Adding a high score table to a         Chpt 17-19      Project 1 – Alien Challenge 6
11                       o External Data                  game                                                   Game
                                                                                                                                   Participation
                                                                                                                                   grade shown
Mar                                                                       Spring break
18
Mar 9         •    Video Tutorials for              •     Video Tutorials for Supercollider      Chpt 20-21      Project 2         Project 1 –
25                 Supercollider                                                                                                   Alien Game
Apr 10        •    Video Tutorials for              •     Video Tutorials for Supercollider                                        Project 2
1                  Supercollider
Apr 11        •    Video Tutorials for Unity        •     Video Tutorials for Unity                              Project 3
8
Apr 12        •    Video Tutorials for Unity        •     Video Tutorials for Unity                                                Project 3
15
Apr 13        •    Video Tutorials for              •     Video Tutorials for Touchdesigner                      Project 4
22                 Touchdesigner
Apr 14        •    Video Tutorials for              •     Video Tutorials for Touchdesigner                                        Project 4
29                 Touchdesigner
May 15        Class work Presentations              Class work Presentations                                                       BONUS
6                                                                                                                                  CHALLENGE
May 16                                                                      No class
13
       EVAULATION & GRADING
       GENERAL
       Neatness, scholarship and presentation will all count towards your final grade. When designing being able to visually
       communicate ideas is part of the process, this does not mean that artistic merit is awarded.
       TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
       Technical challenges for this class are graded on a pass/fail criteria. Every technical challenge will present a number of
       bullet point objectives to achieve for submission.
       Unless all points marked required are present the assignment will be graded fail.
       Some challenges will include ‘optional’ additional points that are not included in the grading criteria but offer advanced
       skill or creative challenge.


Some challenges may indicate they award an additional point for creativity.
PROJECT WORK
Each assignment will be given a specific grading rubric covering exactly how students will earn points. A rubric section is
normally assigned a grade from 0-5:
0 – Null, not covered in submission
2 – Okay, attempts to answer brief but fall short of minimum requirements
3 – Good or great, answers the brief
4 – Excellent, goes above and beyond the brief
5 – Exceptional, a perfect professional piece of work
Some rubric points may have double (or higher) weighting that will result in your award being multiplied by weighting.
Example:
  Grading Section          Award        Weighting       Total
  1                                 3               2       6/10 (60%)
  2                                 4               1         4/5 (80%)
                                                Total   10/15 (66.67%)
YOU WILL BE GRADED ON
      •    Reading, discussion, Participation (10%);
      •    Attendance (5%)
      •    Technical Challenges (25%)
                o 1-5 offer 4%
                o 6 Review Quiz offer 5%
      •    Two-week Projects (60%)
                o Project 1: Processing final – Complete alien game (15%)
                o Project 2: Supercollider for Music & Sound (15%)
                o Project 3: Unity for Games (15%)
                o Project 4: Touchdesigner and physical computing for PLAI (15%)
      •    Extra Credit (5%)
                o Awarded for documenting, uploading and showcasing portfolio of work in last week
This course does not have a final exam, but student exhibition will make part of the assigned grade.
GRADING SCHEME
This class uses a mixture of points and percentages. Assignments will be given in points, but the final grade will be
calculated via the percentage of awarded points vs total available points across all assignments.
To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not recognize the grade of A+. Thus, the conversion from
percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
      •    A=        94+
      •    A- =      90 – 93.999…
      •    B+ =      87 – 89.999…
      •    B=        84 – 86.999…
      •    B- =      80 – 83.999…
      •    C+ =      77 – 79.999…
      •    C=        74 – 76.999…
      •    C- =      70 – 73.999…
      •    D+ =      67 – 69.999…
      •    D=        64 – 66.999…
      •    D- =      60 – 63.999…
      •    F=        0 – 59.999…
PRIVACY
This class is designed to be an open space for discussion, critique and learning. What is said about each other’s work during
this class should remain in the classroom. It will not be published in a blog or any other personal website, tweeted or
posted on social networks.


MOBILE DEVICES
Mobile devices of any kind must be silenced and out of sight.
There may be times when using a mobile is appropriate, such as aiding in discussion or during dedicates solo work – these
times will be very obviously announced. Usage of a mobile device outside of these terms – with or without warning, will
result in severe penalty to your class participation grade.
RESOURCES AND EQUIPMENT
This class will make use of processing, a free to use & develop programming language available at: processing.org
Other useful links:
      ● Processing.org - main site for Processing
      ● Processing.org - tutorials
                ○ hello.processing.org - great starting point
      ● Processing.org - reference
      ● Processing.org - libraries
      ● Processing.org - IDE reference
      ● Learningprocessing.com - website for the textbook
      ● Sketchpad.cc - an online processing editor
      ● Awesome Creative Coding list by TerkelG on GitHub
Lab class for this class will require the ‘Learning Processing, 2nd edition’ text book by Daniel Shiffman.
This is a very active and involved class. Learning will be adapted to suit the class – as such notes should be taken in class to
record topics discussed. As such as note pad and pen will be required for every class session.
