ARC 520F                                 INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO III
                                         INTEGRATION
                                         Fall 2018
                                         MWF 1pm-6pm
Instructor:                              Judith Birdsong
Office:                                  Gol 2.210
Office Hours:                            W12-1
Email:                                   jcbirdsong@utexas.edu
                                         Prerequisites
ARC 520E or 520G; ARC 415L; and ARC 333 with a grade of at least C in each.
                                         Curriculum Flag
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage students in the
process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing a student with the opportunity for independent
investigation of a question, problem, or project related to the student’s major. Students should therefore expect a
substantial portion of the grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of one’s own work.
                                         Intermediate Design Studio
Students pursuing the Bachelor of Architecture must complete four Intermediate Design Studios during their second
and third years. Building on the Foundation Design Studios taken during the first year, the goal of the Intermediate
Studios is to prepare students for Advanced Design Studios in their fourth and fifth years.
Each Intermediate Studio will be structured around one of four broad themes of inquiry (Operational, Environmental,
Integration, and Speculation) and will offer a critical framework and vocabularies for design and development into
key issues emphasized in the theme. Intermediate Studios will also serve as a platform to prepare students for the
range of offerings of the Advanced Studios (e.g. Comprehensive, Urban Design, Landscape Architecture, etc.).
Intermediate Studios will follow a similar structure, but each instructor will individually determine the scope and design
problem for each studio.
                                         Theme: INTEGRATION
This course emphasizes architecture as a tectonic expression through structural systems, construction methods and
materiality, assembly, spatial and formal compositions, etc.
This focus of this particular studio is on site. It should be noted that we typically perceive “site” as a tabula rasa, an
“empty” patch of turf occasionally physically constrained by built neighbors whose presence we often only
grudgingly acknowledge and consider. A given site is, however, never empty or neutral. It is host to natural
phenomenon (vegetation, topography, wind patterns, flora, and fauna) and subject to political mechanisms (codes,
boundaries, rights-of-way, shared infrastructure). Perhaps most importantly given the program and location of our
final project, all sites possess a history -- whether perceptible and legible, or not.
                                         STUDIO STRUCTURE
                                         Exercise 1: Work…Deconstructed
                                         15% of final grade
Architecture is comprised of spatial, structural, organizational, and conceptual (to name a few) “systems” that, taken
together, constitute the complete work. Precedent analysis allows us to delaminate these overlapping strata thereby
revealing insights into a work’s often hidden order. The precedents, which you will investigate in pairs, are not in any
way stylistically similar, but analysis affords us a window into how these disparate architects operating in different
geographies have found distinct ways to generate form and content to ask: What specific ‘ideas’ organized this
work? What was the architect’s methodologies? How does this work embody, communicate and/or express their
intent?
                                         Exercise 2: Work…Reconstituted
                                         20% of final grade


Those insights revealed through the analyses undertaken in Exercise 1 will serve as the raw material for your design
strategy in Exercise 2, a series of iterative site investigations.
                                           Final Project: SANCTUARY
                                           (2019 Lyceum Competition)
                                           65% of final grade
From the project brief:
“The competition aims to explore how landscape and architecture as sanctuary and refuge can be coalesced to
develop a place of multi sensory contemplation and reconciliation. In broad terms, a sanctuary can be considered a
place of refuge and protection, both in physical and psychological terms. People seek refuge in many forms and
places; for some it is in the form of community, a gathering place, or some form of religious worship. For others, it
could be a place for solitary contemplation and reflection. Some find refuge in music, art, or nature - others in
meditation.
Proposals should provide a non-denominational, sanctuary to support past and present immigrants to the United
States and SF Bay Area. They should provide places for quiet contemplation as well as areas to gather in community
groups of various sizes. The sanctuary should enable new arrivals to connect physically, spiritually and emotionally
with their new home. They should also provide a safe environment in which connections can be made, enabling a new
sense of community, and transition to one’s new home. For returning visitors, it provides a place for education,
contemplation, and reflection. Inherently, this exploration of architecture as sanctuary involves an active bodily
encounter, and thus should consider all of the human senses to create feelings of comfort, safety, privacy and
community.”
                                           LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will be exposed to a series of learning goals several times and from different angles over the four Intermediate Studio
sequence. The goal is that similar issues are repeated from studio to studio but from different angles, allowing students to find,
within the diversity of the topics, a “common thread” as they go through the sequence of the four studios. The level of expectation
will grow as students go from being introduced to an issue, to becoming competent at it. Some issues would be only mentioned in
passing in one studio but will be studied in more depth in another.
      •    Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and space, both exterior and interior;
           building envelope
      •    Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures, construction,
           and environmental system
      •    Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant contextual; environmental and
           programmatic factors underlying the project
      •    Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents; research skills
      •    Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
           displayed
      •    Basic grasp of accessibility and egress
      •    Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all activities of the studio
                                           STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning encourages dialogue, collaboration,
risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions
and make proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large.
Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to
develop his/her critical thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education,
where project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the school's core
values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's
fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
                                           DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the design conversations taken place in
studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc). Students are encouraged to participate and be engaged. Specifically,
all B.Arch and BSAS students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (three per semester by lead practitioners
from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio that follow are important for the holistic education of
intellectually engaged students and participation will have an impact on students’ grades (see below).
                                           EVALUATION CRITERIA


While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is derived from
broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions for late
arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
     Pursuit: The consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
           •   The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of inquiry
           •   The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and models, etc.) in
               the development of the design
           •   Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is asked; direct their
               own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
     Grasp: The ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in companion courses.
           •   A strong and clearly stated design objective
           •   Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements – and
               sectional development
           •   Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through creative
               engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and environmental system integration,
               building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
           •   Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and assembly
     Resolution: Of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final design
     presentation.
           •   Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill displayed
               through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
     Engagement: The active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of Architecture
and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements.
                                           GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-              Excellent
                  Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual rigor, craft,
                  and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in
                  class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-           Above Average
                  Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and
                  suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
                  demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C              Average
                  Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication and rigor.
                  Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-        Poor
                  Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
                  appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F                 Fail
                  Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will
                  be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X                 Excused Incomplete
                  Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is
                  not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate
                  Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the second
                  week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
                                           ATTENDANCE


Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course
will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family
emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students
should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly
regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
                                            RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be
penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in
advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
                                            ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for
official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
                                            CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools they
serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
                                            STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to obtain a letter that documents the disability from the
Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
                                            SECURITY, SAFETY, AND THE STUDIO
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of
everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary
component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio
without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studiomates accountable for the security of
your shared space.
