                                         EDP 384V Advanced Practicum
                                                     74306
                                                    Summer
 Class Meets: SZB 435 Wednesdays 4-8pm
Instructor: Jane Gray, PhD                                 Office: 262E
Email: jane.gray@austin.utexas.edu                         Office hours: by appointment
Phone: 512-471-0367
                                            Course Description
This course is meant to complement students’ clinical training at their practicum site. The goal of the course is
to provide students with additional knowledge to inform their clinical practice, provide training in thoughtful
case conceptualization/formulation and treatment planning, and help prepare them to become ethical,
competent, and professional clinicians. The format of the course will be collaboratively decided by the class,
and can include some didactic presentation from the instructor, discussion of readings and professional
experiences, case formulation practice/discussion, and skills practice.
Course Objectives (Students will…)
     1. Be able to conceptualize cases and formulate treatment plans using at least one theoretical
         orientation/treatment approach.
     2. Practice specific clinical skills/techniques from more than one treatment model.
     3. Demonstrate growth as a professional within the practicum site.
Statement on Learning Success
We all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you,
please let me know as soon as possible. Together we will develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. The University of Austin also provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. See http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
or call 471-6259 voice or 410-6644 for videophone. I encourage students to utilize these resources whenever
appropriate, and to contact me very early in the semester with accommodation letters and/or to begin talking
about appropriate accommodations for this course.
Policy on Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
Observance of Religious Holidays:


I respect students’ observation of religious holidays and will work with students around observance of any
religious holidays that conflict with class or class activities. Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states
that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused
under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or
complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as
possible so that arrangements can be made. It is the student’s responsibility to look over the syllabus during
the first week of class and determine if they foresee a problem with the ability to complete assignments when
due or to be present in class. It is then the responsibility of the student to have a conversation with me within
the first week or two of classes so we can determine how class obligations can be fulfilled.
                                          Course Requirements
Student Assignments and Responsibilities:
Non-attending Students:
You must complete the assignments as listed below, submitted via Canvas, to earn a grade and credit for this
course.
Class Attendance and Participation (20% of grade)
You are expected to attend, be prepared, and participate in class. You will arrive on time and remain for the
entire class. While in class, I expect all attendees to be mindfully present and respectful to the instructor and
their peers. Laptops and cellular phones are not permitted unless indicated by the instructor. If you display
any distracting behaviors in class or fail to be respectful and productive in your comments you will lose
participation points. You are expected to willingly participate in class activities. You are encouraged to
participate in class discussions and bring up examples related to your practicum work or other clinical training
experiences. All clinical material discussed in class is to be treated as confidential material and accorded all of
the safeguards that are associated with responsible, professional, conduct. Additionally, please provide
formative feedback about elements of the course that are particularly helpful to your success in your training,
and/or elements you would like included, more of, etc.
Attendance Policy: Attendance at professional conferences or other travel should be cleared with me in
advance or as soon as is possible. If you are unable to attend class due to illness or emergency, please send
me an email before class if possible, or send word with a peer. After 2 absences (excused or not) you will need
to attend an additional semester of practicum.
Participation Grading Policy: I will make a subjective assessment of your class participation. I will consider the
level of preparation and thoughtfulness your participation shows, and the respect and collaboration you
demonstrate with your peers. There are multiple methods of participation including class discussion, role play
activities, etc.
For students registered but not attending class this semester: You must attend the first week of class and be
responsive to instructor. You will get full points for “class attendance and participation” as long as you attend
the first day of class and are responsive to instructor communication.


Submission of Required Paperwork (20% of grade)
Your practicum agreement and malpractice certificate must be complete and uploaded to Canvas within 2
weeks of the first day of class (deadline 6/26). After this date, the instructor will take off 2 points per day. Be
sure you have written your supervisor’s contact information on the practicum agreement, including email, as I
will be contacting each supervisor mid-semester. If you have more than one practicum you need separate
Agreement forms for each one. Ensure your supervisor completes the online Practicum Evaluation form at the
end of the semester. You must have the evaluation form completed at the end of each semester in order to
receive credit for this course.
Clinical Logs (20% of grade)
Students will upload their logs weekly to Canvas, using the template provided by the instructor or uploading a
Time to Track log. Each weekly log is worth 2 points and is due by 11:59 pm Monday of the following week. A
half point will be deducted for each day a log is late, with no credit given after 4 days late.
Self-Reflection (40% of grade)
A brief self-reflection will be due at both the beginning and the end of the semester. The beginning of
semester reflection (20 points) will focus on your training goals for the semester. Your final self-reflection (20
points) will describe what you have learned over the course of the semester and how you feel you have met
(or not met) your training goals.
For students attending class:
You will be expected to also upload case conceptualizations for all active clients to Canvas using the template
provided by the instructor. You will also be expected to upload clips (2-5 min) from your therapy sessions or
assessment feedback sessions, or from role play with peers, for us to review as a group, at least once during
the semester.
 Grading for this Course
  Assignments                                                Points possible              Percent of Total Grade
      1.  Class attendance and participation                20                           20
      2.  Submission of required paperwork                  20                           20
      3.  Clinical logs                                     20                           20
      4.  Self-reflection (2 parts)                         40                           40
Grading Guidelines:
A: 93-100                   B+: 87-89          C+: 77-79
A-: 90-92                   B: 83-86           C: 73-76
                            B-: 80-82          C-: 70-72
    A (Excellent) will be given for outstanding achievement in written work and class contributions. A student
         who earns an A shows consistent initiative, originality, and comprehension as evidenced by a total
         course point value on assignments of 93-100; A-=90-92.
    B (Above Average) will be given for work which is of good quality, but which is either not outstanding in
         the above characteristics or contains some errors of comprehension as evidenced by a total course
         point value of 80-89. (B+=87-89; B- = 80-82)
    C (Average) will be given for work that is of marginal quality for graduate students and/or shows
         significant errors of comprehension evidenced by a total course point value on assignments below 80.


Readings:
The readings include selected chapters from texts on case formulation and articles that will be available on
Canvas. Additional readings will be added throughout the course, including the reading students provide to
accompany their case presentation.
Please see Canvas for PDFs of articles and chapters required.
 Course Outline
       All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
       https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
       schedule.
       Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
       responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
       receive the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
                       Class Topic/Focus                  Readings
   Week         Date
   1      6/12         Introduction/course overview
                                                      Persons, 2008; Chapters 1 and 5
                       Case Formulation
   2      6/19                                        Eells, 2014; Chapter 2
                       Treatment Case Introduction
                       Case Formulation               Persons, 2008; Chapters 6 & 7
   3      6/26         Treatment Case                 For child-focused: Manassis, 2014; Chapter 6
                       Small Group Breakouts          For adult focused: Eells, 2014; Chapter 12
                       Case Formulation
   4      7/3          Treatment Case                 Persons, 2008, Chapters 9-11
                       Small Group Breakouts
                       Case Formulation
   5      7/10         Treatment Case                 TBD from instructor
                       Small Group Breakouts
   6      7/17         NO CLASS
   7      7/24         Guest Lecture                  TBD from guest lecturer


   8      7/31      Guest Lecture                 TBD from guest lecturer
                    Case Formulation
   9      8/7       Treatment Case                TBD from instructor
                    Small Group Breakouts
                    Case Formulation
   10     8/14      Treatment Case                TBD from instructor
                    Small Group Breakouts
References for chapters, available on Canvas or by e-book
Eells, T. D. (Ed.). (2014). Handbook of psychotherapy case formulation. Retrieved from https://ebookcentral
         proquest-com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu
Manassis, K. (2014). Case formulation with Children and Adolescents. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Persons, J.B. (2008). The case formulation approach to cognitive-behavior therapy. New York, NY: The Guilford
         Press.
