                 PUBLIC COPY ONLY (Canvas Access required for full Syllabus)
ANS 302C/HIS 302C Introduction to China                                  Dr. Chiu-Mi Lai
Fall 2018
               INTRODUCTION TO CHINESE CULTURE AND CIVILIZATION
                                [All lectures, discussion and readings in English.]
Office Hours:
Teaching Assistant:
         Required Text: (Available at University Co-op Bookstore)
Charles A. Desnoyers, Patterns of Modern Chinese History (Oxford, 2017)
[Additional readings on Canvas/Course Documents]
         Recommended:
Rana Mitter, Modern China: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, 2016)
Evan Osnos, Age of Ambition – Chasing Fortune, Truth, and Faith in the New China (Farrar,
         Straus, and Giroux, 2014)
Statement on Global Cultures Flag: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Course Description:
This course will provide an introduction to major concepts and ideas from Chinese cultural
traditions to construct a course inquiry into understanding Chinese culture and society. A guiding
principle in this course inquiry will be to investigate the past to help inform the present. The
overall course inquiry: How is the present informed by an understanding of the past? How has
the past shaped the present geopolitics?
Lectures and discussion will examine key concepts from art, history, language, literature, and
thought that greatly shaped, and continue to influence, “Chinese” cultural and geopolitical
entities.
    COURSE EXPECTATIONS
             This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
             There is no written final exam during the Final Exam period.
                                                                                                                      1


            Late assignments will not be accepted for credit. There is no make-up of exams,
             assignments or presentations. (In legitimate cases for missed exam/presentation,
             official documentation must be provided within 1 week)
           Laptop and Other Electronic Devices Use Policy – All devices must be turned off
             during class. Any use of these devices, including texting, websurfing, etc. will lead
             to dismissal from class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat offenders
             will result in a filing of a report of academic problems.
           Laptops may be used for Oral Presentations only.
           Academic honesty is imperative. Acts of academic dishonesty will result in a
             failing grade.
           There is no official class attendance policy for this course but there are
             unannounced quizzes and graded discussion/participation exercises that cannot
             be made up.
             Attendance is vital for success in this course, in assimilating assigned readings and
     lectures, and I value your contribution to class discussion especially in assigned Roundtable
     discussions. As well, lectures will be vital to flesh out ideas and concepts from readings and
     for discussion, all of which cannot be replaced by reading lecture outlines online.
Religious Holidays – Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an
opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of The
University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the
classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
     Final Course Grade will be based on the following (see Canvas course site):
     I. 11%      Class and online discussion, participation and “preparedness”
                 (unannounced reading quizzes and discussion exercises)
     II. 50%     TWO Written Exams (Responses to Discussion and Reading Questions, based on
                          Lectures, Readings, Class Discussion, and Roundtable Presentations)
     III. 24%    ONE Roundtable Discussion and Video “Essay” (Designated Topics) –
                 Canvas signup available after 12th class day
     IV. 15%     Final Video Essay with written commentary*
                 *in class option for oral presentation of essay (limited earned slots)
     Recommended: View Sculpture by Ai Weiwei, ongoing installation in Austin
     https://www.thecontemporaryaustin.org/exhibitions/ai-weiwei/
                                                                                                                  2


ANS 302C/HIS 302C            Fall 2018 Schedule Outline – see Canvas for Detailed Schedule
INTRODUCTION TO CONCEPTS AND IDEAS IN CHINA’S CULTURAL HISTORY
     IMPORTANT DATES:
      EXAMS: 10/3 (in class) and 11/20 (take home, due 11/20)
      Roundtables (Video Essay): 11/5, 11/7, 11/14, 11/16
      Final Video Essay: 12/9 (in class option 12/10, limited earned slots)
      (No final exam during Final Exam Period.)
     See Syllabus on Canvas for detailed Course Expectations
     See Weekly “Modules” on Canvas for detailed schedule and access to other
      readings, assignment submission links, and announcements
     Lecture Outlines are posted on Canvas/Course Files (link on Modules)
     Recommended Lectures for background and supplementary information posted on
      Canvas/Course Files (link on Modules)
     Assignments due on Canvas/Assignments (link on Modules)
      No late submissions accepted. No make-up of exams or presentations
      (In legitimate cases for missed exam/presentation, official documentation must be
      provided within 1 week of missed exam/presentation. Acceptable documentation
      include those for emergency medical and sanctioned organizational and job-
      essential absences.)
     Unannounced reading quizzes, in-class informal writing discussion exercises, and/or
      “Canvas video comments” on assigned readings and lectures (No make-up)
     “Core Reading” assignments listed by section/chapter in required course text:
      Charles A. Desnoyers, Patterns of Modern Chinese History (Oxford, 2017)
      (abbreviated as Patterns)
      Reading Tip: Consult “Timelines” pp. 4-6 and pp. 108-110; “Glossary” on pp. 403-415
       Additional Assigned and Supplementary Readings on Canvas/Course Files (link
          on Modules)
                      WEEKLY CLASS FORMAT (General Outline)
     Weeks 2-10 (Except for Week 6)
      Mondays-Wednesdays: Lectures on Key Concepts for Designated Period
      Fridays: Lecture/Discussion
     Weeks 11-12
      Lectures and Roundtable Forums – Brief student presentations of Video Essays in
      “Roundtable” Forum and Discussion
     Weeks 14-16
      Lectures/Discussion – preparation and discussion of articles for Final Video Essay
                                                                                          3


Weeks 1-5 (8/29 – 9/28)  Introduction, Ancient China, Qin-Han Dynasties, Period of
                         Northern and Southern Dynasties
Week 6 (10/1-10/5)       Review and EXAM 1 (in class)
Weeks 7-10 (10/8-11/2)   Tang-Qing Dynasties
Weeks 11-12 (11/5-11/16) Lectures and Roundtable Presentations: From the Qing to the
                         Republic (Empire to Nation)
                         Individual Video “Essays” for designated Roundtable topics
Week 13 (11/19-11/20)    Review and EXAM 2
                         Take home: due 11/20 by 11:59 pm on Canvas
                         Weds-Friday THANKSGIVING BREAK
Weeks 14-15 (11/26-12/7) Modern and Contemporary China
                         Final Video “Essay”
Week 16 12/10            Course Overview: Contemporary China – What makes it
“Chinese”
                         In class presentations of Final Video Essay (limited earned slots)
                                                                                            4


Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is created for
each course. Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post
grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys.
You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. As with
all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notifications
of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work.
However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs
close to the due date.
Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday
through Friday 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
The UT Library
The UT Library offers resource help and many services. The following link is for Undergraduate Students:
     Website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
The Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing to UT
undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment. Location: PCL 2.330.
          Website: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
(Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students)
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be
checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating
your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for checking
your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of the University, your e-
mail address in Canvas is your employee address.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                                                                                                                    5
