                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                         STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:              SW 393R1                 Instructor:       Christine Winston, LCSW-S
 Unique Number:              87625                    Email:            christinewinston@utexas.edu
 Semester:                   Summer 2020              Office:           Online
 Meeting Time/Place:         M/W 2:30-5:00 pm         Office Phone:     512.289.5802
                             Via Zoom                 Office Hours:     By appointment
               CLINICAL ASSESSMENT AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
I.      STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course will focus on the incidence, etiology, and assessment of health and mental health
issues with children, adolescents, adults, and families. The framework of the course is based on
social work values and the ethical decision-making process, as illuminated by the NASW Code
of Ethics. Students will learn models of assessment with which to evaluate human functioning
throughout the lifecycle. A bio-psychosocial-spiritual and cultural emphasis will be applied to
the diagnostic categories within the DSM-5. Students will develop an advanced understanding of
people from diverse backgrounds—affirming and respecting their strengths and differences. The
course is built on the identification, analysis, and implementation of empirically-based
assessment tools that have incorporated statistically valid reliability and validity studies. Major
classification systems, such as the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and the
International Classification of Diseases, and other schemes for assessing and understanding
human behavior, will be covered.
II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
By the end of the semester, students will be able to:
1. Demonstrate an in-depth understanding of biological, psychosocial, and cultural theories on
the etiology of mental health and mental illness;
2. Demonstrate the ability to apply methods of empirically-based assessment tools and
techniques, including those developed through classificatory schemes, standardized measures,
and qualitative typologies;
3. Demonstrate an advanced clinical knowledge of the relationship between assessment and
intervention as it relates to the strengths, capacities and resources of individuals and families;
4. Demonstrate the ability to adapt assessment models to reflect an understanding of persons
from diverse backgrounds, including (but not limited to) race, ethnicity, culture, class, gender,
sexual orientation, religion, physical or mental ability, age, and national origin;
5. Critically evaluate and analyze different theoretical and assessment models as


to their efficacy in given situations. This includes: a) the adequacy of the research and
knowledge base; b) the range of applicability; c) the value and ethical issues, including the
student’s own value system, and d) the policy implications involved in assessment and delivery
of services;
6. Demonstrate an understanding of the limitations in using classification schemes in
understanding human behavior and the danger of mislabeling people, particularly those from at-
risk populations. Demonstrate advanced knowledge of social work values and the ethical
decision-making processes as they relate to ethical dilemmas in clinical assessment and practice.
III.     TEACHING METHODS
The primary teaching approach in this course is collaborative learning. Course materials are
presented primarily through decision case study and in class discussions. Small group work,
readings, and lectures are incorporated. The goal is to stimulate students’ critical thinking,
defensible decision-making, intellectual creativity, and sharing of knowledge and skills the class.
Students are responsible for material presented through all these activities. Students are required
to complete the assigned readings for each week and be prepared to discuss them.
IV.      REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders-5. Washington, DC: Author.
Corcoran, J and J. Walsh. (2016). Clinical Assessment and Diagnosis in Social Work Practice
(3rd Edition). New York, NY. Oxford University Press.
DSM-5 full version is available at no cost to students through the UT library as supplemental to
the “hard copy.” Available at https://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/record=b8979769
V.       COURSE REQUIREMENTS
    Case-Based Take Home Exam 1                        10%
    Case-Based Take Home Exam 2                        10%
    Case Assessment Paper                              20%
    Group Presentation                                 20%
    Participation                                      20%
    Total                                              100%
Take home case-based exams (each worth 10% of Final Grade)
Due by 2:30 pm on Canvas on due date. Exam 1 is due 7/8, Exam 2 is due 7/22
This case based, take home exam will offer you the opportunity to apply what you have learned
from the course material, including readings, lectures, guest presentations, class presentations, and
discussion material. The test will consist of both content and application-oriented material.


Clinical Assessment Paper (20% of Final Grade)
Paper is due by 2:30pm on Canvas on 6/29
Each student will complete a 5-7 page clinical assessment of a client you have worked with, or a
main character in a book or film following the general assessment interview outline form
provided as an basic guide.
The following specific aspects must also be included in the clinical assessment:
1. Identification of 3-5 defenses displayed by the client and family members
2. An example of at least 1 ethical dilemma, i.e. a circumstance when two or more core social
work values as defined by the NASW code of ethics are in conflict.
3. Where relevant in the available reading material, identify how age, class, culture, race,
ethnicity, country of origin, language(s), educational attainment, religious background,
sexual orientation, clinician value conflict & physical disability may influence (limit,
compromise, or enhance) the clinical diagnostic effort and the diagnosis
4. The effect of trauma and economic/social oppression on the diagnostic process and on the
diagnosis
5. A complete DSM diagnosis with codes and suspected etiology of diagnosis.
6. Suggestions for areas for further testing or assessment, if needed
In the final section of the paper, write a very brief summary of how this individual and family
affected you personally and in your role as a social worker (i.e. what were your initial reactions
to this person; what were your reactions to the family and/or friends’ ability to handle this
illness; what were the most difficult parts of the narrative for you to deal with emotionally; what
kinds of questions did it create for you; as a social worker, did you feel there were other things
that could’ve been done to assist this person and their family or friends).
Group presentation on Mental Health Assessment and Diagnosis topic (20% of Final
Grade)
Presentations will be given during class on 7/27
This assignment will give groups an opportunity to dive deeper into a topic or diagnosis that we
were not able to fully explore during the semester. Students will research a focused area of mental
health assessment and diagnosis that interests them and create and in class presentation to offer
material in an engaging and educational way and a 4-5 page fact sheet that summarizes the
literature you researched and provides any pertinent details to assist fellow students to apply the
material presented. The fact sheet will go beyond what the presentation slides include and should
be organized in a publication-oriented, informational format. The fact sheet will be made available
electronically to students. Presentation topics might be focused on identified populations, specific
treatment options, or particular problem areas. Topic areas require approval from the professor in
order to meet the expectations for this assignment. Treatment and interventions for mental health
may be integrated into presentations. Fact sheets are due by class time. Please submit via Canvas.
Class Participation (20% of Final Grade)
Even though we may be meeting online, it is important to attend class on time, remain awake,


remain for the entire class, and be actively and meaningfully present for effective learning and
demonstration of professional behavior. Because you are graduate level social work students, it is
expected that you will be able to participate on a deeper level in class discussions, taking healthy
risks to work outside of your comfort zone. In order to receive the highest level of participation
points, healthy risk-taking for professional growth must be demonstrated. Participation points will
be determined by attendance, level of interest, respect for others’ learning needs and contributions
to classroom discussions and activities. Being prepared for class by reading assigned material is
part of this professional expectation as well. Please challenge yourself to participate.
Note: Any information contained in this course outline (including, topics, readings,
assignments, and dates) is subject to change as deemed necessary by the instructor.
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and Above               A
        90.0 to 93.999               A-
        87.0 to 89.999               B+
        84.0 to 86.999               B
        80.0 to 83.999               B-
        77.0 to 79.999               C+
        74.0 to 76.999               C
        70.0 to 73.999               C-
        67.0 to 69.999               D+
        64.0 to 66.999               D
        60.0 to 63.999               D-
        Below 60.0                   F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
    1. Students are expected to attend ALL class meetings, to read ALL the assigned readings,
        and to participate in class discussions.
    2. There are no “excused” absences. Students missing two or more class sessions may
        receive a 10% reduction in their overall course grade. Students missing three (3) or more
        class sessions may receive an “F” for the course. The instructor may use her/his
        discretion. Students should not register for this class if he/she has a conflict with the
        schedule, however emergencies are understandable. As soon as you know that you will
        not be attending class because of an emergency, please let your instructor know by email.
    3. Coming to class late or leaving class early may count as an absence.
    4. Assignments are to be submitted according to the schedule. For assignments that are
        turned in during class periods, these assignments are due at the beginning of the class
        period. Assignments turned in during or after the beginning of class will be considered
        late and will receive a ten (10%) penalty per day (weekend days are included in the
        reduction). The instructor may use her/his discretion.
    5. The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (APA 7th Edition) is
        the style manual to be used for all assignments. Incorrect APA style results in a
        deduction of points on assignments.
    6. Appropriate referencing is required. Student failure to use quotation marks for direct
        quotes or citation for indirect quotations and/or others ideas may result in a “0” for the
        paper and/or an “F” for the course.


    7. All papers are to be word-processed or typewritten, double-spaced, 10 – 12 point font,
         and 1 inch margins.
    8. Any modifications, amendments, or changes to the syllabus and or assignments are the
         discretion of the instructor. Changes will be announced in class. It is the responsibility of
         the student to inquire about any changes that might have been made in his/her absence.
    9. Instructor teaching notes to decision cases are available to instructors. These teaching
         notes are NOT to be used by students for any purposes. The use of these notes is
         considered an infraction of the University policies governing scholastic dishonesty will
         result in the initiation of a level three student review and may result in the student’s
         failure in this class or the program. In addition, it is expected that students will produce
         original work for feedback and analysis. Therefore, utilizing any past case analyses is not
         acceptable.
    10. Students who have difficulty with the course materials, assignments, or class activities
         should schedule an appointment with the instructor as soon as possible so that, where
         appropriate, additional assistance can be provided.
    11. This course is part of a professional training program. The behavior that is expected of
         social workers in professional practice settings is also expected of students in this course.
         Students are expected to arrive at class punctually, to remain in class for its duration, and
         to maintain focus upon course content during class. Eating in class is permitted only during
         breaks. Cell phones, smart phones, and laptops must be turned off during the duration of
         the class. While it is expected that course content will include examination of a diverse
         array of ideas and opinions, the professor does require that students engage one another
         with respect and professionalism.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.


This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.


POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further


  information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
  https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
  CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
  here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
  Links menu on the School’s website.
  SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
  involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
  present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
  the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
  and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
  BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
  behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
  may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
  provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
  Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
  Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
  visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
  EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
  are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
  is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
      · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
           the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
           of class.
      · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
      · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
           Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
  IX. SCHEDULE
                                          DSM 5 Introduction
1             Overview of Syllabus        Other Conditions that may be a Focus (Z-Codes)
6/8           Introduction to             Cultural formulation and cultural glossary
m             Assessment and              Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 1-2
              Diagnosis
                                          Optional readings on Canvas:
              Controversies in            McWilliams, Why Diagnose?
              Assessment and
              Diagnosis                   Martinez (2013) Conducting the Cross-Cultural Clinical
                                          Interview
              Culture and Diagnosis
                                          Paniagua (2013) Culture-Bound Syndromes, Cultural
                                          Variations, and Psychopathology


2    Mental Status             DSM 5 Major and Mild Neurocognitive Disorders
6/10 Examinations              Corcoran and Walsh: Neurocognitive Disorders Ch 18
w                              http://www.heardalliance.org/resources/screening-tools
     Neurocognitive Disorders
                               Optional readings on Canvas
     Mental Disorders due to a
     General Medical           Montoro-Rodriguez and Gallagher-Thompson (2020)
     Condition
                               Stress and Coping: Conceptual Models for
                               Understanding Dementia Among Latinos
     Assessments: Mini-
     Mental Status Exam        Chavez-Dueñas et al (2020) Contextual, Cultural,
     (MMSE) and the Mental     and Sociopolitical Issues in Caringfor Latinxs with
     Status Exam               Dementia: When the Mind Forgets and the Heart
                               Remembers
                               DSM-5 Neurodevelopmental Disorders
3    Neurodevelopmental        Disruptive, Impulse Control and Conduct Disorders
6/15 Disorders                 Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 3-6
m
                               Optional readings on Canvas:
     Disorders typically
     diagnosed in Childhood    Garcia-Barrera and Moore (2013) History Taking,
     and Adolescence           Clinical Interviewing, and the Mental Status
                               Examination in Child Assessment
                               Magaña et al (2013) Access to Diagnosis and Treatment
     Defense Mechanisms        Services Among Latino Children With Autism Spectrum
     https://dmrs-q.com/       Disorders
                               Pardini (2010) Building an Evidence Base for DSM–5
                               Conceptualizations of Oppositional Defiant Disorder
                               and Conduct Disorder: Introduction to the Special
                               Section Cases
     Assessments: Modified
     Checklist for Autism in
     Toddlers (MCHAT)
     Depressive Disorders


4                               DSM 5–Depressive Disorders
6/17 Adjustment Disorders       Bipolar and Related Disorders
w                               Adjustment Disorder pp 286
     Bipolar spectrum           Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 12, 15
     disorders
                                Optional readings on Canvas;
     Assessing for suicidality, Cerimele et al (2019) --Bipolar Disorder in Primary care
     Beck Depression
     Inventory (BDI-2)          Leong at al (2000) Suicide among Racial and Ethnic
     Patient Health             Groups: Implications for Research and Practice
     Questionnaire (PHQ-9)      Lackey (2008) Feeling blue” in Spanish- A qualitative
                                inquiry of depression among Mexican immigrants
                                Haroz et al (2016) How is depression experienced
                                around the world? A systematic review of qualitative
                                literature
5    Anxiety Disorders          DSM 5 Anxiety Disorders
6/22                            Obsessive Compulsive and Related disorders
m    Obsessive Compulsive       Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 7-8
     and Related Disorders
                                Optional readings on Canvas:
     Assessment tool: Yale      Fernandez et al (2002) Comparative Phenomenology Of
     Brown Obsessive            Ataques De Nervios, Panic Attacks, And Panic Disorder
     Compulsive scale
     (YBOCS)                    Szaflarski et al (2012) Anxiety Disorders among US
                                Immigrants: The Role of Immigrant Background and
                                Social-Psychological
                                Factors
6    Schizophrenia Spectrum     DSM 5: Schizophrenia Spectrum and other Psychotic
6/24 and other Psychotic        Disorders)
w    Disorders                  Substance-Induced Disorders (Not Including
                                Dependence and Abuse)
     Malingering                Medication-Induced Movement Disorders and Other
                                Adverse Effects of Medication.
     Assessments:               Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 17
     Brief Psychiatric Rating
     Scale (BPRS),              Optional readings on Canvas:
     Positive and Negative      Wilcox and Duffy (2015) The Syndrome of Catatonia
     Syndrome Scale (PANSS)


                              Luhrmann et al (2015) Differences in Hearing Voices of
                              people with psychosis in the USA, India and Ghana:
                              interview-based study
7    Catch Up Day             Case assessment Due
6/29
m    Small Group Differential
     Diagnosis exercises      No new reading!
8    Medications for
7/1  Treatment of Mental      https://www.nami.org/About-Mental-
w    Health                   Illness/Treatments/Mental-Health-Medications/Types-
                              of-Medication
     Guest Lecture: Dr. Vijay
     Gorrepati, Psychiatrist
     with Integral Care
     Receive take home exam
                              .
9    Trauma and Stressor      DSM 5 sections: Trauma and Stressor Related
7/6  Related Disorders        Disorders
m                             Dissociative Disorders
     Dissociative Disorders   Somatic Symptom and Related Disorders
                              Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 9
     Somatoform Disorders
                              Optional readings on Canvas:
     Factitious Disorders
                              Lutton and Swank (2018) The Importance of
                              Intentionally
     Assessments:             in Untangling Trauma From Severe Mental Illness
     Dissociative Experiences
     Scale (DES)              Saxe et al (2002) Self-Destructive Behavior in Patients
     PTSD Check List (PCL-5) with Dissociative Disorders
                              Bryant-Davis and Ellis (2013) Therapeutic Treatment
                              Approaches for Ethnically Diverse Survivors of
                              Interpersonal Trauma
                              Schore (2009) Attachment Trauma and the Developing
                              Right Brain: Origins of Pathological Dissociation


                            https://utexas.kanopy.com/video/ace-study-i-childhood-
                            trauma-and-adult-health
                            Take home exam 1 due
10
7/8  Personality disorders  DSM 5: Personality Disorders
w                           Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 16
                            Optional readings on Canvas:
                            Lingiardi and McWilliams (2017) Chapter 1
                            Blair (2001) Neurocognitive models of aggression, the
                            antisocial personality disorders, and psychopathy
     Personality Disorders, Canvas: Paris and Black (2015) Borderline Personality
11   Continued              Disorder and Bipolar Disorder
7/13
m    Guest Lecture:         Optional readings on Canvas:
     Shannon Huggins,
     LCSW-S, BCD            Kernberg and Yeomans (2013) Borderline personality
                            disorder, bipolar disorder, depression, attention
                            deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and narcissistic
                            personality disorder: Practical differential diagnosis
12   Substance-related and  DSM 5 sections: Substance-related and Addictive
7/15 Addictive Disorders    Disorders
w                           Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 13
     Guest Lecture: Julie
     Falchuk, LCSW          Optional readings on Canvas:
                            Room (2006) Taking account of cultural and societal
                            influences on
     Assessments: SASSI,    substance use diagnoses and criteria
     CAGE
                            Jones et al (2015) A Qualitative Study of Black
     Receive take home exam Women’s Experiences in Drug Abuse and Mental
     2                      Health Services


13         Eating Disorders             DSM-5 sections:
7/20                                    Feeding and Eating Disorders
m
                                        Corcoran and Walsh: Ch 11
                                        Optional readings on Canvas:
                                        Strother et al (2012) Eating Disorders in Men:
                                        Underdiagnosed,
                                        Undertreated, and Misunderstood
                                        Lipsman (2013) Neurocircuitry of limbic dysfunction in
                                        anorexia
                                        nervosa
                                        Franco et al (2007) Cross-Ethnic Differences in Eating
                                        Disorder Symptoms and Related Distress
14         Panel of Social Workers      Take home exam 2 due
7/22       Working in Community
w          Mental Health                Optional readings on Canvas:
                                        Huey and Jones (2002) Improving Treatment
                                        Engagement and Psychotherapy Outcomes for
                                        Culturally Diverse Youth and Families
15         Group Presentations          Please turn in fact sheets via Canvas by class time
7/27
m          Online course
           evaluations-- on your own
 X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Alarcón, R. D. (2016). Global mental health and systems of diagnostic classification: Clinical
 and cultural
 perspectives. Acta Bioethica, 22(1), 15-25
 Allen, L. A.; Woolfolk, R.; Escobar, J.; Gara, M.; Hamer, R. (2006) Cognitive- Behavioral
 Therapy for Somatization Disorder: A Randomized Controlled Trial Arch Intern Med.;166
 (14):1512-1518.


 Allik, J. (2005). Personality dimensions across cultures. Journal of Personality Disorders, 19(3),
212-232.
American Psychiatric Association (APA). (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders: Text Revision (4th Edition). Washington, DC: Author.
Ancoli-Israel, S. (2005) Long-term use of sedative hypnotics in older patients with
insomnia, Sleep Medicine, Volume 6, Issue 2, Pages 107-113
Baethge, Christopher, Baldessarini, Ross J., Khalsa, Hari-Mandir Kaur, Hennen, John, Salvatore,
Paola, Tohen, Mauricio (2005). Substance Abuse in First- Episode Bipolar I Disorder:
Indications for Early Intervention, Am J Psychiatry 162: 1008-1010
Barkley, R. A. (1998). Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis and
treatment (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford.
Barlow, D. H., & Durand, M. V. (1999). Abnormal psychology: An integrative approach (2nd
ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. [Chp. 1, Abnormal behavior in historical context]
 Bass, C., Jones, D. (2006); Fabricated or induced illness, Psychiatry, Volume 5, Issue 2,
Psychological medicine 1, 1, Pages 60-65
Beck, Aaron T., Brown, Gary, Berchick, Robert J., Stewart, Bonnie L., Steer, Robert A. (2006)
Relationship Between Hopelessness and Ultimate Suicide: A Replication With Psychiatric
Outpatients, Focus 4: 291-296
Berg, M.B., Mimiaga, M,J., & Safren, S.A. (2004). Mental health concerns of HIV- infected gay
and bisexual men seeking mental health services: An observational study. AIDS Patient Care &
STDs, 18(11), 635-643.
Bockting, W. O., & Coleman, E. (1993). Gender dysphoria: Interdisciplinary approaches in
clinical management. Journal of psychology & human sexuality, v. 5, no. 4. New York:
Hayworth Press.
Bobo, W. V., Voort, J. L. V., Croarkin, P. E., Leung, J. G., Tye, S. J., & Frye, M. A. (2016).
Ketamine for treatmentresistant unipolar and bipolar major depression: Critical review and
implications for clinical
practice. Depression and Anxiety, 33(8), 698-710.
Brand, B. L., Sar, V., Stavropoulos, P., Krüger, C., Korzekwa, M., Martínez-Taboas, A., &
Middleton, W. (2016). Separating fact from fiction: An empirical examination of six myths about
dissociative identity disorder. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 24(4), 257–270.
Buelow, G., Hebert, S., & Buelow, S. (2000). Counselor’s resource on psychiatric medications:
Issues of treatment and referral (2nd Ed.). Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.


Canino, G. & Alegria, M. (2008). Psychiatric diagnosis – is it universal or relative to culture?
The Journal
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 49(3), 237-250.
Cerimele, J. M., Fortney, J. C., Pyne, J. M., & Curran, G. M. (2018). Bipolar disorder in primary
care: A qualitative study of clinician and patient experiences with diagnosis and treatment.
Family Practice.
Chavez-Dueñas N.Y., Adames H.Y., Perez-Chavez J.G., Smith S.N. (2020) Contextual,
Cultural, and Sociopolitical Issues in Caring for Latinxs with Dementia: When the Mind
Forgets and the Heart Remembers. In: Adames H., Tazeau Y. (eds) Caring for Latinxs with
Dementia in a Globalized World. Springer, New York, NY
Cook, J M, & O'Donnell, C. (2005). Assessment and psychological treatment of posttraumatic
stress disorder in older adults. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry & Neurology, 18, 2. p.61(11).
Corcoran, J and J. Walsh. (2016). Clinical Assessment and Diagnosis in Social Work Practice
(3rd Edition). New York, NY. Oxford University Press.
Cozolino, L. (2006). The Neuroscience of Human Relationships. New York: Norton.
DuPaul, G. J., & Stoner, G. (1998). Assessing ADHD in the schools. New York: Guilford.
Frances, A and Ross, R. (2001) DSM-IV-TR Case Studies: A Clinical Guide to Differential
Diagnosis. Washington, DC. American Psychiatric Press.
Franklin, C., & Jordan, C. (1999). Family practice: Brief systems methods for
social work. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. [Chp. 9, Rapid Assessment in family practice
Franko, D. L., Becker, A. E., Thomas, J. J., & Herzon, D. B. (2007). Cross-ethnic differences in
eating disorders
symptoms and related distress. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 40, 156-164.
Fonagy, P, Gergley G, Elliott J., Target, M. (2004) Affect Regulation, Mentalization and
Development of the Self. New York: Other Press.
Gabbard, G. O. (2007). Gabbard's treatments of psychiatric disorders. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Pub.
Garcia-Lopez, L., Jose Olivares, Deborah Beidel, Anne-Marie Albano, Samuel Turner, Ana I.
Rosa, (2006) Efficacy of three treatment protocols for adolescents with social anxiety disorder: A
5-year follow-up assessment, Journal of Anxiety Disorders, Volume 20, Issue 2, Pages 175-191
Gillberg, C., Harrington, R., & Steinhausen, H.-C. (2006). A clinician's handbook
of child and adolescent psychiatry. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.


González, H. M., Vega, W. A., Williams, D. R., Tarraf, W., West, B. T., & Neighbors, H. W.
(2010). Depression care in the United States: Too little for too few. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 67(1), 37-46.
Greenwald, R., & Rubin, A. (1999). Assessment of posttraumatic symptoms in children:
Development and preliminary validation of parent and child scales. Research on Social Work
Practice, 9(1), 61-75.
Guilleminault, C.; Lee, J.; Chan, A. (2005) Pediatric Obstructive Sleep Apnea Syndrome Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med.;159(8):775-785
Haroz, E. E., Ritchey, M., Bass, J. K., Kohrt, B. A., Augustinavicius, J., Michalopoulos, L., ... &
Bolton, P. (2017).How is depression experienced around the world? A systematic review of
qualitative literature. Social Science & Medicine, 183, 151-162.
 Hinson, VK., Haren, WB. (2006) Psychogenic movement disorders, The Lancet Neurology,
Volume 5, Issue 8, Pages 695-700
Janca, A., Isaac, M., & Ventouras, J. (2006, February). Towards better understanding and
management of somatoform disorders. International Review of Psychiatry, 18(1), 5-12.
Kamphaus, R. W., & Frick, P. J. (2005). Clinical assessment of child and adolescent personality
and behavior. New York, NY: Springer.
Kaplan, H. I., & Sadock, B. J. (1998). Clinical psychiatry. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkens.
[Chp. 2, Typical signs and symptoms of psychiatric illness defined]
Kernberg, Otto K. (1993). Severe Personality Disorders: Psychotherapeutic Strategies. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kessler, Ronald C.; Patricia Berglund; Olga Demler; Robert Jin; Kathleen R.
Merikangas; Ellen E. Walters (2005) Lifetime Prevalence and Age-of-Onset Distributions of
DSM-IV Disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication Arch Gen
Psychiatry;62(6):593-602.
Lahey, B., Loeber, R., Burke, J., & Applegate, B. (2005). Predicting Future Antisocial
Personality Disorder in Males From a Clinical Assessment in Childhood. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 73(3), 389-399.
Lewis-Fernandez, G., Guarnaccia, P. J. Martinez, I. E., Salman, E., Schmidt, A., & Liebowitz,
M. (2002).
Comparative phenomenology of ataques de nervios, panic attacks, and panic disorder. Culture,
Medicine,
and Psychiatry, 26, 199-223.


Lieberman, Jeffrey A.(2005), Effectiveness of Antipsychotic Drugs in Patients with Chronic
Schizophrenia, N Engl J Med 353: 1209-1223
Lingiardi, V., & McWilliams, N. (Eds.). (2017). Psychodynamic diagnostic manual: PDM-2
(2nd ed.). Guilford Press.
Lock, J. & Steiner, H. (1999). Gay, lesbian, and bisexual youth risks for emotional, physical, and
social problems: Results from a community-based survey. Journal of the American Academy for
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38(3), 297-304.
Lukas, S. 1993. Where to Start and What to Ask. New York, NY. Norton.
Magaña, S., Lopez, K., Aguinaga, A., & Morton, H. (2013). Access to diagnosis and treatment
services
among Latino children with autism spectrum disorders. Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities, 51(3), 141-153.
March, J. S., & Mulle, K. (1998). OCD in children and adolescents: A cognitive- behavioral
treatment manual. New York: Guilford.
Mash, E., & Terdal, L. G. (Eds). (1997). Assessment of childhood disorders (3rd ed.). New
York: Guilford Press.
Mc Williams, N. (1994). Psychoanalytic diagnosis: Understanding personality structure in the
clinical process. New York: The Guilford Press.
Micali, N., Martini, M. G., Thomas, J. J., Eddy, K. T., Kothari, R., Russell, E., ... & Treasure, J.
(2017). Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of eating disorders amongst women in mid-life: A
population-based study of diagnoses and risk factors. BMC Medicine, 15(1),12
Morrison, J. (2014). Mental Status Exam I: Behavioral aspects. In The first interview (4rd ed)
(pp. 123-135). New York: Guildford Press.
Nicholls, D., Viner, R. (2005) Eating disorders and weight problems BMJ 2005;330:950-953.
Nasrallah, Henry A., Targum, Steven D., Tandon, Rajiv, McCombs, Jeffrey S., Ross, Ruth
(2005). Defining and Measuring Clinical Effectiveness in the Treatment of Schizophrenia,
Psychiatr Serv 56: 273-282.
Nathan, P. E., & Gorman, J. M. (Eds). (1998). A guide to treatments that work. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Newman, Louise K. (2002) Sex, Gender and Culture: Issues in the Definition, Assessment and
Treatment of Gender Identity Disorder, Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry 7: 352-359


Nuttall, E. V., Romero, I., & Kalesnik, J. (Eds.) (1999). Assessing and screening preschoolers:
Psychological and educational dimensions (2nd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon
Othmer, E. & Othimer S. C. (2002). The Clinical Interview Using DSM-IV-TR, Vol. 1:
Fundamentals. Washington DC: American Psyciatric Press, Inc.
Paniagua, F. (1998). Assessing and treating culturally diverse clients (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Paniagua and Yamada eds (2013) Handbook of Multicultural Mental Health (Second
Edition):Assessment and Treatment of Diverse Populations, Elisker.
Pardini, D. A., Frick, P. J., & Moffitt, T. E. (2010). Building an evidence base for DSM-5
conceptualizations of oppositional defiant disorder and conduct disorder: Introduction to the
special section. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 119(4), 683.
Pomeroy, E. (2015). The Clinical Assessment Workbook: Balancing Strengths and Differential
Diagnosis (2nd edition). Boston, MA: Cengage Learning
 Paul, R. (2006). Language disorders from infancy through adolescence: Assessment &
intervention. St. Louis, Mo: Mosby Elsevier.
 Pelham, William E., Fabiano, Gregory A. & Massetti, Greta M. (2005). Evidence- Based
Assessment of Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder in Children and Adolescents. Journal of
Clinical Child & Adolescent Psychology, 34 (3), 449-476.
Pomeroy, E (2000). The Clinical Assessment Workbook (2nd edition). Cengage.
 Portzky, G., Audenaert, K., Heeringen, K. (2005) Adjustment disorder and the course of the
suicidal process in adolescents, Journal of Affective Disorders, Volume 87, Issues 2-3, Pages
265-270
Preston, JD, JH O'Neal, M. C. Talaga. (2008) Handbook of Clinical Psychopharmacology for
        Therapists, 5th edition. New Harbinger Publications.
Rappley, Marsha D (2005). Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder, N Engl J Med 352: 165-
173
Rehm, J., & Room, R. (2015). Cultural specificity in alcohol use disorders. The Lancet. pii:
S0140-
6736(15)00123-3.
 Roberts, A. R. (2005). Crisis intervention handbook: Assessment, treatment, and research.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Romero, I. (1999). Individual assessment procedures with preschool children. In


E. Nuttall, I. Romero, & J. Kalesnik (Eds.), Assessing and screening preschoolers (2nd Ed).
Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Room, R. (2006). Taking account of cultural and societal influences on substance use diagnoses
and
criteria. Addiction, 101(s1), 31-39.
Schore, A.N. (2003). Affect dysregulation and disorders of the self. New York: W.W.
Norton and Company, Inc.
Schore, A. (2009) Attachment Trauma and the Developing Right Brain: Origins
of Pathological Dissociation.in Dell, Paul, and J. O’Neil eds. Dissociation and the Dissociative
Disorders : DSM-V and Beyond., Taylor & Francis Group, 2009. ProQuest Ebook Central,
https://ebookcentral-proquest-com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=614744.
Smith,Y., Van Goozen, S., Kuiper, A., Cohen-Kettenis, P., (2005). Sex reassignment: outcomes
and predictors of treatment for adolescent and adult transsexuals. Psychological Medicine, 35 ,
pp 89-99
Strother, E., Lemberg, R., Stanford, S. C., & Turberville, D. (2012). Eating disorders in men:
Underdiagnosed, undertreated, and misunderstood. Eating Disorders, 20(5), 346-355.
Szaflarski, M., Cubbins, L. A., & Meganathan, K. (2017). Anxiety disorders among US
immigrants: The
role of immigrant background and social-psychological factors. Issues in Mental Health
Nursing, 38(4), 317-326.
Tasman, Allan, et al. The Psychiatric Interview : Evaluation and Diagnosis, John Wiley & Sons,
Incorporated, 2013. ProQuest Ebook Central, https://ebookcentral-proquest-
com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=1187749.
Taylor, C. B.; Prevention of Eating Disorders in At-Risk College-Age Women Arch Gen
Psychiatry. 2006;63(8):881-888.
Tazaki, M., & Landlaw, K. (2006). Behavioural mechanisms and cognitive- behavioural
interventions of somatoform disorders. International Review of Psychiatry, 18(1), 67-73.
Tronik, E.Z. & Weinberg, M.K. (1997). Depressed mothers and infants: Failure to form
dyadic states of consciousness. In L. Murray & P. J. Cooper (Eds.). Post partum
depression and child development (pp. 54-81). New York: Guilford Press
van der Kolk, B.A., McFarlane, A.C., & Weisaeth, L. (Eds.). (1996). Traumatic stress: The
effects of overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society. New York: Guilford Press


van der Kolk, B. A. (2002). The Assessment and Treatment of Complex PTSD. In R. Yehuda
(Editor) Treating Trauma Survivors with PTSD,. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press,
Inc.
van der Kolk, (2006). Clinical Implications of Neuroscience Research in PTSD
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, pp. 1-17
Wallin, D.J., (2007). Attachment in Psychotherapy. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Warner, J., McKeown, E., Griffin, M., Johnson, K., Ramsay, A & King, M. (2004). Rates and
predictors of mental illness in gay men, lesbians and bisexual men and women: Results from a
survey based in England and Wales. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 185, 479-485.
Widiger, T., & Samuel, D. (2005). Evidence-based assessment of personality disorders.
Psychological Assessment, 17(3), 278-287.
 Wilcox, J. A., & Reid Duffy, P. (2015). The syndrome of catatonia. Behavioral Sciences, 5(4),
576-588.
Wilson, G. Terence (2005) Psychological Treatment of Eating Disorders Annual Review of
Clinical Psychology 1, 439-465
Zarit, S. H., & Zarit, J. M. (2007). Mental disorders in older adults: Fundamentals of assessment
and treatment. New York: Guilford Press.
Zucker, K. J., & Bradley, S. J. (1995). Gender identity disorder and psychosexual problems in
children and adolescents. New York: Guilford Press.
 Zucker, Kenneth J. (2005) Gender Identity Disorder in Children and Adolescents, Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology 1, 467-492
