                                  Histories of African Liberation
                                      AFR 372G/HIS 364G
                                   University of Texas at Austin
                                              Fall 2018
Professor: Tshepo Masango Chéry, Ph.D
                                  COURSE OVERVIEW
         Freedom seemed to come quickly and with ease for Africans in the mid-twentieth
century. And yet, the history of African independence began with Ethiopia in the 1890s and
stretched into the 1990s in South Africa. African people created fifty-four distinct nation-
states out of this struggle. In the process, it transformed local leaders and activists such as
Kwame Nkrumah, Nnamdi Azikiwe, Haile Selassie, Nelson Mandela, and many others into
official heads of state. This course focuses on the historical moment of African independence
to consider the multiple meanings of African freedom, the process and strategies to obtain it,
and its global impact. It relies on historical methods to examine the following questions: How
did African people define freedom both locally and globally? How did they mobilize to resist
oppression? And how did their vision for African independence shape their political,
economic, and social future(s)? These historical questions provide critical insight for our
understanding of Africa, its global position, and its people (living on the continent and abroad).
Objectives: 1) To think critically about the ways Africans defined and obtained freedom from
colonial rule; 2) To consider both regional experiences and the collective expression of African
independence; 3) To define and articulate the meaning and impact of African independence
from a global perspective.
Key Terms: freedom, African independence, international relations, regional politics,
transnationalism, and agency.
Required Texts:
All required readings for this course are digitized and accessible on Canvas or will be
distributed in class. Additionally, resources in the form of films & music are reserved at the
Fine Arts Library, accessible through a digital portal, and or posted on Canvas.
                                ASSIGNMENTS & GRADING
         African Studies in a broad sense is very likely unfamiliar and even foreign to you. This
means attendance at every class is among the minimum requirements for success. It will be
incredibly difficult for you to do well in this class if you do not attend the lectures regularly.
Successful students rely on lecture notes alongside the assigned text. Successful students also
come to class prepared and ready to actively engage all assigned texts. This requires reading
and reflecting on the text as well as being prepared to pose relevant questions, provide
comments, and feedback on the reading for each class period. In other words, you must have
an active voice in the class. We will employ various strategies to encourage your participation
                                                                                                1


beyond simply speaking-up in class. Plan on posting (via email) at least one thoughtful question
or comment on Canvas’ discussion section at least every two weeks to ensure your
participation. Students are allowed three unexcused absences during the course of the
semester. Each additional (unexcused) absence will result in a 5-point deduction from your
final grade.
*Absences Due to Athletics or University Activities
Any athlete competing for UT on an NCAA or club level team needs to notify me as soon as
possible about any absences throughout the semester. Written documentation from the
Athletic department will be required for accommodations to be given.
Please notify the professor and or provide written documentation regarding all medical and
other emergencies. They will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
                              Assignment       Points
                            Course             15 points
                            Engagement
                            Digital Source     25 points
                            Entry
                            Presidential       25 points
                            Profile
                            Midterm            25 points
                            Examination
                            Presentation       10 points
                            Total              100 points
                            DESCRIPTION OF ASSIGNMENTS
Course Engagement: 15 Total Points
Your success in this course depends on close reading and engagement with the texts (readings,
films, video clips, web links and information posted to Canvas), as well as active and informed
participation in class discussions. You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site
and your email regularly for additional texts and announcements.
Your class participation grade will be based on attendance and meaningful participation in class
discussions. Meaningful participation is taken to be analytic engagement with the texts and
course themes in class discussions (both in the classroom and in virtual classroom space), not
vague commentary or generalizations. Each student is expected to come to class prepared to
participate actively in class discussions each week. This includes but is not limited to doing the
assigned reading and preparing thoughtful questions to share with the class.
Those students who take the initiative to engage critically with the readings and themes of the
class and actively participate in class discussions by sharing their ideas and thoughts openly
and respectfully on a regular basis will earn high grades.
                                                                                                2


Digital Source Entry: 25 Total Points
You will choose and analyze a primary source such as a speech or political manifesto from
the African independence period. Your final analysis, in the form of a single-spaced two-
page paper, of the source will be published online based on the quality of your work. Each
entry will include the primary source and your analysis in an effort to provide critical
historical information and contextual analysis for outside readers.
The entry MUST:
(1.) Provide a BRIEF overview of the primary source to give the reader the intellectual
context. The synopsis of the source should provide an introduction to the historical period,
the key figures, and the issues at stake but in a way that asserts your main argument/and or
reading of the source. In other words, your synopsis should have a pointed focus on the
topic you plan to discuss in your digital entry and should not merely summarize the source.
(2.) Clearly identify and articulate the major argument(s) or narrative you make in the digital
entry upfront. In short, you must define the focus of your paper by making a clear and
concise thesis statement that demonstrates your thinking/intellectual vantage point about
the primary source.
(3.) Explain how the text informs, challenges, and/or expands your understanding of the
particularities of African political history by using specific examples and details. This may
require limited outside research and or discussions with your professor. You must consider
specific portions of your primary source (and not generalizations) in your entry, which might
require citation.
(4.) Use the conclusion to describe some of the larger historical implications for the
arguments you are making about your primary source.
Essays must be a MINIMUM of 2 pages (and no more than 3.5 pages) in length, typed (in 12-
point font), single-spaced with standard 1” margins. It must also be free of grammatical
errors/typos and use proper citation techniques specific to the discipline of history (Chicago
Manual Style). Please do not use any other form of citation.
Presidential Profile: 25 Total Points
This paper will be a 3-page profile of one of the first African presidents during the wave of
African independence. Your final profile (which will entitle a detailed process of research,
drafting, and feedback) will rely on at least three scholarly sources from which to build the
profile.
The paper MUST:
(1.) Provide a BRIEF overview of relevant personal history that might have shaped the
     president. This might include a note on his education or an important moment of
     political consciousness that ultimately shaped his leadership. The hope is that this
     introduction would provide the reader with a broad context.
(2.) The paper must also provide the larger historical context under which this president and
     his people gained freedom. This might include a quick discussion of the political party
                                                                                                3


      that he led, its rise to power, and the way they gained leadership in the decolonial era.
 (3.) Your profile should offer a discussion of some of the decisive work that the president
      led during his time in office (from economic reform and or investments in a specific
      project or some large social system that he implemented.)
 (4.) Lastly, be certain to provide important sources that influenced the creation of your
      presidential profile. These sources must be scholastic in nature and approved by your
      professor. Search engines such as google or Wikipedia do not count as scholarly sources.
      Rather secondary sources from scholarly journals and or books will provide important
      profile information.
 Profiles must be a MINIMUM of 3 pages (and no more than 5 pages) in length, typed (in 12-
 point font), single-spaced with standard 1” margins. It must also be free of grammatical
 errors/typos and use proper citation techniques specific to the discipline of history (Chicago
 Manual Style). Please do not use any other form of citation.
 Presentation: 10 Total Points
 Students will be given the opportunity to provide a 10-minute presentation on both their
 digital source entry and presidential profile; ideally these projects would be linked or
 connected in some way.
 Mid-term Examination: 25 Total Points
 There will be an in-class midterm exam part way through the semester. We will discuss the
 format as well as sample questions in class together. All your answers to this exam must be entirely
 of your own making. Working with someone else on the exam in any way will be interpreted as academic
 dishonesty and will be reported.
                                     FINAL GRADE DISTRIBUTION:
   A        94-100       B+       87-89    C+      77-79      D+       67-69      F Below 60 pts
   A-       90-93        B        83-86    C       73-76      D        63-66
                         B-       80-82    C-      70-72      D-       60-62
                                        COURSE SCHEDULE
 As the professor of this course, I reserve the right to deviate or modify parts of this
 schedule. All changes will include advanced written notice. Please note that all materials with
 an asterisk in front of it are posted on blackboard.
DATE/TOPIC                                 READINGS                           ASSIGNMENT
Week 1                 Introduction to Course
8/29 - 8/31
                       No Class 9/3 Labor Day
                                                                                                   4


Week 2         Required Reading:
9/3-9/5        Wole Soykinka, “Preface” in Of Africa (New Haven:
               Yale University Press),vii-xii.
Conceptualizat
ions of Africa Jonathan T. Reynolds, “So Many Africas, So Little
               Time: Doing Justice to Africa in a World History
               Survey Course,” World History Connected, 2,1, (2004).
               http://worldhistoryconnected.press.uillinois.edu/2.1/re
               ynolds.html
Week 2         Required Reading:                                       Choose
9/10 - 9/12    Oliver August, “Africa Rising: a Hopeful                Presidential
               Continent,” The Economist, 2 March 2013.                Profiles and
               http://www.economist.com/news/special-                  Primary Sources
               report/21572377-african-lives-have-already-greatly-     9/12
               improved-over-past-decade-says-oliver-august
               Evan Wadongo, “Africa Rising? Let’s be Afro-
               realistic,” The Guardian
               https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-
               professionals-network/2014/nov/07/africa-rising-lets-
               be-afro-realistic
               Listen to Podcast: Dayo Olopade, “Finding Simple,
               Creative Solutions in Africa” on The Leonard
               Lopate Show
               https://www.wnyc.org/radio/#/ondemand/35417
               4
Week 3         Required Reading:                                       Map Quiz
9/17 - 9/19    A. Adu Boahen, “The Eve of the Colonial                 9/19
The Process of      Conquest and Occupation,” 1-26.
Colonization/
Colonial State
Week 4         Required Reading:                                       Discuss Sources
9/24 – 9/26    Watch Youtube Film: “Africa: The Scramble for           for Presidential
               Africa—States of Independence”                          Profile
               https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LbT44HwzN               9/26
               rI
               Perspectives on the Battle of Adwa
               http://www.blackpast.org/perspectives/battle-
               adwa-adowa-1896
               Marcus G. Harold, “Racist Discourse about
               Ethiopia and Ethiopians Before and After the
               Battle of Adwa” in P. Milkias & G. Metaferia, eds.,
               The Battle of Adwa (2005), 229-37.
                                                                                        5


Week 5        Required Reading:                                  Preliminary
10/1 – 10/3   Boahen, “The Imposition of the Colonial System:    Reading of the
              Initiatives and Responses,” 27-57.                 Source
                                                                 10/3
Week 6        Required Reading:
10/8 – 10/10  Walter Rodney, Chapter 6.1: “Colonialism as a
              System for Underdeveloping Africa,” How Europe
              Undeveloped Africa (New York: Black Classic Press,
              2012), 320-351.
              http://abahlali.org/files/3295358-walter-
              rodney.pdf
Week 7        Required Reading:                                  Draft of
10/15 – 10/17  Boahen, “The Operation of the Colonial System”    Presidential
              58-93.                                             Profile 10/17
Week 8        Required Reading:
10/22 – 10/24 Primary Source, “Frantz Fanon Discusses the limits
              of African independence”
              “The Battle of Algiers”
Week 9        Required Reading:                                  Midterm
10/29 – 10/31 “Kwame Nkrumah on Pan-Africanism as an             10/24
              answer to neo-colonialism”
              Tukufu Zuberi, Chapter 2: “The End of Colonial
              Rule: Beginnings of Independence, How Africa
              Shaped the World (New York: Rowman & Littlefield),
              49-89.
Week 10       Required Reading:
11/5 – 11/7   Biafra’s Declaration of Independence
              http://www.blackpast.org/biafras-declaration-
              independence-1967
              “Half of a Yellow Sun”
Week 11       Required Reading:
11/12– 11/14  “Half of a Yellow Sun”
Week 12       Thanksgiving Break
11/19 – 11/21
Week 13       Required Reading:
11/26 – 11/28 *Desmond Tutu, No Future Without Forgiveness,
              “The Prelude,” (Chapter 1), 1-12.
              South African Students Organisation on Black
              Theology
                                                                                6


                     http://www.blackpast.org/saso-resolution-black-
                     theology-1971
                     Steve Biko, Selections from “I Write What I like”
Week 14              Presentations                                            Final
12/3 – 12/5                                                                   Submission of
Week 15              Last Class
12/10
                                POLICIES & PROCEDURES
 University of Texas Honor Code
 The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
 leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
 expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
 toward peers and community.
 Scholastic Dishonesty
 Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying
 academic records, and misrepresenting facts. A full and comprehensive statement about
 what constitutes academic dishonesty can be found in Appendix C, section 11-802, in the
 General Information Catalog. Student Judicial Services in the Office of the Dean of Students
 is responsible for investigating alleged violations and implementing the discipline process.
 Statement on Electronic Communication
 E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
 responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
 announcements. We will also use Blackboard—a web-based course management system with
 password-protected access to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
 online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to provide online surveys. You can find
 support for using Blackboard at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday,
 8am to 6pm. Please plan accordingly.
 I will not respond to emails that ask about information that has been covered in the syllabus,
 a handout, or otherwise communicated in class.
 No late assignments or examinations will be accepted. Any assignment that is not submitted
 by 5pm on the day that it is due will receive a zero.
 Statement on Religious Holidays
 By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
 prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
 examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
 give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
 absence.
 Resources
                                                                                                  7


Please make use of the following centers and resources to gain support in a variety of areas
during this semester.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
(512) 471-3515
The Counseling & Mental Health Center (CMHC) offers individual counseling, group
therapy, psychiatric services, and telephone counseling.
Services for Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations should get a letter
documenting the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office
of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). This letter should be presented to me at start of the course and accommodations
needed should be discussed in time. Please remind me of your accommodations five
business days prior to an exam or assignment.
Undergraduate Writing Center
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
(512) 471-6222
(512) 475-VERB (Writer's Advice Line)
The Undergraduate Writing Center assists undergraduates with all stages of the writing
process.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the
classroom and the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions. Do not
attempt to re-enter a classroom or building without the instructions and or permission of the
Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
office.
Use of Electronic Devices
You are permitted to use a laptop computer or tablet only if you are using it to take notes or
engage in activity pertinent to the course. If you are caught using the computer or device to
conduct non-academic related activity, I will ban such devices from the lecture hall.
                                                                                              8
