                     INTEGRATED COMMUNICATION FOR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
                                              ADV 320 (06420)/PR 320 (06950)
                                                   3:30-5 TTH, CMA 3.114
                                                          Spring 2020
Instructor:                              Tim Scott
Office:                                  BMC 4.356 (Belo Building, 4th floor)
Phone:                                   (832) 818-6373
E-mail:                                  TimScott@utexas.edu
Office Hours:                            1-4 p.m. on Wednesday and by appointment
Teaching Assistant:                      Rocio M Santiago Montes
Email:                                   rocio.santiago.montes@utexas.edu
Office Hours Location:                   Station 12, 4th Floor, BMC
Office Hours:                            5:30-8:30 p.m. on Mondays
The truth about nonprofits and branding is that they all have a brand whether they have consciously
thought about it or not. . . . Nonprofits can’t talk themselves out of the brand experience they have built.
Brands are born of experience and are built or eroded with organizational behavior and communication.
--Cynthia Currence
Former Vice President of Strategic Marketing and Branding American Cancer Society
Course Description
The course will enable students to explore integrated communication and branding in a variety of
nonprofit settings. Students will examine the strategic, integrated use of multiple communication
approaches, including advertising, public relations, social media, promotions, sponsorships, and special
events. They will also examine branding in the context of nonprofit organizations and nonprofit causes.
Branding for nonprofits has been defined as “the platform on which the motivation behind the
organization’s work may be articulated and the significance of its work may be appreciated” (Tan 2003).1
More specifically, a nonprofit organization’s “brand” can be viewed as “its mission come alive on an
artistic, humanitarian, intellectual or political basis” (Tan 2003). Among the benefits of successful
branding is creating a strong organizational identity that influences the loyalty of the organization’s
constituencies. The course will encompass the following themes:
         • Theories and Frameworks Related to Integrated Communication and Branding
           Because most integrated communication and branding research has been conducted in the
           commercial sector, the course will focus on analyzing extant theories and frameworks
           developed in commercial settings for their applicability and adaptability to nonprofit
           organizations. Since many nonprofit organizations are service providers, special attention will be
           given to theories and frameworks related to marketing and branding commercial services.
      •    Organizational Branding for Nonprofit Organizations
           One major approach to branding involves developing a “corporate” or organizational brand. The
           course will focus on strategies for creating a meaningful brand identity for nonprofit
           organizations as institutions. The emphasis will be on building, protecting, and maintaining an
           institutional brand identity and inspiring constituents to be supporters and evangelists for the
           nonprofit organization.
1
  See Tan, Patricia (2003), “Down to the Core: Branding in the Not-for-profits,” Interbrand, available at www.brandchannel.com.


                                                                                                            2
     •    Integrated Communication and Branding of Social Causes
          A major part of nonprofit communication falls under the rubric of social marketing, which
          involves promoting social causes with the goal of changing behavior in a way that benefits
          individuals, society, or both. Classic examples of social marketing include motivating people to
          wear seat belts, to refrain from drinking and driving, and to quit smoking. The course will explore
          the application of integrated communication and branding strategies to social marketing.
        • Partnerships Between Companies and Nonprofits
          Partnerships between companies and nonprofits are proliferating. These collaborative efforts
          provide an interesting and potentially complicated context within which to apply integrated
          communication and branding. While the potential benefits are alluring, the risks are often
          substantial as well. Both strategy and execution can be particularly challenging, and both
          warrant careful consideration.
        • Ethical Issues of Integrated Communication and Branding
          Emphasis will be given to identifying and examining ethical problems that may occur in various
          aspects of nonprofit communication and branding. Biases that prevent individuals from
          recognizing ethical issues will be examined, and various approaches for systematically analyzing
          ethical issues will be presented and applied.
Prerequisites:
Students should have upper division standing. Strategic Marketing for Nonprofit Organizations by Alan R.
Andreasen (published by Prentice Hall) is recommended as supplemental reading for students who feel
that they need to increase their understanding of the fundamentals of marketing strategy and integrated
communication. There are many editions, and although the book has been updated through the years,
all of the editions deal with the fundamentals and are suitable as supplemental reading.
Course Website:
The course website is on Canvas.
Tutorials for students who are unfamiliar with Canvas are available at
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/welcome-to-canvasCourse.
Format
The primary pedagogy will be the case method of discussion. This method uses descriptions of real
situations as the basis for classroom discussions. It requires students to come to class prepared to
participate in the discussion and to listen to one another. Too often, students do not benefit from this
style of teaching because they ignore the comments of fellow students. This method assumes that,
instead of lecturing, the professor is making points through discussion with students. When students
make important points, the professor does not have to do so. It is also an important skill to be able to
learn to separate the wheat from the chaff. This method of teaching also presumes that students have
heard prior discussions. When a student who did not hear prior discussions participates, it generally
wastes the time of others. Being prepared means that one has read and thought about the
material; it does not mean that one must fully understand the material or have the “right”
answers. If a student is not prepared, he or she must put a note on the lectern before class. It is
also in one's long-term interest to prepare thoroughly for each class because the material is cumulative.
Lack of preparation or repeated absences will hurt one’s grade. The cases will be supplemented by
readings that provide theoretical and conceptual material and by guest speakers.


                                                                                                             3
Course Materials
Everyone should have access to a copy of the materials listed below. They are on reserve for two-hour
check out at PCL but will also be posted on canvas as needed during the semester.
     •   Forces for Good: The Six Practices of High-Impact Nonprofits, 2nd edition, (2012) by Leslie R.
         Crutchfield and Heather McLeod Grant. There is an electronic version of this book (2nd edition,
         2012) available through PCL. Also, there is an electronic copy of the first edition (2008) available
         through PCL, and the first nine chapters are the same in the first edition as in the second edition
         (2012), so much of what we will read is in the first edition version.
     •   Reading materials that are available electronically will be posted on Canvas. Others will be
         provided during class.
As optional reading, a monograph, Good to Great and the Social Sectors by James C. Collins, is on
reserve for two-hour check out at PCL. The Practical Guide to Account Planning by Chris Kocek is
optional reading for the team project. The book is available from Amazon.
Evaluation
         Class Participation                                          30%
         First Case Analysis and Write-Up                             20%
         Second Case Analysis and Write-Up                            20%
         Team Project                                                 30%
                                                                     100%
Any disagreements about grades must be submitted in writing within 10 days of when the grade is
released. Written assignments that are turned in late on the due date will be penalized one-half letter
grade, and an additional one-half letter grade will be deducted for each additional day that a paper is
late.
Class Participation and Attendance. Reliable and punctual attendance is critical in the workplace. The
expectation is that students will be present for class and prepared to participate actively in class
discussions. The participation grade is based on attendance and both the quality and the quantity
of participation. Students who are absent will have less opportunity to participate, and this will be
reflected in their participation grades. That said, quality is generally more important than quantity.
Among the types of contributions that will be rewarded are contributions that (1) get the discussion off to
a productive start, (2) shape the discussion in useful ways, (3) help change the direction when needed,
(4) provoke useful debate, and (5) summarize the comments of others in an integrative and concise
manner. Good participation demands good listening. Students are expected to respond to and build
upon their colleagues’ comments and questions. All students are expected to come to class prepared to
open the discussion, which means being prepared to talk for at least five minutes about the key insights
from their reading and/or case analysis.
Attendance will be taken at each class. Other than university sanctioned absences (e.g., observance of
religious holidays; participation in varsity sports), the instructor does not make judgments regarding
excused vs. unexcused absences. The expectation is that students will attend class. There may be
unavoidable circumstances in which a student might have to miss class (e.g., a death in the family,
severe illness), and if the student otherwise has a good attendance record, those absences will not be a
problem.
Case Write-Ups. Students will be assigned two cases to analyze and write up as examinations.
Students should not confer with anyone about the cases or engage in company or industry research
before turning in their write-ups.


                                                                                                             4
The final case write-up may be turned in early. There is a one-half letter grade penalty for papers that are
turned in late on the due date, and an additional one-half letter grade penalty for every day that a paper
is late after the due date. All papers are due before class time on the date specified. Dates are
subject to change per the discretion of the professor and as needed.
Case Write-Up #1
Assigned Date: March 5th
Due Date: March 12th
Case Write-Up #2
Assigned Date: April 2nd
Due Date: April 9th
Team Project. Students will work in teams of four or five on an integrated communication project for a
nonprofit organization. The project will include a written report and a presentation to the class. Student
teams may select the nonprofit organizations, but the organizations must be approved by the professor.
Students may select their teammates, but the professor retains the right to change team composition.
There is a one-half letter grade penalty for projects that are turned in late on the due date, and an
additional one-half letter grade penalty for every day that a paper is late after the due date. All projects
are due before class time on the date specified. Dates are subject to change per the discretion of
the professor and as needed.
Team Project
Assigned Date: March 24th
Due Date: May 7th
Presentations: May 5th & 7th
Reading Assignments and Study Questions
The actual dates of reading assignments will be posted on Canvas. The professor will project the
dates of assignments a week or two in the future, but the assignments are subject to change, so
students should check Canvas before each session. Because it is difficult to anticipate the pace of
class discussions, the interests of a particular class, and the exact dates upon which guest speakers will
be available, it is impossible to know specific daily reading assignments far in advance. If students miss
a class session, it is their responsibility to find out what they missed by contacting another student and
checking Canvas. Do not contact the professor or the TA for the assignment. Get to know fellow
students and learn to use Canvas. Tutorials for students who are unfamiliar with Canvas are
available at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/welcome-to-canvas.
Study questions often will be provided to guide reading and preparation; students generally will not be
asked to turn in their responses. Class discussions will not be limited to the study questions, and a given
study question may or may not be dealt with in the class discussion. The cases are intended to present
dilemmas as a manager encountered them. Students are encouraged to deal with each of the cases as
they are written, without seeking outside or post-case data on the firm. When cases are discussed,
students should bring them to the class session.
Office Hours
The professor and the TA strongly encourage students to come by our offices during office hours.
Please feel free to come by simply to chat. Students should not use e-mail as a way of having a
conversation with the professor or TA about substantive issues; that is what class discussions and office
hours are for. The professor and TA do not mind being contacted by e-mail for administrative purposes.


                                                                                                          5
Computer and Cell Phone Etiquette
Because the class is discussion based, students are asked to refrain from using computers and cell
phones during class. It is very difficult to follow and participate in a discussion and use a computer or
cell phone simultaneously.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of
the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, students have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to
them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the
future demands of a career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
In a case-based, discussion class, much of the benefit of the course comes from analyzing cases, and
the primary mode of evaluation is based on students’ analyses of cases. As such, students currently in
the course should not use the class notes, case notes, or case write-ups of students who have
previously taken the course or confer with those students about specific cases until after the cases have
been discussed in class or turned in as written assignments. In addition, students should not pass on
their notes of case discussions, case write-ups, or any class handouts regarding case discussions or
case write-ups to students who will take the course in the future or confer with those students about
case discussions or written case assignments. Students are free to discuss cases assigned for class
discussion with other students in the course before and after the class discussions. Written case
assignments are to be completed without conferring with anyone or referring to materials other than
those in the course.
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from
attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this provision
may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. A student
who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements
can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/
Students with Disabilities
Students should notify the instructor of any modification/adaptation they may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. They will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office
so that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on
campus through Services for Students with Disabilities. http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/


                                                                                                             6
University Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If you are sick
or if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, the
options listed below are available to you for support. Students are encouraged to take advantage of
these resources as needed. Both your professor and TA are willing to talk with you about personal as
well as academic issues.
Mental Health
For immediate support:
     • Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8 a.m.-5 p.m.
          | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | https://cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is Abby Simpson, LCSW.
          CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable.)
FREE Services at CMHC:
     • Brief assessments and referral services
     • Mental health and wellness articles - https://cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     • MindBody Lab - https://cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     • Classes, workshops, and groups - https://cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Physical Health
Most students know that they can make appointments at University Health Services
https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/appointments.html, but many don’t know about the 24/7 Nurse Advice
Line Nurse Advice (512 475-6877) or the many other resources. Students can search for information
and resources by topic using the UHS website https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/HT/index.html.
