Spring 2016
Global Cultures
Flag
                        Religions of the Caribbean
     Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Orisha Chapelle, Trinidad
     Religions of the Caribbean
     Professor J. Brent Crosson
     brent.crosson@utexas.edu
     RS 366, AFR 372G, ANT 324L, LAS 324L
     Classroom: T/TH 12:30-2, SZB 296
     Office Hours: TH 2-3:15 in Burdine 514 and by appointment (just email me at the above
     email address)
     Teaching Assistant: Brice Bongiovanni
     Office Hours: Fridays 1-3 PM in BUR 510
     Email: b_bongi@utexas.edu
     In this course we will discuss the politics of religious practices in the Greater Caribbean, from
     Vodou and Rastafari to popular Hinduism. As a region, the Greater Caribbean encompasses the
     islands of the insular Caribbean, the Caribbean coasts of Central America and South America,
     Brazil, and the centers of Caribbean trans-migration in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
     (this course will focus on Caribbean diasporas in New York City, for example). While the
     Caribbean is usually seen as African diasporic and Christian, non-Christian West and Central
     African religions, Hinduism, Islam, spiritism, European esotericism, and indigenous religions
     all maintain long-standing and vibrant presences. We immerse ourselves in the complex nexus
     1


Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
of Caribbean religions through explorations of practices including Cuban-Kongo religion,
Haitian vodou, U.S. fantasies of voodoo and U.S. interventions in the Caribbean, Hindu popular
religions in Trinidad and Guyana, Islam in the Caribbean, Black Carib religion in New York and
Honduras, and Rastafarianism in Jamaica.
Texts (Available at the Co-Op or online)
* Barry Chevannes. Rastafari: Roots and Ideology
* William Earle and Srinivas Aravamudan. Obi; or the History of Three-Fingered Jack
* Karen McCarthy Brown. Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn
* Paul Christopher Johnson. Diaspora Conversions: Black Carib Religion and the
        Recovery of Africa
* Aisha Beliso de Jesus. Electric Santeria
* Earl Lovelace. The Wine of Astonishment
* Diana Paton. The Cultural Politics of Obeah (E-Book Available Through UTexas
  Library Website)
* Aisha Khan, ed. Islam and the Americas (E-Book Available Through UTexas Library
  Website)
Grading
Class Attendance and Participation (15%)
        Attendance of each class will count for 0.75 points for a maximum of 10 possible
        points. You must be present in the first ten minutes of class to get credit. We will
        engage in participation exercises over the semester that will be worth a total of 5
        points.
Group Presentation (10%)
Five Reading Quizzes (I will drop your lowest quiz score) (40%)
Final Exam (35%)
Class Policies
No Cell Phone Policy (please don’t use cell phones during class)
Attendance: If you have to leave class early or arrive in the middle of class please let
me know beforehand.
Plus and minus grading will be used: A+ 99-100, A 94-98, A- 90-93, B+ 88-89, B 84-87, B-
80-83, C+ 78-79, C 74-77, C- 70-73, D+ 68-69, D 64-67, D- 60-63, F 59 and Below
Please do not sit in the back half of the classroom. Unfortunately, this is not the ideal
classroom for a discussion-focused course of this size. We can easily fit into the front half of the
classroom, and this encourages dialogue and engagement.
Page 2


Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Canvas
Course information, handouts, assignments, review sheets, etc. will be posted on the class
website on Canvas. To find the Canvas site, and go to http://canvas.utexas.edu/ and log in with
your EID and password.
University of Texas Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community. If you are uncertain about what constitutes plagiarism, or other violations, please
feel free to ask me. Students who violate the University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possible failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. The policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information,
you can talk with me or visit the Student Judicial Services Web site: http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sis.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-
mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your email address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/
policies/emailnotify.php.
Accommodations: Documented Disability Statement
If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss the accommodations
you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing
accommodations you will need. For more information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/
ddce/ssd/.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Page 3


Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Class Itinerary
(Over the Course of the Semester, We Will Move Generally From North to South in
the Caribbean Basin, With Transnational and Trans-regional Connections
Throughout)
Tuesday, Jan. 19th
Introductions
Part One: HAITI (With Connections to Brooklyn, Hollywood, the Bahamas, and
Washington D.C.)
Thursday, Jan. 21st
Sidney Mintz and Michel-Rolph Trouillot. “The Social History of Haitian Vodou”
Tuesday, Jan. 26th
Karen McCarthy Brown. Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn, pp. 1-20, 80-201.
Screening: Legacy of the Spirits
Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Thursday, Jan. 28th
Karen McCarthy Brown. Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn, pp. 272-328.
Guest Lecture: Kyrah Daniels
Tuesday, Feb. 2nd
Karen McCarthy Brown. Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn, pp. 330-401
Laënnec Hurbon. “American Fantasy and Haitian Vodou”
Videos: Mama Lola in New Orleans
The Princess and the Frog (and other popular representations of “Voodoo”)
Group Presentation 1: The Zonbi/Zombie
Thursday, Feb. 4th
Elizabeth McAlister. “Slaves, Cannibals, and Infected Hyper-Whites: The Race and
Religion of Zombies”
Screening: White Zombie [Excerpts]
Night of the Living Dead [Excerpts]
First Reading Quiz
Page 4


Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Tuesday, Feb. 9th
No Class
Thursday, Feb. 11th
Felix Germain. “The Earthquake, The Missionaries, and the Future of Vodou”
Bertin Louis, “Introduction” from My Soul Is in Haiti: Protestantism in the Haitian
Diaspora of the Bahamas
Additional Reading: Karen Richman. “Religion at the Epicenter: Agency and
Affiliation in Léogâne After the Earthquake”
Group Presentation 2: Spiritual Warfare Theology
Tuesday, Feb. 16th
Bertin Louis, “Chapter One” from My Soul Is in Haiti: Protestantism in
the Haitian Diaspora of the Bahamas
Elizabeth McAlister, “Possessing the Land for Jesus”
Guest Lecture: Bertin Louis
Part Two: CUBA (With Connections to Puerto Rico, Los Angeles, or New York)
Thursday, Feb. 18th
Aisha Beliso de Jesus. Electric Santeria (“Introduction,” “Electric Oricha”)
Group Presentation 3: Santería, Syncretism, and the Orishas
Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Tuesday, Feb. 23rd
Aisha Beliso de Jesus. Electric Santeria (“Transnational Caminos,” “Contaminating
Femininities,” “Epilogue”)
Part Three: Jamaica (With Connections to London, Trinidad, Barbados, Costa
Rica, or Ethiopia)
Thursday, Feb. 25th
Kenneth Bilby. “An (Un)natural Mystic in the Air: Images of Obeah in Caribbean
Song”
Diana Paton. The Cultural Politics of Obeah (Introduction)
Website: www.obeahhistories.org
Page 5


Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Group Presentation 4: Tacky’s Rebellion
Tuesday, March 1st
Diana Paton. The Cultural Politics of Obeah (Chapter 1)
Charles Rzepka, “Introduction: Obi, Aldridge, and Abolition”:
https://www.rc.umd.edu/praxis/obi/rzepka/intro.html
William Earle and Srinivas Aravamudan. Obi; or the History of Three-Fingered Jack
(Letters 1-7)
Second Reading Quiz
Thursday, March 3rd
Diana Paton. The Cultural Politics of Obeah (Chapter 2)
William Earle and Srinivas Aravamudan. Obi; or the History of Three-Fingered Jack
(Letters 8-15)
Tuesday, March 8th
Diana Paton. The Cultural Politics of Obeah (Chapter 7)
Brent Crosson. “What Obeah Does Do”
Thursday, March 10th
Diana Paton. The Cultural Politics of Obeah (Chapter 8)
Earl Lovelace, “Working Obeah”
LeRoy Clarke, “My Work is Obeah”
Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americ
Tuesday, March 15th (Spring Break)
Thursday, March 17th (Spring Break)
Tuesday March 22nd
Barry Chevannes. Rastafari: Roots and Ideology (Chapters 1-5)
Screening: Marcus Garvey and the Promised Ship
Group Presentation 5: Marcus Garvey
Page 6


Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Thursday, March 24th
Barry Chevannes. Rastafari: Roots and Ideology (Chapters 8 and 10)
Screening: Bad Friday
Part Three: HONDURAS (With Connections to St. Vincent, New York, Cuba,
South Carolina, and Nigeria)
Tuesday, March 29th
Paul Christopher Johnson. Diaspora Conversions: Black Carib Religion and the
Recovery of Africa. Pp. 1-59 (“Introduction,” “What is Diasporic Religion?”)
Group Presentation 6: Garifuna
Third Reading Quiz
Thursday, March 31st
Paul Christopher Johnson. Diaspora Conversions: Black Carib Religion and the
Recovery of Africa, pp. 60-98 (“‘These Sons of Freedom’: Black Caribs Across Three
Diaspora Horizons”)
Optional Reading: Mark Anderson, “Bad Boys and Peaceful Garifuna.”
Tuesday, April 5th
Paul Christopher Johnson. Diaspora Conversions: Black Carib Religion and the
Recovery of Africa, pp. 146-226 (“Ritual in the Homeland,” “Ritual in the Bronx,”
“Finding Africa in New York”)
Marta Moreno Vega, “The Yoruba Orisha Tradition Comes to New York City”
A
7

Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Additional Reading: Keith McNeal, Trance and Modernity (Chapter 6: “Religion and
the Politics of Diaspora in an Era of Postcolonial Multiculturalism”)
Lecture: Black Power Movement and the Orisha Resurgence
Screening: ’70, Remembering a Revolution
Fourth Reading Quiz
Thursday, April 14th
Spiritual Baptists
Earl Lovelace. The Wine of Astonishment
Wallace Zane. Journeys to the Spiritual Lands. “Introduction” and “A Shouting”
Group Presentation 7: The Shouter Prohibition Ordinance
Tuesday, April 19th
Earl Lovelace. The Wine of Astonishment
Wallace Zane. Journeys to the Spiritual Lands. “A Banning,” “Pilgrim Travelers,” and
“Mourning”
Thursday, April 21st
Keith McNeal, Trance and Modernity (Chapter 4: “Doing the Mother’s Work”)
Group Presentation 8: Kali
Part Four: Islam in the Caribbean (With Connections to Guadeloupe, India, France,
Trinidad, and Puerto Rico)
Tuesday, April 26th
(All Readings are found in Islam and the Americas an E-Book
Available Through Texas Library Website)
Aisha Khan. “Introduction: A Storied Hemisphere”
Omar Ramadan-Santiago. “Insha’Allah/Ojalá, Yes Yes Y’all: Puerto Ricans
(Re)Imagining Their Identities Through Islam and Hip-Hop
Guest Lecture: Omar Ramadan-Santiago
Thursday, April 28th
(All Readings are found in Islam and the Americas an E-Book
Available Through Texas Library Website)
Page 8


Anthropology 130F: African Diasporas in the Americas
Jeanne P. Baptiste. “More Than Dawud and Jalut: Decriminalizing the Jamaat al
Muslimeen and Madressa in Trinidad”
Yarimar Bonilla. “Between Terror and Transcendence: Global Narratives of Islam and
the Political Scripts of Guadeloupe’s Indianité”
Fifth Reading Quiz
Part Five: BRAZIL (With Connections to Guyana, Outer Space, Nigeria, and
France)
Tuesday, May 3rd
Kelly E. Hayes “Intergalactic Space-Time Travelers: Envisioning Globalization in
Brazil’s Valley of the Dawn”
Thursday, May 5th
Final Exam
Page 9
