                                                                          Department of Arts and Entertainment Technologies
                                                                                     School of Design and Creative Technologies
                                                                          College of Fine Arts | The University of Texas at Austin
AET 321G Sound System Design
Spring 2020 Syllabus
Unique Number: 20765
Classes will meet on Wednesdays 8:00 – 11:00 AM
Classroom: WIN 1.138
Instructor Name: Carolina Perez
Email: carolina.perez@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: TTH 11:00 AM - 12:00 PM
Course Overview
Live audio system design including equipment, acoustic prediction software, system wiring and networking, control software
and multimedia integration.
Prerequisites
AET 305 Foundations of Music Technology
Flags
None
Learning Outcomes
In this course, students will:
      1. Understand the acoustical factors affecting loudspeaker systems.
      2. Use industry-standard design/modeling software to predict system performance.
      3. Design a professional sound reinforcement system for a performing arts venue.
Course Materials
All required materials will be posted to Canvas.
Overview of Schedule
Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be altered to accommodate UT
closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the
schedule will be announced via Canvas.
Assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas. All assignments (unless stated otherwise) will be due
at the start of the following class.
Schedule & Topics
        Week              Date                              Topic                                  Assignment Due
          1               01/22         Sound System Design Introduction
                                        Audio theory assessment
                                        Venue survey
          2               01/29         Case Study: Payne Theatre                         Venue types and sound system
                                        Needs analysis                                    specifications research
          3               02/05         Loudspeakers/Amp theory                           System Design Goals
          4               02/12         Survey of loudspeaker market                      Loudspeaker market research
          5               02/19         Loudspeaker Prediction with MAPP XT               MAPP Prediction


           6              02/26          Loudspeaker Prediction with ArrayCalc                 ArrayCalc Prediction
                                         R1 Workshop
           7              03/04          Ground plan and Section drawings                      System Drawings: GP and Section
           8              03/11          Rigging workshop                                      System Drawings: Rigging
                                         Loudspeaker rigging drawings
           9              03/18          Spring Break
          10              04/01          Survey of Digital Mixer Market                        Digital mixer research
          11              04/08          Survey of Audio Networking Systems                    Audio networking research
                                         Dante Workshop
          12              04/15          Survey of Wireless Systems                            Wireless Systems research
                                         Equipment list                                        Equipment list
          13              04/22          Wall plates and panels                                System Drawings: Panels and
                                         Rack diagrams                                         Racks
          14              04/29          System Tuning Workshop                                System Drawings: Signal Flow
                                         Signal Flow Block Diagram
          15              05/06          Design Prelims                                        Prelim System Design
          16              05/13          Design Finals                                         Final System Design
Grading Scale
Coursework will be weighted as follows in calculating the Final Grade:
Assignments 40%
Prelim System Design 15%
Final System Design 25%
Attendance 20%
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
F = 0-59
Attendance
If a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please inform me as
soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving class
prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy. Two tardies equals an absence.
https://catalog.utexas.edu/undergraduate/fine-arts/academic-policies-and-procedures/
Classroom Etiquette
Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the instructor.
      1)   Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the beginning of class, please
           enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t hold up the entire class by
           failing to return promptly at the end of an announced break, since often the second part of the class period is when
           we will engage in group activities.


      2)   Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the classroom. If you forget to do so, and your phone
           rings, chirps, or vibrates loudly during class, turn it off immediately and discreetly. I reserve the right to penalize
           repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s assignment.
      3)   Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights, sounds, and smells. If you
           would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music, polish your nails, doodle with
           Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.
      4)   Consider bringing earphones and/or earplugs to class for work sessions. If you like to listen to music while you work,
           you are welcome to do so, so long as no one else can hear it. And if you are easily distracted by noise/conversation,
           please bring earplugs to wear so that the conversation from desk critiques will not bother you.
Personal Nouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of
race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the
instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what
appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Use of Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments are copyright
protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is
a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class
materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and
an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading
class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students. For more
information, go to:
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Management+of+Course+Materials%3A+Copyrights+and+Class+Recordings.
Campus Carry
The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as buildings and spaces that
are accessible to the public. The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried gun
on campus should immediately call 911.
Concealed-carry permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms. It is the responsibility of concealed-carry permit holders to
carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus. “About their person” means that a concealed-carry
permit holder may carry a holstered handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough
that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area
and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled. A concealed-carry permit holder may not carry a partially or wholly
visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or
other parking area. For more information go to: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students.
Academic Integrity
The University’s Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Students are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of
individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams,
and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
      ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
      ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing them;
      ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic discipline; and
      ● avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty as including any act
designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
      ●    Cheating


      ●     Plagiarism
      ●     Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
      ●     Falsifying Academic Records
      ●     Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended deadline for an
            assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
      ●     Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses without authorization to
            do so)
      ●     Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any means material
that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and
other expression or media, and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in conjunction
with a program course requirement.
For more information on Academic Integrity and avoiding Academic Dishonesty and Plagiarism, go to:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
Copyright and Fair Use
Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers. Many of the uses we will
make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to
be aware of your own and other copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’
works. A useful resource is Copyright Crash Course, available at https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/copyright.
Student Support Services
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They include (but are not limited to) the
following:
      ●     Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range of services and resources
            to support students and alumni.
      ●     The Undergraduate Writing Center (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu. helps students with every phase of writing
            assignments for their courses.
      ●     The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills, time-management, and note-
            taking courses.
      ●     University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health promotion services
            for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
      ●     officially enrolled in certain University programs.
      ●     The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with their personal
            concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Emergency Procedures
Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide students, faculty, and staff with
information regarding potential threats to the safety and security of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way
to notify students, faculty, and staff of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also
have the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of users subscribed to the
service. Consider subscribing to this service at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/. For more information about
emergency procedures, go to: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
University Policies


UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students. Students are expected
to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or her official e-mail
address. Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with “User Unknown” is not an acceptable excuse for missed
communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered
delivered without further action required of the University or instructor. For further information, go to:
http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
Religious Holidays
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose
absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or
complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be absent from scheduled
classes to observe a religious holy day. For more information, go to: https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-
policies-and-procedures/attendance/.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that the necessary
accommodations can be made promptly. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259,
ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644).
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual
misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to
fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
       1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
       2.   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a
            Title IX investigation.
       3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means
that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report
any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty
or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu.
For more information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
