        Welcome to the ADV 305 Syllabus! Select anything, right-click, and choose
                “Comment” to leave a comment, question, or just to say hi.
      ADV 305: Fundamentals of Advertising
                                     Spring 2020
                    Instructor: Jacob Copple – ​call me​ Jacob, ​or​ Professor Copple!
                                           TA: Irene Kim
        What is this class?                                         Key Information
ADV 305 is an overview of advertising for
                                                                          Class meetings
non-ADV majors offered by the Stan Richard
                                                                       T, TH 3:30 - 5:00 pm
School of Advertising and Public Relations in
the Moody College of Communication. This
class meets the needs of those who are                                     Student Hours
interested in careers which relate to                 Jacob:                    TBD
persuasive communication and strategic                Irene:             W 2:00 - 3:00​.
market planning.
                                                      You can stop by anytime you see me, or ​email me​ to
 This course will cover the basic concepts in         set up an individual meeting​.
advertising, marketing and integrated brand
promotion (IBP), and talk about advertising’s
                                                                        How to contact us
role and function in the market. This class
                                                      Email:             jgcopple@utexas.edu
will also give you an idea of how the industry
                                                      Office:            BMC 4.322
works and what the process is like for
advertising campaign planning.
                                                      Email​:            irenekim310@gmail.com
                                                      Office​:           BMC 4.322
         Table of Contents:
                                                      Be sure to read my ​email responses policy​.
  ● Course goals
  ● Assignments, Exams, and Grading
                                                                             Textbook
  ● Policies                                          Advertising and Integrated Brand Promotion, 8th
        ○ Attendance & absences                       Edition​. O’Guinn, Allen, Semenik, & Close. Cengage
        ○ Early and late work                         Learning, 2018. Must be 8th Edition.
        ○ Accomodations
        ○ Email Responses
  ● Academic integrity & collaboration                Class materials and announcements are
  ● Student Life                                      on ​Canvas
        ○ Counseling and Mental Health                Check Canvas and your UTexas email at least once before
                                                      and after each class
        ○ Title IX
        ○ Basic Needs
        ○ All Are Welcome
  ● Course Schedule


Course Goals
Learning Objectives: ​Students who successfully complete this course will ideally be able to
    ● Know the basic concepts in Advertising, Integrated Brand Promotion, and Marketing
    ● Understand the role and function of advertising in the market and society
    ● Apply the basic concepts and follow the planning process to design their own
        advertising campaign
Student Responsibilities:
    ● Complete assigned readings prior to the class they’re assigned to and complete the
        assignments before the due date attached.
    ● Attend class and be prepared to discuss topics of interest during lecture.
    ● In addition to the textbook, you are responsible for understanding all the content from
        in-class lectures, slides, videos, and relevant discussions.
    ● Exams test your conceptualization and understanding of course content. To do well on
        the exams study your class notes, readings, and go through each study guide (yes
        there will be study guides for each exam).
Assignments, Exams and Grading
Method of Evaluation:​ Overall letter grades are based on point totals based on the following
distribution
     Assignment                       Points per Assignment         Percentage (Total)
     Exams (4+1)                      100                           20 (80)
     Writing Assignment (5)           4                             5 (20)
     Extra Credit                     TBD                           TBD
     Total                            320                           100
                                        Return to the first page


Grading Scale: ​The points necessary to learn each letter grade are as follows…
                                   Letter Grade   Point Total
                                               A  93-100
                                              A-  90-92.9
                                             B+   87-89.9
                                               B  83-86.9
                                              B-  80-82.9
                                             C+   77-79.9
                                              C   73-76.9
                                             C-   70-72.9
                                             D+   67-69.9
                                              D   63-66.9
                                             D-   60-62.9
                                               F  0-59.9
Exams: ​Each exam covers the material leading up to that exam. Non-cumulative. The format
will be multiple choice, true or false, and matching questions. We will have 4 exams in total
on week 4, 8, 12 and 16. There will be study guides posted to Canvas for each exam.
    Optional Final:​ If you’re unsatisfied with your final grade prior to the end of the course, you
can take an optional, cumulative final exam. The final exam grade will replace your lowest
exam grade ​if it helps your final grade​. The final can’t hurt your final grade.
Writing Assignment: ​This class is all about learning the basics of advertising and how
contextual, structural, and societal variables impact how brands promote themselves. This
semester you’ll choose a brand and do a “deep follow” on their advertising and IBP
strategies. You’ll get to choose your brand, big or small, later in the semester and write 5
short reflection pieces about them and their advertising. Topics will vary and be introduced in
class and posted on Canvas.
Extra Credit: ​There may be an opportunity to earn extra credit through the school’s research
pool. I might have you all do something else. The details are TBD and I will make everyone
aware of them when they become available.
A Note about Grading: ​Each of you are enrolled at one of the best public universities in the
country, congratulations! Even though this is a course for non-majors, I expect the best from
each one of you. That being said, this course is not likely to be one you need to get into a
                                         Return to the first page


major (like ADV 318J, this courses older more mature sibling), and is therefore not as
challenging as others you might take. If you are comfortable with a B or C, then you can do
the work that will reflect that grade. If you want to put in the time and effort to study and
complete the writing assignments to get an A, then go for it! Your grade is a reflection of how
much work you put into the class.
If you’re unhappy with a grade you receive, you have ​7 days​ to talk to me or the TA
in-person​ during our student hours or other scheduled time (not before/after class). After the
7 days you will not be able to dispute a grade.
Policies
Attendance & Absences
Attendance is ​crucial​ to success in this class. ​ Your best chance to discuss new material,
ask questions, and avoid confusion is during class. So, don't miss class! You are responsible
for all material and announcements from class, even in case of absence. Much of this
information will be available on Blackboard. Please check in with me and with your
classmates when you are back.
That said, life happens. We get the flu. Relatives need your help. When this happens, do
what you need to do. I trust that you are an adult and will make the best choices that you can.
I would appreciate it if you can notify me in advance of an absence, if possible. In every case,
please come talk to me afterwards.
Early, Late, and Make-up Work
Early work: ​The only early work you could turn in before the due date is the writing
assignment. I will open these up on canvas at specific times with different prompts pertaining
to our recent class lectures and discussion. Once those have been published you’re free to
turn them in at any time. Exams will only be taken early under extreme circumstances or
under the recommendation from the Dean of Students.
Late/Make-up work:​ Writing assignments will be counted late and 2 points will be deducted
from every late assignment turned in. Exams will not be made up after the fact unless under
extreme circumstances or under the recommendation from the Dean of Students. If you have
significant​ extenuating circumstances that cause you to miss multiple assignments or class
meetings, see me to discuss arrangements.
Accommodations
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD):​ If you have special needs because of
learning, physical or other disabilities, it is your responsibility to contact Services for Students
with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). Also, see
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/​ . SSD will help you arrange accommodations.
Then, speak with me​ in person​ about making those accommodations and ensuring that they
are consistent with your arrangements with SSD.
                                        Return to the first page


Religious Holy Day Observance Policy: ​The Texas Education Code specifies that an
institution of higher education shall excuse a student from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel
for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be
penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the
absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance for
more information.
Email Responses
I do my best to reply to emails promptly and helpfully. However, I receive a ​lot​ of email. To
help both you and me, here are some specific expectations about emails:
    ● I will always ​try​ and respond within 24 hours, even on weekends.
    ● If your email asks a question that is answered in the Syllabus or on Canvas (such as in
        an announcement or an assignment sheet), I may reply by directing you to read the
        appropriate document. If you’ve read the relevant document and still have questions
        about it, please make this clear in your email by describing what you’ve already read
        and which specific part of it you have a question about.
    ● Often, it’s much easier to discuss questions in person. I may ask you to meet with me
        in my office (at a time that works for both of us) rather than answering directly in an
        email.
    ● On homework or project questions, please include photos, PDFs, or links if possible.
Academic Integrity and Collaboration
Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and integrity in
all course activities and assignments. It is expected that there shall be no deception
regarding the representation made by the student of his/her preparation, participation, or
performance.
Plagiarism is a form of fraud​. Proper acknowledgement makes the difference. Plagiarism
is presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own. Plagiarism is the presentation
of a sequence of words, from another writer, quoted without quotation marks and presented
as one’s own work. It is crucial that acknowledgement of sources be accurate and complete.
This includes citations of all sources on written assignments. The instructor uses various
tools to determine if plagiarism has occurred.
The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and plagiarism
are subject to the standard policies and procedures for all UT-Austin students as established
by UT-Austin.:
                                        Return to the first page


Acknowledging collaboration:​ In ​all​ work, you must clearly state the name(s) of the
person(s) you collaborated with on each problem.
Specific academic honesty expectations:​ The following are guidelines for avoiding
plagiarism in assignments. The list is intended to be helpful but not exhaustive. If you are
unsure about the appropriateness of some form of assistance on an assignment, you should
always ask me.
● Outside resources in general:​ On ​all ​work, unless directly stated otherwise, the only
    resources you may use are our class notes (including explorations and activity
    worksheets), our textbook, or your own direct observations.
● Copying:​ Copying someone’s writing, or any part of a passage, from any source (friend,
    internet, book, etc.) in any setting, constitutes plagiarism.
● Past students:​ On any assignment, basing your work on the efforts of another student
    who previously completed this course, or one like it, is considered plagiarism.
● Other instructors:​ If you plan to seek the help of an instructor or tutor (other than me),
    you should discuss this with me in advance (by email or in person). If you do not verify
    that this is acceptable ​before​ seeking help, this will be considered plagiarism. I am always
    willing to discuss any aspect of the course with you.
Online Elements of the Course:​ Understand that the online course format allows for
multiple methods of identity verification, collusion, collaboration and plagiarism monitoring
and detection. A violation of the course policy may include (but is not limited to) the following:
    ● Giving out your UT EID to any other person
    ● Collaborating of sharing information with another person regarding the material on any
         activity, assessment or assignment, before during or after.
    ● Republishing materials from the course without the permission of the course instructor
         (me) and/or the university.
A positive note: ​Remember that I want you to be successful. That is, I want you to develop a
deep, personal understanding of the material we study so that you become a better student
of communication in general who can go on to do well in all of your future endeavors. Every
part of this course structure – including both collaborative work ​and ​restrictions on
collaboration – are intended to help you with this. You will often struggle, and that’s
intentional – struggle is essential to learning.
Student Life
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your
way, there are options available for support.
 For immediate support
                                        Return to the first page


    ● Visit/Call the ​Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC)​: M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
        | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
    ● CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
 CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication
    ● Abby Simpson, LCSW | M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a
        message* if she is unavailable)
 FREE Services at CMHC
    ● Brief assessments and referral services
    ● Mental health & wellness articles - ​cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
    ● MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Title IX and Mandatory Reporting
As of January 1, all employees who witness or receive information about sexual harassment,
sexual assault, dating violence and stalking that involve a current student or employee must
promptly report the incident to the University’s Title IX Coordinator or a Deputy Title IX
Coordinator.
This means that I have to report any information of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating
violence and/or stalking ​even if you’re not meaning to report the information​. This isn’t
information I expect you to be aware of so I want you to know about it upfront. The last thing I
want to do is report something a student was sharing with the intention of not making it
known to university officials.
If you’d like to talk to someone about an incident of sexual or interpersonal violence please
see the contacts about at ​CMHC​, ​Student Emergency Services​, or talk to a ​UT Advocate​.
Advocates empower students by providing information, tools, and resources and by allowing
students to determine the course of action that best fits their needs. They are trained to listen
and work with students respectfully in whatever decision they make.
Basic Needs
Any student who has difficulty affording groceries or accessing sufficient food to eat every
day, or who lacks a safe and stable place to live, and believes this may affect their
performance in this course, is urged to contact the ​Office of the Dean of Students​ or the ​UT
Outpost​, which can provide food and clothing items.
All Are Welcome
This classroom is for everybody. It doesn’t matter what you look like, your political ideologies,
your citizenship status, or your sex, gender, or sexual preferences. I will not tolerate hate
speech of any kind in classroom discussions, assignments, or anywhere else. This class will
also be open to ideas that may not follow your political, religious, or philosophical
perspectives. Please consider everyone as a human being with their own ideas and thoughts.
I also want to make it clear that I am an ally for LGBTQ+ students and any homophobia or
sexism in the classroom, discussions, assignments, or anywhere else will not be tolerated.
                                      Return to the first page


Return to the first page

Course Schedule
 The contents of the course schedule are subject to change at my discretion. I will make you aware of any changes if and
                                                    when they occur.
Week      Day       Date     Chapter Reading             Lecture/Discussion Topic
            T      1/21                                 Introduction and Overview
   1
           TH      1/23      Chapter 1                  Advertising Basics
            T      1/28      Chapter 2                  Organization of the Advertising Industry
   2
           TH      1/30                                 Deep Follower - Introduction
            T      2/4       Chapter 3                  History of Advertising
   3
           TH      2/6       Chapter 4                  Social and Ethical Dimensions of Advertising
            T      2/11                                 Exam Review
   4
           TH      2/13                                 Exam 1
            T      2/18      Chapter 5                  Consumer Behavior
   5
           TH      2/20      Chapter 5                  Consumer Behavior
            T      2/25      Chapter 6                  Segmentation, Positioning, Value Proposition
   6
           TH      2/27                                 Deep Follower - Update
            T      3/3       Chapter 7                  IBP Research
   7
           TH      3/5       Chapter 8                  IBP Plan
            T      3/10                                 Exam Review
   8
           TH      3/12                                 Exam 2
            T      3/17
   9                                                           Spring Break
           TH      3/19
            T      3/24      Chapter 9                  Managing Creativity in ADV and IBP
  10
            Th     3/26                                 Deep Follower - Update
            T      3/31      Chapter 10                 Creative Message Strategy
  11
           TH      4/2       Chapter 12                 Media Planning
            T      4/7                                  Exam Review
  12
           TH      4/9                                  Exam 3
            T      4/14      Chapter 15                 Sales Promotion, POP, Support Media
  13
           TH      4/16      Chapter 16                 Event Sponsorship and Branded Entertainment
            T      4/21                                 Deep Follower - Update
  14
           TH      4/23      Chapter 18                 Public Relations
            T      4/28      Chapter 18                 Public Relations
  15
           TH      4/30                                 Exam Review
            T      5/5                                  Exam 4
  16
           TH      5/7                                  Final Exam Review / Deep Follower - Evaluation
Optional Final Exam                                     Time and Location TBD
                                              Return to the first page
