                 ACCT 384.2 – Taxation of Entities I
                 Spring 2020 (02630, 02635)
            Professor   Kristina Zvinakis
                Office  CBA 4M.222 (512.471.5314)
         Office hours   Tuesday 10:00-11:30 am, Thursday 3:00–5:00 pm,
                        when the door is open, and by appointment
                e-mail  kristina.zvinakis@mccombs.utexas.edu
1 Learning objectives
   Most individuals working in the accounting function (especially those in the area of tax) will
   encounter corporate-tax issues. A solid foundation in the calculation of the corporate tax liability
   and an understanding of the tax law that affects the transactions that take place in the life of a C
   corporation are required to successfully resolve those issues. As a result, the learning goals for this
   course are
   −   to facilitate your understanding of the fundamental concepts governing the taxation of
       corporations,
   − to facilitate your understanding of the fundamental concepts governing the taxation of
       transactions between a corporation and its shareholders,
   − to enhance your ability to read, interpret and apply tax law to corporate operations and
       transactions involving a corporation and its shareholders, and
   − to gain an appreciation for how data and data analytics might affect the calculation of the
       corporate tax liability.
2 Materials
   Text: South-Western Federal Taxation 2020: Corporations, Partnerships, Estates and Trusts,
           Raabe/Young/Hoffman/Nellen/Maloney, 43rd edition. The ebook (likely the most economical
           option) can be purchased here. Other purchase options can be found here.
   Instructor class notes and supplemental articles: Available on Canvas
   Tax research services: To access readings not posted to Canvas or to undertake tax research, all
   University of Texas students have access to either CCH Omni Tax or RIA’s Checkpoint via the
   University Library’s database webpage.
3 Keys to success
  To successfully master the principles of corporate taxation you will need to practice applying the
  concepts we discuss in class. The theory underlying corporate taxation is straight forward; the
  application is where things get complicated and your understanding of these concepts is truly
  tested.
                                                                                            1 | Spring 2020


  You are expected to attend class. This means that you are expected to arrive on time and to remain
  for the entire class period. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to ensure that you obtain any
  handouts or assignments and understand the material covered in the class missed. Also, because
  this is an accelerated class you will need to be especially diligent in preparing for each session in
  order to keep up with the material; falling behind will make it more difficult to be successful.
  Finally, because we will not be using laptops or tablets in class, I request that you not turn on or use
  your laptops or tablets during class unless you are asked to do so.
4 E-mail, Canvas and class notes
   I will communicate with you regularly via e-mail; you are responsible for the content of these
   messages. I will use the e-mail account that appears in the class roster to create a class mailing list.
   This e-mail address is the one that appears with your name in the UT Directory. You should verify,
   via UT Direct, that the e-mail in the directory is the e-mail you are currently using.
   The Canvas page maintained for this class also provides useful course information. To access this
   page you will need a UT EID and your EID password. You should access this page on a regular basis
   to ensure you are up to date and aware of what is going on in ACCT 384.2. Additionally, class notes
   for each class (a PowerPoint file) will be posted to Canvas the day before the class meeting. You will
   find assignment details, due dates, exam dates, and additional readings here, as well.
5 Evaluation
   A rigorous academic environment will be maintained in ACCT 384.2. Grades are earned based on
   your performance on the following:
              Midterm exam                                                                 150 points
              Homework problem sets                                                         85 points
              Tax return project                                                           175 points
              Participation                                                                 75 points
              Final exam (comprehensive)                                                   200 points
              Maximum possible points                                                      685 points
  An effort has been made to coordinate exam and assignment dates in this course and Professor
  Bredeson’s course to avoid overwhelming everyone involved.
  Tax return project: The tax return project will require you to complete a corporate tax return in
  three parts. The due dates for the three parts of the project are posted in Canvas and included in the
  course outline. You will work in groups of 3 for each part of the project; I will assign you to a group
  and the groups will change for each part of the project. Because I am assigning you to groups, the
  evaluation of each projection will include points for each member’s contribution to the group
  assignment. Each group should complete their own project.
  Late assignments: If you hand in an assignment after the due date, you will lose 5 points for every
  day the assignment is late. After the assignment is discussed in class or returned (whichever is
  earlier), I will no longer accept the assignment for a grade.
                                                                                               2 | Spring 2020


Attendance, participation and engagement: I believe that being engaged in class and participating in
class discussion allows you to better understand the topics discussed and improves the learning
environment for everyone. Explicitly evaluating your performance on this dimension provides an
incentive to take preparation for class and such engagement seriously.
Your engagement will be evaluated on three dimensions: (1) attendance, (2) voluntary contributions
to class discussion and (3) answers to questions asked of you (by me) during class. That is, during a
portion of class each day, I will randomly call on students to answer questions related to the topic of
discussion. When you are called on, your participation grade will be detrimentally affected if you
choose not to answer the question, cannot attempt a reasonable answer or are not in class.
Evaluating class participation and engagement can be subjective. Generally, if you remain alert, add
to the discussion or ask relevant questions about the material, your contribution will be positively
evaluated. If you never participate, sleep during class, or otherwise telegraph that you would like to
be anywhere but class, this will be detrimentally reflected in your evaluation. Note also that points
can be deducted for counterproductive classroom activity, including disrupting the class by
inappropriately talking to your neighbors, reading non-class material on your phone, or incessantly
texting during class.
Anyone arriving late to class (meaning arriving I have started talking) will lose their participation
points for that class period. Arriving late disrupts flow of the class and is disrespectful to everyone in
the classroom.
Individual absences from class do not need to be explained, but if you would like to e-mail me to tell
me that you will not be in attendance, you are welcome to do so.
Finally, I expect that you will attend the section of the course in which you are enrolled.
Midterm and final exam: This course has a midterm exam and a comprehensive final exam. You are
required to take both of these exams. There are no make-ups for any exam. Both the midterm and
the final will be given in the evening. The date and location of these exams are detailed in the course
outline, are posted to Canvas and will be announced in class. Each student is responsible for
managing their own personal schedule to be present at these exams. If you miss an exam because of
an illness or other dire or irreconcilable conflict, you should notify me as soon as possible and
present written documentation of your absence (e.g., note from physician). I have final authority to
determine if your absence is justified. Your grade will be determined at the time that your absence
is excused. Note that this is an individual determination based on the facts and circumstances of
each case.
Grading concerns: Any concerns or questions about grading on an assignment or exam must be
resolved in the week after the graded assignment or exam is returned in class or made available to
you. This time frame applies whether or not you were present in class to receive your graded
assignment or chose to retrieve it from the Department Office. A grading scale including pluses and
minuses will be used in this course. Note that for MPA students, a grade point average of 3.0 is
required to successfully graduate from the University of Texas at Austin.
                                                                                             3 | Spring 2020


6 Dropping the course
   The course catalog details both add and drop date deadlines. Students enrolled in graduate classes,
   at the discretion of the instructor, are allowed to drop the class up until the last class meeting of
   the accelerated term (before the final exam) without academic penalty. A student who stops
   attending without notification or without the submission of a drop form will automatically earn a
   grade of “F” for the semester.
7 Academic misconduct
  Academic misconduct includes (but is not limited to) cheating, fabrication, facilitation of academic
  misconduct by others, and plagiarism, and is a serious academic offense. Neither the Department of
  Accounting nor I will tolerate academic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty
  with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the department’s Policy Statement on
  Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all of
  the faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
  observe all of the student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that
  policy statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask
  me for clarification.
  Application of departmental policy to ACCT 384.2
  Graded assignments (e.g., Tax return projects, homework problems): Each group’s solution should be
  independently prepared. Groups should not refer to other students, other groups’ solutions, or to
  solutions prepared in previous semesters. All questions about the tax return project are to be
  directed to me or posted to the discussion board for this class; questions about other assignments
  should be directed to me. Violation of these policies will be treated as an act of scholastic
  dishonesty. Evidence of non-independent work will be forwarded to Student Judicial Services with a
  recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the course.
  Exams: Each student is expected to independently complete an exam during the designated exam
  period. No student should refer to other students’ exam solutions or discuss the exam with other
  students during the exam period. Violation of this policy will also be treated as an act of scholastic
  dishonesty. Evidence of non-independent work will be forwarded to Student Judicial Services with a
  recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the course.
8 Course outline/Topic coverage
  The course outline details daily topic coverage, assigned readings and homework due dates. This
  outline is both posted to Canvas as a separate document and broken out by module on the Canvas
  page for this course.
                                                                                              4 | Spring 2020
