Professor Thompson
                                       AFR 372C (30535)
                                     Rethinking Blackness
                                     Flags: Cultural Diversity
“To be born Black is an extraordinary gift bestowing access to an unbelievably rich
legacy of joy. It’ll lift you to ecstasy and give you pain that can make you stronger
than you imagined possible. To experience the full possibilities of Blackness, you
must break free of the strictures sometimes placed on Blackness from outside the
African-American culture and also from within it. These attempts to conscript the
potential complexity of Black humanity often fly in the face of the awesome breadth
of Black history.”
                                                       Touré, Who’s Afraid of Post-Blackness
Course Description
Cultural critic Wahneema Lubiano argues that “postmodernism offers a site for
African American cultural critics and producers to utilize a discursive space that
foregrounds the possibility of rethinking history, political positionality in the cultural
domain, the relationship between cultural politics and subjectivity, and the politics of
narrative aesthetics.” Other scholars such as Cornel West conclude that the black
experience in America is fundamentally absurd. Henry Louis Gates Jr. suggests that,
“only a black person alienated from black language-use could fail to understand that
we have been deconstructing white people's languages and discourses since that
dreadful day in 1619 when we were marched off the boat in Virginia. Derrida did not
invent deconstruction, we did!” If postmodernism is characterized by a de-centered
human subjectivity then the black condition in the Americas is fundamentally
postmodern.
Although many writers render the outsider status of African Americans with
somberness this course examines texts that re-imagine black subjectivity beyond
conventional narratives of suffering and oppression. Rethinking Blackness considers
how artists present topics sacred to many African Americans such as the Civil Rights
movement, slavery, family, and religion, but do so outside traditional African
American artistic and cultural paradigms. We will consider how their treatment of
such sensitive issues expands notions of black identity and questions assumptions
about the African American experience. During the term we will explore a variety of
texts and genres from the late 20th century to the present including but not limited to
film, literature, autobiography, music, drama, and television.


Required Books
    1. Octavia Butler, Kindred (1979)
    2. Katori Hall, The Mountaintop (2011)
    3. Mat Johnson, Incognegro: A Graphic Mystery (2018)
    4. Stew, Passing Strange (2008)
    5. George Wolfe, Colored Museum (1988)
All books can be purchased at the University CO-OP. Assigned articles designated by an
* can be located on the course’s Canvas page.
Course Requirements & Policies
Quizzes
You will take five short multiple-choice quizzes throughout the term that allow you to
demonstrate your understanding of the major themes, concepts, characters and
theories discussed in the course. This is an opportunity to showcase what you’ve
learned from the assigned reading, as well as assess your comprehension of the
lecture and class discussions.
Black Art Matters Review
Each student must attend a black artistic performance, art exhibit, film, play or
concert and then write a 2-3 page review. The review should summarize or describe
the art object or performance, discuss the artist’s aims, and provide a sustained
analysis of the ways that the piece challenges and/or maintains conventional notions
of blackness. Reviews can be submitted online throughout the semester but the final
deadline for all reviews is Friday, April 26 at 12 noon.
Group Research Project: Essay
Groups will conduct research and write 7-10 page critical essay on a topic, figure or
text that represents blackness reimagined. The subject of the research project must
be something that was not covered during the course. The project is meant to
showcase your analytical engagement with theories of postmodernist black identity
and culture. Each essay should include secondary sources and include proper
citations and a properly formatted works cited page. This final project is meant to
demonstrate your research, thinking and writing skills. It is essential that you
carefully proofread your essays for clarity and grammatical errors. All work must be
typed in a 12-point academic font (Times, Times New Roman) doubled-spaced and
have one-inch margins as well as appropriate citations. While the essay has multiple
contributors, it should read as an unified text. Include each group member’s name on
the cover page. Additional research project guidelines such as suggested topics, and
proposal format will be discussed in class. I strongly advise you to consult with me or
the TA in person or via email as you develop your group presentations.
                                              2


Group Research Project: Presentation
Groups will also deliver a brief (5-7 minutes max) presentation based on their
research project. Students are strongly encouraged to use their creativity to present
their findings. You can do a video, short skit, website, create a Wikipedia Page,
Tumblr, Instagram, PowerPoint or use another presentation tool to share your
subject. The point of this exercise is to learn about then teach your classmates about
the ways black artists and intellectuals contest prevailing ideas of blackness in the
US. Use this as an opportunity to refine your skills. Focus on working collaboratively,
writing clearly, and presenting in ways that showcase your creativity, and expertise.
Make sure that you rehearse every aspect of your presentation because you will be
graded on a variety of criteria such as: content, persuasiveness, organization,
presentation of evidence, validity of argument, contact with the audience, vocal
punctuation and expressiveness, oral language style, appropriate volume and pace of
speech, poise, comfort, and eye contact. It is also important that your presentations
stay within the time limit so that everyone has an opportunity to participate. Please
note that on the day of your presentation you must submit the typed (2+ page)
“script,” outline or text of your presentation.
On a final note, the presentations are not just an academic exercise for the
presenters. I expect audience members to act as engaged listeners. In fact, your
written feedback on each presentation will be incorporated into the grades so your
active participation is not just encouraged, but required.
Participation
Complete all reading before class and participate fully in class discussions and
exercises (presentations, quizzes, performances, group projects and workshops).
Many of the texts are quite complicated so I strongly suggest that you take reading
notes since our discussions rely on textual observations. Always bring texts to class
because I may call upon you to read an excerpt, perform a scene or analyze a
passage. Prompt and regular attendance is expected. Tardiness is disrespectful to me
and to your classmates. Please be advised that if you miss multiple classes and/or are
consistently late your grade will suffer. It is incumbent upon you each keep a
personal copy of all work that you submit until final grades are posted. Late work will
be penalized.
Notice: Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Final grades will be calculated as follows:
Quizzes (5)                                    25%
Black Art Matters Review                       20%
                                              3


Group Research Project: Essay               25%
Group Research Project: Presentation        20%
Participation                               10%
Course Schedule
                                          Part I.
                          Introduction: Rethinking Blackness
Tuesday, January 22
Introduction
Thursday, January 24
Toni Morrison, “Recitatif” (1983)*
Tuesday, January 29
George Wolfe, The Colored Museum (1988)
Harry Elam, “Signifying on African-American Theatre: The Colored Museum by George
Wolfe.”*
Thursday, January 31
George Wolfe, The Colored Museum (1988)
Tuesday, February 5
Touré, “Chapter One: Forty Million Ways to Be Black.” Who’s Afraid of Post Blackness?
(2011), 1-17.*
Trey Ellis, “The New Black Aesthetic.” (1989)*
Thursday, February 7                                             Quiz 1
Touré, “Chapter Two: “Keep It Real Is a Prison.” Who’s Afraid of Post Blackness? (2011),
19-56.*
                                         Part II.
                      Rethinking Black History: Revisiting the Past
Tuesday, February 12
Octavia Butler, Kindred
                                           4


Thursday, February 14
Octavia Butler, Kindred
Tuesday, February 19                                               Quiz 2
Octavia Butler, Kindred
Thursday, February 21
Mat Johnson, Incognegro
Tuesday, February 26
Mat Johnson, Incognegro
Thursday, February 28
Katori Hall, The Mountaintop (2011)
Suzan-Lori Parks, “An Equation for Black People Onstage,” (1995)*
Tuesday, March 5
Katori Hall, The Mountaintop (2011)
Research Project Groups assigned
Thursday, March 7                                                  Quiz 3
Katori Hall, The Mountaintop (2011)
Tuesday, March 12
Group Research Project Workshop
Thursday, March 14
Group Research Project Workshop
March 18-23
Spring Break
                                        Part III.
            Real Black: Rethinking the Cultural Politics of Racial Authenticity
Tuesday, March 26
Blanton Museum Tour
Meet at the front entrance of the Blanton
                                           5


Thursday, March 28
Stew, Passing Strange (2008)
Tuesday, April 2                                                Quiz 4
Stew, Passing Strange (2008)
Gayle Wald, “Passing Strange and Post-Civil Rights Blackness.”(2010)*
Thursday, April 4
Stew, Passing Strange (2008)
Due: Group Research Project Proposal with working bibliography of 5-7 diverse sources
Tuesday, April 9
Dir. Dees Rees, Pariah (2012)
Thursday, April 11
Dir. Dees Rees, Pariah (2012)
Tuesday, April 16                                               Quiz 5
Dir. Dees Rees, Pariah (2012)
                                       Part IV.
                 New Theories and Renderings of Blackness Explored
Thursday, April 18
Group Research Project Workshop
Tuesday, April 23
Group Research Project Workshop
Thursday, April 25
Presentations (1-3)
Friday, April 26
Due: Black Art Matters Review by 12 noon
Tuesday, April 30
Presentations (4-6)
                                          6


Thursday, May 2
Presentations (7-9)
Tuesday, May 7
Presentations (10-12)
Thursday, May 9
Conclusion
Due: Final Essay
                      7
