Concepts of Visual Style
Concept art is first of all an art of which the material is concepts, as the material of e.g. music is sound.
Since concepts are closely bound up with language, concept art is a kind of art of which the material is language.
[Henry Flynt: “Essay: Concept Art.” (1961) In: La Monte Young (ed.): An Anthology, 1963.]
              AET 339 // Concepts of Visual Style                                          neal daugherty ( kneel dock-er-tee )
Description                                                                   Instructor
              unique ID:     20965                                                         email:		        neal_daugherty@utexas.edu
              meeting:		     t/th - 3:30 p.m.-5:00 p.m.                                    phone:		        512-695-9749 between (10am and 7pm)
              location:		    DFA 4.126                                                     office:		       TBD
              format:		      upper division                                                hours:		        (by appt.)
context and objectives
This course will expand on student’s existing conceptual skills and further develop them to produce a clear and well-conceived visual
vocabulary of artistic style, character development, environment design, and presentation strategies. The ultimate goals of this course
is to prepare the student with the fundamentals of conceptual artistic style and applying it to the techniques of concept art. These
new skills and concepts will empower the student so that they may be able to network with programmers, producers, and other
artists. The student will be graded on their individual personal development. Individual and group instruction will address needs for
proper presentation to the class and prospective collaborations.
This course will be an examination of contextual aspects regarding observational, analytical, and technical projects. Research topics and read-
ings are to be expected. Expect additional work outside of the specified class time. There will be no final exam for this course. With the excep-
tion of the grade and attendance policies, parts of this syllabus are subject to change with advance notice, as deemed necessary or appropriate
by the instructor.
course schedule and Canvas
In this class I use Canvas - a Web-based course management system with password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu to distribute
course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assign-ments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys. You
can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
projects are based upon digital creation, manipulation, transmission, and critical introspection:
Project 1) Reverse-Engineered Proteus Effect I - Exploration into artistic style as it personally applies to the student’s real life and
online persona. Completion of project and Participation Progress will constitute 15% of the student’s cumulative grade.
Project 2) Reverse-Engineered Proteus Effect II - Exploration into artistic style as it personally applies to the student’s real life and
online persona. Completion of project and Participation Progress will constitute 15% of the student’s cumulative grade.
Project 3) Static Media Saturation - Exploration into artistic style as it personally applies to static media in virtual and realtime
scenarios. Completion of project and Participation Progress will constitute 15% of the student’s cumulative grade.
Project 4) Temporal Media Saturation - Exploration into artistic style as it personally applies to temporal media in virtual and realtime
scenarios. Completion of project and Participation Progress will constitute 15% of the student’s cumulative grade.
Project 5) Presentation - Exploration into personal style exhibiton, concept art sheets, presentation straegies in both virtual and real-
time scenarios. Completion of project and Participation Progress will constitute 20% of the student’s cumulative grade.
Participation - Developing your digital skills sets, through participation in both collaborative and individual projects, is paramount to
achieving a good grade in this class. You will be graded on your own individual progress but you must keep up with the class. Partici-
pation is perhaps the most important part of your grade, as it ties together all of your learned experience with work ethics and
In addition to the discussions of the formal artistic and technical content of the class, broad dialogue may occur regarding contemporary art and
its social and historical context. Visual stimulus will be presented weekly, if not daily. This may include the expression of thoughts, experience
and concepts of contemporary and historical individuals. Self-expression is to be expected and explored both visually and verbally. Open and
frank discussions of cultural mores and taboos (as it applies to art and internet culture) will be discussed regularly.
**backup of your data is solely your responsibility and should be done daily to avoid loss**


storage, media, service requirements & recommendations
Each student will need to purchase/have available the following for the course:
           Sketchbook, pencils, pens, for tradtional sketching
           A free (or pay-per) Blogging service accessible to the instructor
           Internet Access and a Working E-mail Address
           Adobe Creative Cloud Master Collection
           USB Flash/Thumb drive(s) and/or Portable External hard disk drive(s)
           Cloud Storage Access (Dropbox, Google Drive, etc.)
           lynda.com Free for UT Students - http://www.utexas.edu/hr/index
use of e-mail for official correspondence to students
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s responsibil-
ity to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be
time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and
instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
grading and grading policy
Each student will receive six grades for the semester. The grades will be based on completion of particular projects throughout the duration of the
course. Students will be evaluated on comprehension of specific terminology, grasp of course technology, presentation, aesthetic development and
artistic growth. Collaboration with others students will be expected and factors of attendance and class participation will be extremely important to
each project’s grade.
Grading in a studio art class is inevitably subjective, meaning that the final evaluation of the work pre­sented is based on how the criteria for the as-
signments is met and on the opinion of the instructor as to the work’s quality. The following offers some of the criteria used in determining grades.
Starting in the Fall of 2009, the University will switch from its current system to a plus/minus system. This system will be applied to your final grade.
           A+/- means outstanding work exceeding the requirements in both quantity and quality. A clear and complete understanding of techniques
           and processes is evidenced. Significant participation in critiques has occurred. Finished and fully developed work is innovative
           and well presented.
           B+/- means good work beyond the requirements. Good understanding of techniques and processes is evidenced.
           Individual approach has formed.
           C+/- means average work. Requirements are met; projects are completed on time. Regular attendance is maintained. Adequate
           participation in critiques and understanding of techniques and processes is evidenced.
           D+/- means poor work. Requirements barely met, understanding of techniques and processes lacking. Skill level low.
           F means unacceptable work. Requirements not met. Little understanding of techniques or processes.
           Grading System Scale:
           A          = 4.00              C          = 2.00
           A-         = 3.67              C-         = 1.67
           B+         = 3.33              D+         = 1.33
           B          = 3.00              D          = 1.00
           B-         = 2.67              D-         = 0.67
           C+         = 2.33              F          = 0.00
class attendance policy
Class attendance is a requirement and use of the full class period is expected.You will be allowed three sick, personal, physical or mental health days
without grading consequences. It is up to your discretion how you use these three days. Being late to class three times or leaving class early three
times will count as an absence. 15 minutes late to the start of class will constitute a tardy. Leaving class before being dismissed by your professor
will constitute an early departure. A 4th absence will result in the lowering of your final grade by one letter grade. Absences, tardiness and/or early
departures beyond this could result in course failure. If a serious medical or personal situation occurs affecting attendance, please discuss it with your
professor.
Q drop Policy The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill
1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergradu-ate student a total of more than
six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.” A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor, in writing, as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made to complete
an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
university attendance policy: religious holy days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you
must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete


the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
academic honesty
According to the General Information catalog, “the value of a university degree depends on the absolute integrity of the work done by each student
for that degree, a student should maintain a high standard of individual honor in his or her scholastic work” (page98). Students who violate Uni-
versity rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced.
documented disability statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Dis-abilities (SSD) at
(512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
letter from SSD.
copyright and fair use:
You may find the need to use copyrighted material this semester: music, photographs, movie clips, or any other expression. For many of your uses,
you need to find the copyright holder and negotiate a license.You own the copyright to the work you produce in this class. As a copyright holder
yourself, you understand the importance of copyright ownership. It is your responsibility to secure music and archival footage licenses as well as
artwork, location and personal releases. For some uses, however, neither you nor anyone else needs to license copyrighted material. This is because
copyright law exists to encourage and support creativity. Copyright law recog-nizes that creativity doesn’t arise in a vacuum. As creators, we all
stand on the shoulders of giants. New works of art (such as films, books, poems, paintings) all make use of what has gone before. Thus, copyright law
not only protects authors with a copyright that lets them decide who can use their works, but also offers exemptions from the author’s control. For
filmmakers, the most important exemption is the doctrine of fair use.You can rely on fair use, where appropriate, in the film and media projects you
undertake for this course. If you are making a documentary film, consult the influential Documentary Filmmakers Statement of Best Practices in Fair
Use http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/files/pdf/fair_use_final.pdf which was created by a group of national filmmaker organiza-tions, has been
endorsed by the University Film and Video Association, and is now relied on by film festivals, insurers, cablecasters, distributors and public broadcast-
ers. Fair use also applies in the fiction film environment, but not necessarily to the same extent or in the same way.
As always, the central question is whether the new use is “transformative” -- i.e., whether it adds significant value by modifying
or recontextualizing the original. For more understanding, including information on when you can use works for free http://www. centerforsocialme-
dia.org/files/pdf/free_use.pdf without even using fair use, why you (mostly) don’t need to worry about trademarks http://www.centerforsocialmedia.
org/files/pdf/free_use.pdf what is in the public domain http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/rock/backgrounddocs/copyrightterm.pdf how fair use
lawsuits http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/videos/sets/fair_use_case_studies have been settled, and on how fair use has been employed success-
fully http://www.centerforsocialmedia.org/videos/sets/fair_use_case_ studies in documentary film, visit centerforsocialmedia.org/fairuse
**backup of your data is solely your responsibility and should be done daily to avoid loss**
