                                                         BIO206L
            INTRODUCTORY LABORATORY EXPERIMENTS IN BIOLOGY
                                                       Summer 2019
Course Description
This course has been designed to engage you, excite you, and get you thinking like a scientist! Each topic will be covered
in a collaborative ‘hands-on’ manner. You will work with your fellow students to generate hypotheses, design experiments
and collect and analyze data, and discuss ethical issues. The course will introduce you to cell and molecular biology
techniques used in a broad range of laboratory work. You will master the use of optical microscopes and study the
structure of protists as well as plant and animal cells. Molecular techniques such as gel electrophoresis and the
amplification of segments of DNA using PCR (polymerase chain reaction) will be introduced as well. You will spend a
portion of the course examining animals and plants and how their structure, physiology and development are a reflection
of millions of years of evolution. We’ll focus on one plant process (photosynthesis) and two key animal systems
(respiratory and cardiovascular) to gain an understanding of how plants and animals maintain their internal environment.
You will also design an experiment to study the feeding behavior of crickets. At the end of the semester, we hope you are
as amazed as we are by the great diversity of life and have a deeper appreciation for the role of evolution in shaping its
form and function.
This course carries the Ethics Flag. Ethics courses, like BIO 206L, are designed to equip you with skills that are
necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. A substantial portion of your grade (50%) comes
from assignments involving ethical issues and the process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations.
BIO206L consists of a range of unique numbers (beginning with 84965). Each unique number corresponds to a specific
lecture and laboratory time. Scheduled locations and times of all BIO206L lab sections are listed in the Summer 2019
Course Schedule online: http://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/
You must attend the BIO206L laboratory section to which you are officially enrolled. Attending the lecture will help you to
prepare for lab that day. You should have either registered for or have credit for BIO311C in order to take BIO206L.
If this is not the case, contact Dr. Maas immediately.
Required materials
Lab Manual
The required text for BIO206L is a NEW COPY of the lab manual “Introductory Laboratory Experiments in Biology,”
sold exclusively at the University Co-Op bookstore on Guadalupe Street. An introductory biology textbook of your choice,
such as that used in BIO311C and BIO311D, is also recommended as a background reference.
                                              BIO 206L Summer 2019    Page 1 of 8


Lab Notebook
Researchers use laboratory notebooks to document their hypotheses, experiments, observations, illustrations, and their
interpretations of these experiments. You are required to purchase a bound (NOT SPIRAL) lab notebook. You do not
need to spend extra money to purchase a notebook that creates duplicate pages! Your LI will check your Lab Notebooks
as part of your Lab Performance grade (see below).
LabClicker
LabClicker is a course management system that contains general course and instructor information as well as a source
of online resources that are integral to success in the course. You will find lecture notes, handouts, updated experimental
protocols, and assignments on LabClicker. Please visit it frequently to review these resources. To use the LabClicker
system, you must register using your UTEID online at http://labclicker.com and pay a $35 plus tax registration fee.
You will also use LabClicker to complete Pre-lab Homework and for you to enter Peer Evaluation points. Any personal
web-enabled device such as a smart phone, tablet, computer laptop, etc. can then be used to access the LabClicker
system. You are required to bring a web-enabled device to every lecture. If you require additional assistance
registering for or using the LabClicker system please email admin@labclicker.com.
Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/)
I will use Canvas for sending and receiving emails and posting important announcements. Please check the Canvas
website regularly for course information: I will also use UT Instapoll (a Canvas tool) to ask questions during lecture.
You will also submit your Data Reports and Ethics Case Study assignments as Word Documents on Canvas. Once
submitted, your assignments will be reviewed by the plagiarism-detection tool, Turnitin. Turnitin is a software resource
integrated with Canvas and detects plagiarism and improper citation. The software works by cross-referencing submitted
materials with an archived database of journal, essay, and newspaper articles, books, student papers, and other
published work. I DO NOT ACCEPT OR GRADE LATE ASSIGNMENTS. IT IS YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO DOUBLE-
CHECK THAT YOUR ASSIGNMENT HAS BEEN SUBMTTED CORRECTLY ON CANVAS.
Canvas will serve as the official repository of the BIO 206L scores that will comprise your total BIO206L final grade. It is
your responsibility to ensure that your scores for all of the various BIO 206L assignments are correctly displayed in
Canvas.     AFTER A GRADE APPEARS IN CANVAS YOU HAVE 48 HOURS TO ASK FOR A REGRADE.
Course Personnel
Lecturer: Dr. Martha Maas
Office hours: MW from 10-11 and TH from 10-11 in PAI 1.13 Or by appointment.
Email: m.maas@austin.utexas.edu
                                              BIO 206L Summer 2019      Page 2 of 8


Laboratory Instructors (Teaching Assistants)
A Laboratory Instructor (LI) will supervise your work during each laboratory period for the duration of the semester. Your
LI should be your first point of contact for individual assistance during the course. Your LI will be available to assist you
during regularly scheduled office hours or by appointment. Each LI will provide a handout with additional details including
his/her office hours this week in lab.
Course Structure
1. Lecture Questions
Lectures consist of activities and mini-lectures to provide an introduction to the concepts and the ethical ideas covered
during lab. Lecture materials (handouts, slides, etc.) will be posted on LabClicker.
During lecture, I will pose Lecture Questions to help you assess your own understanding of the material. Starting on
Monday, June 10th, I will begin to record your answers. Lecture questions will be asked using UT Instapoll. You will
access UT Instapoll through Canvas. Please be sure to bring a web-enabled device to every lecture.
You can earn a maximum of 5 points by answering Lecture Questions. I will record the percentage of questions you
answer during each lecture. I will then use that percentage to determine the number of points (out of 5) that you have
earned. For example, if you answer 90% of the questions asked during lecture you will earn 4 out of 5 Lecture Question
points. You can’t make up a Lecture Question for any reason.
2. Pre-Lab Homework
Pre-Lab Homework is administered through the LabClicker system and will contain questions that are designed to help
you prepare for each upcoming lab in an interactive manner. I recommend that you carefully read the appropriate section
in the manual before you attempt Pre-Lab Homework.
To complete Pre-Lab Homework, you will login at http://labclicker.com/lab/. To access each assignment, select the Pre-
Lab tab at the top menu. Each Pre-Lab Homework will only be opened for a short time with a deadline as shown in the
LabClicker system. NOTE: Each Pre-Lab Homework must be completed PRIOR to its respective deadline.
There will be 12 graded Pre-Lab Homework assignments over the course of the semester. Each assignment will be worth
0.5 point, and I will take the top 10 grades (for a total of 5 points possible) to calculate your Pre-Lab Homework score.
You cannot make up a Pre-Lab Homework.
3. Laboratory Performance
The Course Schedule (page 8) lists the lecture topics and laboratory exercises that will be covered this semester. For
each laboratory exercise, you will receive a ‘Lab Performance’ grade posted in the LabClicker system. You can earn a
total of 4 performance points during each lab and we will take the top 10 grades to calculate your Lab Performance Score
(a total of 40 points possible). The components of your Lab Performance grade are as follows:
                                               BIO 206L Summer 2019      Page 3 of 8


 Laboratory Technique and Clean-up (2 points possible, graded by your LI): Your LI will evaluate your Laboratory
 Technique and Clean-up during lab. Good technique includes arriving on-time to lab and in proper attire (long pants,
 closed-toe shoes). During lab, your LI will observe your performance of lab activities and record whether you are able to
 demonstrate good laboratory skills during the lab session. During lab, you need to take notes and record your data
 and results in your lab notebook. The observations of living or preserved specimens should be in the form of notes or
 drawings and include complete identification of the organism, body structure(s), and any other important information (e.g.,
 age or state of maturity, sex, specific strain or preparation, etc.). Any illustration made with a microscope should have a
 note indicating the type of microscopy used (e.g., bright-field) and the total magnification at which the specimen was
 observed. Your LI may evaluate your notebook during lab. The LI will also explain any steps needed to complete the lab,
 such as sharing data with the class before you leave. The LI will also review what is required to completely clean-up your
 work area for each lab. You must ask for permission to be dismissed from lab after you have completed all of the
 procedures, cleaned your area, and properly stored any lab equipment and supplies.
 Participation (2 points possible, graded by students in your lab group): You will be assigned to work with a group of
 several students (typically 4) to complete lab activities. Groups will be assigned during the first laboratory period with
 switches among groups done throughout the semester. After each lab exercise, you have an important responsibility to
 rate each group member (including yourself) using the rubric below. Each student can earn up to 2 points total for
 excellent participation during lab. Each score will be calculated by taking the average of the total points awarded by all
 members of the group. You must enter your ratings within 24 hours of lab ending using the LabClicker system at
 https://labclicker.com/lab/peer. If you do not enter your ratings within 24 hours, peer scores will be averaged without your
 input and you will receive zero out of two points for that lab.
                                                      Activity Participation Rubric
                               2 = Excellent                                1 = Fair                     0 = Needs to improve
                  Fully participated in activities during    Sometimes participated in the        Did not participate in the activities;
                  lab; Encouraged all members of the         activities; Sometimes did not listen Did not listen to or work well with
Participation     group to participate; Listened to          to other group members;              other group members.
                  ideas without interrupting; Worked         Sometimes did not work well with
                  well with group.                           group members.
 In summary: to earn all 4 Laboratory Performance points you must:
          Demonstrate good laboratory technique and thoroughly perform clean-up duties (2 points possible, LI-evaluated)
          Participate in activities (2 points possible, peer-evaluated within 24 hrs)
 Once your performance is graded, you have 48 hours to speak with your LI about a grading concern. After 48 hours, your
 performance grade will not be reviewed or adjusted. You cannot make up Lab Performance.
                                                    BIO 206L Summer 2019      Page 4 of 8


4. Data Reports
You will complete a Data Report for six of the exercises (see Course Schedule on page 8). You can earn a total of 5
points for each Data Report assignment for a total of 30 points (no Data Reports can be turned in late or dropped.).
Working on the Data Report during lab will improve your answers because the material is still fresh and you can also ask
your LI for help at that time.  Write the answers to the Data Report questions in complete sentences, using proper
grammar and spelling. Grading will be based on completeness and clarity, evidence that experiments have been
conducted correctly and carefully, the interpretation of your results, and the use of appropriate graphs, tables, labeled
figures, etc. to share your data. Also, be sure to appropriately cite your sources using a population citation format.
You must submit a Word Document of your Data Report on Canvas before your next lab begins. Any Data Reports
submitted later than 15 minutes after the start of the laboratory period will be considered late. Any Data Reports turned
in late will not be accepted for grading, and a "0" grade will be recorded for that report.
Your LI will grade your Data Reports using Speed Grader on Canvas. Once your Data Report is graded, you have 48
hours to speak with your LI about a grading concern. After 48 hours, your Data Report grade will not be reviewed or
adjusted. You cannot make up Data Reports.
5. Ethics Case Studies
You will complete three Ethics Case Studies (details and due dates announced in class). You can earn a total of 10
points for each Ethics Case Study assignment, for a total of 30 points (NO CREDIT FOR LATE ASSIGNMENTS.).
Each Ethics Case Study assignments will be posted on Canvas. Your assignment must be completed using complete
sentences and proper grammar and spelling. You must submit a Word Document of your Ethics Case Study assignment
on Canvas. Any Ethics Case Study assignments turned in late will not be accepted for grading, and a "0" grade will be
recorded for that case study.
Your LI will grade your Ethics Case Study assignment using Speed Grader on Canvas. Once your Ethics Case Study
assignment is graded, you have 48 hours to speak with your LI about a grading concern. After 48 hours, your grade will
not be reviewed or adjusted. Any Ethics Case Study assignments turned in late will not be accepted for grading, and a
"0" grade will be recorded for that report.
6. Concept Exam
On July 8th, you will take a one-hour, multiple-choice exam DURING LECTURE that will have questions about the ethical
and biological concepts presented in lecture and in lab. There will be 35 multiple-choice questions worth two points each
on the exam (for a total of 70 points possible).
7.    Laboratory Practical Examination
During the last day of lab (July 10) you will take a one-hour "Laboratory Practical Examination" worth 70 points. The
format and the method of administering the practical exam will be explained later in the semester. Each Laboratory
Instructor will administer the Laboratory Practical Examinations for his/her sections.
                                               BIO 206L Summer 2019     Page 5 of 8


Grading Summary
Yo ur gra d e i n B IO 2 0 6 L wi l l b e d et er m in e d a s f o ll o ws :
 Lecture Questions                                       % of questions answered                            5
 Pre-Lab Homework (0.5 point each)                       Top 10 Pre-Lab Homework assignments                5
 Lab Performance (4 points each)                         Top 10 Lab Performance grades                      40
 Data Reports (5 points each)                            Six Data Reports                                   30
 Ethics Case Studies (10 points each)                    Three Ethics Case Studies                          30
 Concept Exam                                                                                               70
 Laboratory Practical Exam                                                                                  70
 TOTAL POINTS POSSIBLE:                                                                                     250
This gives a total of 250 possible points. The course grade will be computed by dividing the sum of all points earned by
2.5 to obtain a score based upon a 100 point scale. If your score falls within one of the categories listed below, you are
guaranteed the letter grade indicated. In this course your final course grade will be one of the following:
93-100 points = A, 90-92.99 points = A-, 87-89.99 points = B+, 83-86.99 points = B, 80-82.99 points = B-,
77-79.99 points = C+, 73-76.99 points = C, 70-72.99 points = C-, 67-69.99 points = D+, 63-66.99 = D, 60-62.99 = D-
below 60 points = F.
The grade you will receive at the end of the semester is the grade you earn. There is NO extra credit of any kind in
this course. There is NO curving of grades at the end of the semester.
All scores that will comprise the total final grade will be posted in LabClicker and Canvas. All student grades will be
available for individual inspection on LabClicker and Canvas using your UT EID. This means YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE
to review and confirm within 48 hours that your assignments have been graded correctly.
Due to Federal law, scores and evaluation of your performance may be discussed ONLY during office hours or
by appointment.
IMPORTANT Policies
Policy on academic integrity (Honor Code):
You are expected to maintain academic integrity. The University of Texas at Austin Honor Code states: “The core
values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness,
and respect toward peers and community.”
                                                  BIO 206L Summer 2019       Page 6 of 8


All assignments must be your OWN work. All submitted assignments will be checked for evidence of cheating. When
cheating is suspected, we will act in accordance with the University’s honor code policies. If you become aware of the
scholastic dishonesty of a fellow student, you are obligated by the University Honor Code to report it. Students who
violate the University’s policies on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
in the course and/or dismissal from the University. To see the UT academic dishonesty policy, please see:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_conseq.php
Arriving late to a Laboratory Exercise
Students who arrive more than 15 minutes late to a laboratory period will not be allowed to participate in the lab exercise
and will be marked as absent.
ONE Absence from Lab
You may miss ONE lab (although I encourage you to attend every lab!). For this ONE missed lab, you may ask your lab
group for their notes and data for writing a Data Report (if assigned). You can’t make Performance Points for the missed
lab. And, if a Data Report is due, be sure to turn your in your Data Report on Canvas before your regular lab
section begins.
MORE than one Absence from Lab
If you have another lab absence (the second absence), the maximum number of points you can earn in the class is 200
(except for EXTRAORDINATRY circumstances). If you miss more than two labs, you will earn an ‘F’ in the course.
Policy on Religious Observance
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of
a religious holy day. If you must miss a lecture or lab or an examination in order to observe a religious holy day, you will
be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Students with Disabilities
Specialized services are available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Typically you must
provide documentation to the Dean of Students’ Office, such that appropriate accommodations can be determined. If
deemed that special accommodations may be made, the SSD office should provide you with a letter which you should
submit to Dr. Maas (by the 12th class day or as soon as the official accommodation request letter is obtained).
                                                     BIO 206L Summer 2019 Page 7 of 8


                       SUMMER 2019 COURSE SCHEDULE
                        NO LECTURE OR LABS ON FRIDAY, JUNE 7TH
             FIRST LECTURE AND LABS ON MONDAY, JUNE 10
                    LECTURES ARE FROM 9:00 TO 9:50
        DAY:                                  Lecture and Lab Exercise Topic
June 10             Exercise 1                        Laboratory Equipment and Procedures
June 12             Exercise 2                                 Basic Light Microscopy
June 14             Exercise 3                       Advanced Techniques of Light Microscopy
June 17             Exercise 4               Enzyme Activity and Environmental Effects (Data Report)
June 19             Exercise 5                Plant Diversity, Anatomy, and Physiology (Data Report)
June 21             Exercise 6                      Animal Anatomy: Dissection of a Vertebrate
June 24             Exercise 7                           Animal Development (Data Report)
June 26             Exercise 8              Cellular Respiration and the Cardiovascular System (Data Report)
June 28             Exercise 9                             Animal Behavior (Data Report)
July 1             Exercise 10                    Transgenic Organisms: Bacteria and Nematodes
July 3             Exercise 11                    DNA Fingerprinting 1: DNA Isolation and PCR
July 5             Exercise 12               DNA Fingerprinting II: Gel Electrophoresis (Data Report)
                CONCEPT EXAM and
July 8                                      Concept Exam (during lecture) and Open Labs (during lab)
                   OPEN LAB
July 10          LAB PRACTICAL                                    Lab Practical Exam
                               BIO 206L Summer 2019    Page 8 of 8
