                 ACCT 384.2 – Taxation of Entities I
                        Spring 2019
                        Unique Numbers: 02690, 02695
            Professor   Kristina Zvinakis
                 Office CBA 4M.222 (512.471.5314)
         Office hours   Tuesday 10:00‐11:30 am, Thursday 3:00–5:00 pm,
                        when the door is open, and by appointment
                e‐mail  kristina.zvinakis@mccombs.utexas.edu
1 Learning objectives
   Most individuals working in the tax area will encounter corporate tax issues. To successfully resolve
   those issues, a solid foundation in the calculation of the corporate tax liability and an
   understanding of the tax law that affects the transactions that take place in the life of a C
   corporation are required. Therefore, my goals in this class are
      to facilitate your understanding of the fundamental concepts governing the taxation of
       corporations,
    to facilitate your understanding of the fundamental concepts governing the taxation of
       corporate‐shareholder transactions, and
    to enhance your ability to read, interpret and apply tax law to corporate operations and
       transactions involving a corporation and its shareholders.
2 Materials
   Text: South‐Western Federal Taxation 2019: Corporations, Partnerships, Estates and Trusts,
           Raabe/Hoffman/Young/Nellen/Maloney, 42nd edition. Purchase options can be found here.
           Buying the ebook is likely the most economical option.
   Instructor class notes and supplemental articles: Available on Canvas
   Tax research services: To access readings not posted to Canvas or to undertake tax research, all
   University of Texas students have access to three electronic tax research libraries ‐ CCH Omni Tax,
   RIA Checkpoint, and Lexis‐Nexis Academic Universe – via the University Library’s webpage.
3 Keys to success
  To successfully master the principles of corporate taxation you will need to practice applying the
  concepts we discuss in class. The theory underlying corporate taxation is straight forward; the
  application is where things get complicated and your understanding of these concepts is truly
  tested.
  You are expected to attend class. This means that you are expected to arrive on time and to remain
  for the entire class period. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to ensure that you obtain any
  handouts or assignments and understand the material covered in the class missed. Also, because
                                                                                               1 | Spring 2019


  this is an accelerated class you will need to diligently prepare for each session in order to keep up
  with the material; falling behind will make it more difficult to be successful in this class.
  Finally, because we will not be using laptops or tablets in class, I request that you not turn on or use
  your laptops or tablets during class unless you are asked to do so.
4 E‐mail, Canvas and class notes
   I will communicate with you regularly via e‐mail; you are responsible for the content of these
   messages. I will use the e‐mail account that appears in the class roster to create a class mailing list.
   This e‐mail address is the one that appears with your name in the UT Directory. You should verify,
   via UT Direct, that the e‐mail specified is the e‐mail you are currently using.
   The Canvas page maintained for this class also provides useful course information. To access this
   page you will need a UT‐EID and EID password. You should access this page on a regular basis to
   ensure you are up to date and aware of what is going on in ACCT 384.2. Additionally, class notes for
   each class (a PowerPoint file) will be posted to Canvas the day before the class meeting. You will
   find assignment details and additional readings here, as well.
5 Evaluation
   A rigorous academic environment will be maintained in ACCT 384.2. Grades are earned based on
   your performance on the following:
              Midterm exam                                                               150 points
              Homework                                                                   110 points
              Tax return project                                                         160 points
              Participation                                                               80 points
              Final exam (comprehensive)                                                 200 points
              Maximum possible points                                                    700 points
  An effort has been made to coordinate exam and assignment dates in this course and Professor
  Bredeson’s course to avoid overwhelming everyone involved.
  Tax return project: The tax return project will require you to complete a corporate tax return in
  three parts. The due dates for the different parts of the project are posted in Canvas and the course
  outline. You may work in groups on this project. A group should consist of no more than 3 people.
  You can choose your own group at the beginning of the term and you will work with that group
  throughout the semester. If you have trouble finding a group, please let me know. Each group
  should complete their own project.
  Late assignments: If you hand in an assignment after the due date, you will lose 5 points for every
  day the assignment is late. After the assignment is discussed in class or returned (whichever is
  earlier), I will no longer accept the assignment for a grade.
  Attendance, participation and engagement: I believe that being engaged in class and class discussion
  allows you to better understand the topics we discuss and improves the learning environment for
  everyone. Explicitly including such amounts in your performance evaluation provides an incentive to
                                                                                              2 | Spring 2019


  take preparation for class and participation seriously. Your engagement will be evaluated on three
  dimensions: (1) attendance, (2) voluntary contributions to class discussion and (3) answers to
  questions asked of you (by me) during class. That is, during a portion of class each day, I will
  randomly call on students to answer questions related to the topic of discussion. When you are
  called on, your participation grade will be detrimentally affected if you choose not to answer the
  question, cannot attempt a reasonable answer or are not in class.
  Evaluating class participation and engagement can be subjective. Generally, if you remain alert, add
  to the discussion or ask relevant questions about the material, your contribution will be positively
  evaluated. If you never participate, sleep during class, or otherwise telegraph that you would like to
  be anywhere but class, this will be detrimentally reflected in your evaluation. Note also that points
  can be deducted for counterproductive classroom activity, including disrupting the class by
  inappropriately talking to your neighbors or incessantly texting during class.
  Anyone arriving late to class (meaning arriving I have started talking) will lose their participation
  points for that class period. Arriving late disrupts flow of the class and is distracting and disrespectful
  to everyone in the classroom.
  Individual absences from class do not need to be explained, but if you would like to e‐mail me to tell
  me that you will not be in attendance, you are welcome to do so.
  Finally, I expect that you will attend the section of the course in which you are enrolled.
  Midterm and final exam: This course has a midterm exam and a comprehensive final exam. You are
  required to take both of these exams. There are no make‐ups for any exam. Both the midterm and
  the final will be given in the evening. The date and location of these exams are detailed in the course
  outline, will be posted to Canvas and will be announced in class. Each student is responsible for
  managing his/her own personal schedule to be present at these exams. If you miss an exam because
  of an illness or other dire and irreconcilable conflict, you should notify me as soon as possible and
  present written documentation of your absence (e.g., note from physician). I have final authority to
  determine if your absence is justified. Your grade will be determined at the time that your absence
  is excused. Note that this is an individual determination based on the facts and circumstances of
  each case.
  Grade disputes: Any concerns or questions about grading on an assignment or exam must be
  resolved in the week after the graded assignment or exam is returned in class. This time frame
  applies whether or not you were present in class to receive your graded assignment or chose to
  retrieve it from your mail folder. A grading scale including pluses and minuses will be used in this
  course. Note that for MPA students, a grade point average of 3.0 is required to successfully graduate
  from the University of Texas at Austin.
6 Dropping the course
   The course catalog details both add and drop date deadlines. Students enrolled in graduate classes,
   at the discretion of the instructor, are allowed to drop the class up until the last day of the term
   without academic penalty. A student who stops attending without notification or without the
   submission of a drop form will automatically earn a grade of “F” for the semester.
                                                                                              3 | Spring 2019


7 Academic misconduct
  Academic misconduct includes (but is not limited to) cheating, fabrication, facilitation of academic
  misconduct by others, and plagiarism, and is a serious academic offense. Neither the Department of
  Accounting nor I will tolerate academic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty
  with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the department’s Policy Statement on
  Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all of
  the faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
  observe all of the student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that
  policy statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask
  me for clarification.
  Application of departmental policy to assignments in this course
  Graded assignments (e.g., Tax return projects, homework problems): Each group’s solution should be
  independently prepared. Groups should not refer to other students, other groups’ solutions, or to
  solutions prepared in previous semesters. All questions about the tax return project are to be
  directed to me or to the TA for this class; all other questions directed to me. Violation of these
  policies will be treated as an act of scholastic dishonesty. Evidence of non‐independent work will be
  forwarded to Student Judicial Services with a recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the
  course.
  Exams: Each student is expected to independently complete an exam during the designated exam
  period. No student should refer to other students’ exam solutions or discuss the exam with other
  students during the exam period. Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of scholastic
  dishonesty. Evidence of non‐independent work will be forwarded to Student Judicial Services with a
  recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the course.
8 Course outline/Topic coverage
  The course outline details daily topic coverage, assigned readings and homework due dates. Because
  of its length and detail, this outline is posted to Canvas as a separate document.
                                                                                            4 | Spring 2019
