                                                                                    Revised January 17, 2020
                                                                                          Subject to Revision
SYLLABUS : SPRING 2019
ARC 327R | ARC 386M | ARI 350R | ARI 386M
Managing the Design Project
Project Management for the Design Professional
Professor: Dr. Richard W. Jennings, FAIA
Time:         Thursday, 2:00-5:00 pm
Room:         SUT 2.110
Course Description
The project is the basic defining element of architectural, engineering, interior design, and planning
practice. It is through the process of managing and leading projects that design concepts are translated
into reality. This course addresses the management and leadership of design projects, including
buildings, interiors, planning, and other types of professional services projects.
Valuable to students of architecture, architectural engineering, interior design, landscape architecture,
civil, structural, mechanical and electrical building engineering, planning, and students in real estate and
business who want to learn about the process of managing and delivering projects.
This course provides a solid introduction to project management, including: project start up; scoping,
budgeting, and scheduling; financial management and control of projects; owner and client
relationships; establishing and negotiating professional fees; project revenue recognition, earned value
management, and percent complete determination; overview of both traditional and newer alternate
project delivery approaches, including traditional design-bid-build, design-build, bridging, fast-track, and
Integrated Project Delivery (IPD); introduction to Gantt charts, critical path scheduling and other
scheduling techniques; team building; coalescing owner-designer-contractor relationships; professional
services delivery; project risks and mitigation; life cycle costing analysis; project close-out,
commissioning, post-occupancy services; and other project management topics.
The course is comprised of lectures, written assignments, readings, real-world cases, role-playing
exercises based on real-world situations, and expert guest speakers from the design, construction and
real estate fields. There is no textbook for the class. All of the suggested readings will be available as PDF
files on the Canvas course website. This course complements other practice-related courses.
Assignments
There are Assigned readings and short written assignments. In addition, in lieu of examinations there is a
5-page Midterm and 5-7-page Final Paper, double spaced preferred, on the student’s choice of relevant
topics, such as the project management process, client relationship management, advantages and
disadvantages of various design service delivery methods, team building, integrated project delivery,
project communications, or design team leadership. There will several in-class exercises that reinforce
concepts covered in the course.
Evaluation
Student evaluations will be based on class attendance, preparation and participation (20%), written
assignments (25%), the midterm paper (25%), and the final paper (30%).


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
Texts and Readings
All assigned readings are posted on the course website in PDF format and intended as background to
supplement class discussions. The readings include excerpts from The Architect’s Handbook of
Professional Practice, 14th and 15th Editions, American Institute of Architects; (An Electronic version is
available via library website) Integrated Project Delivery: A Guide, published by the American Institute of
Architects and the AIA California Council, The Project Management Institute’s Body of Knowledge (BOK),
and various other relevant articles and papers.
Syllabus
Session 1 January 23        Course Overview and Introduction to Project Management
                            Course overview, discussion of topics to be covered, assignments, grading,
                            review of syllabus, pedagogical expectations, and an introduction to the scope
                            and unique dimensions of project management; discussion of forms of project
                            organizations, roles and relationships; overview of the different types of
                            projects; and the perspectives of owner, client, developer, architect, designer,
                            contractor in project management.
                            Suggested Readings: AIA, Thinking Like a Client; AIA, Client Perceptions Study;
                            AIA, Plan for Success; CURT, Owner Study 2018; Whitemer, 4 Things You Must
                            Do at the Start of Every Project.
Session 2 January 30        Essential Skills and Attitudes of the Project Manager
                            Essential skills and attitudes needed by the effective project manager in the
                            design firm environment; sustaining the often-juxtaposed goals of design
                            quality, satisfied clients, and effective project management; team building and
                            coordination; importance of appropriate and special attitudes and techniques
                            necessary in coordinating design professionals and design projects.
                            Suggested Readings: The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice,
                            Section 13.1, “The Effective Project Manager” (14th Ed.) and Section 10.1
                            “Managing Architectural Projects” (15th Ed.), both posted in the course
                            Readings folder. In addition, the 14th and 15th editions of the AIA Handbook
                            are available electronically at the following links:
                            https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                            com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=1443899&query=the
                            +architect%27s+handbook+of+professional+practice
                            and
                            https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                            com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=818987&query=the+
                            architect%27s+handbook+of+professional+practice
Session 3 February 6        Project Delivery Approaches
                            Introduction to various project delivery approaches including the traditional
                            approach, alternate approaches such as Fast-Track, Bridging, CM at Risk,
                            Hyper-Track, and Integrated Project Delivery; the merits, disadvantages and
                            applicability of each approach will be discussed.
                            Suggested Readings: The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice,
                            Section 11.4, “Project Delivery Methods;” AIA, Primer on Project Delivery
                            Terms; AIA, Integrated Project Delivery: A Guide, and Drive On!: A Project
                            Manager Story. Will discuss case in class.
Richard W. Jennings                   Managing the Design Project                   Spring 2020       Page 2


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
                      Assignment No. 1: Recommend a Project Delivery Approach. Due February
                      27.
Session 4 February 13 The Project Management Process
                      Discussion of managing a design project, both delivery of design services and
                      the design professional’s involvement in project planning and build phases;
                      discussion of the functions of project management including planning,
                      organizing, staffing, facilitating, coordinating, obtaining and providing
                      feedback; consultant selection and coordination; the project work plan; team
                      coordination; introduction to agreement analyses; role definitions;
                      responsibility matrices; checklists; schedules; and other project management
                      tools.
                      Guest: Stephi Motal, AIA, Project Manager, Black & Vernooy Architecture
                      and Urban Design.
                      Suggested Readings: Pressman, Chapter 4, “Project Management;” Haviland,
                      Chap. 1, “Understanding Project Management;” and AIA, “Project
                      Management Techniques.”
Session 5 February 20 The Project Triad – Scope, Cost, Time
                      Scope, cost and time are critical elements of any project; a change in one of
                      these elements affects the other two; discussion of importance of defining
                      and documenting project scope, quality, and client expectations; discussion of
                      purpose and development of project budgets, cost estimates, and schedules;
                      presentation of sample exhibits that are used in actual practice.
                      Guest: TBA
                      Suggested Readings: The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice,
                      Section 13.5, “Construction Cost Management;” AIA, “Managing the
                      Contingency Allowance;” and AIA, “Elements of Realistic Project Budgets.”
                      Assignment No. 2: Prepare an Overall Project Budget, due before midnight,
                      March 12.
Session 6 February 27 The Economics of Design Services and Financial Control of Design Projects
                      Introduction to the economics of architectural practice; staff utilization
                      modeling, multiple concept, and economic billing rates; setting and
                      negotiating compensation; agreements and their analysis; budgeting and
                      scheduling the delivery of design services, professional staff and consultants;
                      reporting and controls; introduction to design services reporting software
                      such as Deltek Vision® that architects and large and small design firms employ
                      to manage project services.
                      Guest: Derek Villemez, Development Services Manager, DPR Construction.
                      Suggested Readings: Dickenson, “A Better Value;” AIA 8.1, “Financial
                      Planning;” and AIA 13.3, “Project Controls.”
                      Assignment No. 1 Due Before Midnight
                      Assignment No. 3: Prepare Economics of a Firm and Calculate a Fee, due
                      before midnight, April 2.
Richard W. Jennings            Managing the Design Project                   Spring 2020       Page 3


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
Session 7 March 5     Understanding the Client & Trusted Advisor Concept
                      Discussion of types of clients, their expectations, needs and perspectives;
                      coalescing the client; discussion of client view versus design professional view
                      of new projects; strategies and tactics for more effective client management;
                      introduction to the “trusted advisor” concept by David Maister and how it can
                      facilitate improved client relationships and interactions with the design
                      professional; discussion of how design professionals can become more than
                      consultants to their clients.
                      Guest: Paul A. Bielamowicz, AIA, LEED AP, Principal, Page Southerland Page,
                      Inc. (PAGE) Architecture Engineering Interiors Consulting.
                      Suggested Readings: Maister, “The Trusted Advisor Notes;” Maister,
                      “Professionalism in Consulting;” Maister, “A Matter of Trust;” and The
                      Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice, Section 6.3, “Building Client
                      Relationships.”
Session 8 March 12    Managing Innovative Projects
                      Effectively managing the innovative project; discussion of the project
                      management requirements of unique and innovative projects. Assignment:
                      Assignment No. 2 Due Before Midnight
                      Suggested Readings: Fischer, “Virtuoso Teams” and Thurm, “Master of the
                      House.”
No Class   March 19   Spring Break - No Class
Session 9 March 26    Project Budgeting, Estimating, Control, & Life Cycle Costing
                      Introduction to the overall project budget, cost estimating, cost reporting and
                      control; discussion of the various techniques that can be employed to assist
                      the client with more than construction costs; brief overview of basic real
                      estate economics; introduction to life cycle costing including present value,
                      future value, annuities and return on investment decision making concepts.
                      Suggested Readings: The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice,
                      Section 12.12, “Life Cycle Costing” and review Section 13.5, “Construction
                      Cost Management.”
                      Assignment No. 4: Prepare a Life Cycle Cost Analysis, due April 16.
Session 10 April 2    Project Scheduling
                      Project scheduling as it relates both to delivering design services and
                      construction projects; introduction to Gantt Charts, Critical Path Method
                      (CPM), and Precedent Diagramming Method (PDM) techniques of scheduling
                      design services and construction; review of scheduling software applications.
                      Suggested Readings: AIA, “Project Scheduling: A Way to Evaluate Workload”
                      and review the scheduling part of The Architect’s Handbook of Professional
                      Practice, Section 13.3, “Project Controls.”
                      Assignment No. 3 Due Before Midnight
Richard W. Jennings             Managing the Design Project                   Spring 2020      Page 4


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
Session 11 April 9    Project Risks and Mitigation
                      Introduction to various risks that design professionals incur in delivering
                      design services in the project management context, and how those risks can
                      be mitigated; importance of acting within the scope and dimensions of
                      professional liability insurance in managing the design project; discussion of
                      appropriate project documentation and communication to minimize risk.
                      Guest: Shawn Brown, Principal, Crowell Builders.
                      Suggested Readings: Simpson, “Risky Business” and AIA, “Quality Control –
                      Managing the Top 5 Risks.”
                      Midterm Paper Due Before Midnight.
Session 12 April 16   Project Communications, Team Building, Leadership & Conflict Resolution
                      Importance of communications in the management of design projects;
                      strategies and tactics for effective communication; making client
                      recommendations and client decisions; ethics involved in making
                      recommendations and analyses; importance of and techniques for
                      confronting project issues early and resolving conflicts amicably; project
                      directories, meeting documentation, correspondence, and other
                      communication techniques for effective use among project teams.
                      Suggested Readings: AIA, “The Art of Listening,” and The Architect’s
                      Handbook of Professional Practice, Section 6.2, “Communicating with Clients.”
                      Assignment No. 4 Due Before Midnight.
Session 13 April 23   Project Close Out & Post-Occupancy Services
                      Definition and obligations of the project manager in project close out;
                      discussion of final documentation and transmittal of information to the client;
                      discussion of importance of following up to ensure the final details of a design
                      project are completed; overview of post-occupancy services and their benefits
                      to both the client and design professional.
                      Suggested Readings: The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice,
                      Section 12.6, “Project Closeouts” and Gonchar, “Looking Back and Moving
                      Forward : Post Occupancy Evaluations;” Adler, “Finish Strong Project Close
                      outs.”
Session 14 April 30   Project Management and the Future
                      Discussion of new forms and concepts of design project management, trends,
                      and future challenges and opportunities for the design and construction
                      professional, including the future of disruptive technologies such as wider
                      adoption of fully integrated BIM, cloud computing, VPNs and others.
                      Suggested Readings: Bernstein, “Repositioning Practice for the Future;”
                      Whitemyer, “Future Evidence Based Design;” Fisher, “Architecture and the
                      Third Industrial Revolution;” Baker, “Can Technology Solve Architects’
                      Productivity Challenge?”
Session 15 May 7      Final Class Session
                      A summary presentation of the topics and concepts covered during the
                      semester and discussion of topics of interest to the students.
Richard W. Jennings             Managing the Design Project                   Spring 2020       Page 5


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
Assignments:
                      Assignment        Topic                                     Due Date
                      Assignment 1      Recommend a Delivery Approach            February 27
                      Assignment 2      Prepare an Overall Project Budget         March 12
                      Assignment 3      Prepare Economics of Firm and a Fee         April 2
                      Midterm Paper Choice of Topic                                 April 9
                      Assignment 4      Prepare a Life Cycle Cost Analysis         April 16
                      Final Paper       Choice of Topic                            May 14
Guests:
                      Date*             Guests
                      February 13       Stephi Motal, Project Manager, Black & Vernooy
                      February 27       Derek Villemez, Development Services, DPR Construction
                      March 5           Paul A. Bielamowicz, Principal, PAGE
                      April 9           Shawn Brown, Principal, Crowell Builders
                      * All speaker dates have been confirmed.
Professor:            Dr. Richard W. Jennings, FAIA is an Adjunct Professor of Architecture at The
                      University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture and former faculty
                      member of the Harvard University Graduate School of Design. He is also a
                      Senior Consultant with a New York City investment banking firm providing
                      advisory services to architecture and engineering firms in the areas of
                      valuations, mergers and acquisitions and business consulting. With more than
                      35 years of professional experience, Dr. Jennings has led large design firms
                      and managed the design and construction of numerous large-scale
                      commercial office buildings, hotels, planning and mixed-use projects. He was
                      co-founder, managing principal, president and CEO of a nationally operating
                      architectural and planning firm, and prior to co-founding that firm, he was a
                      principal and director of the architecture and technical services division of a
                      700-person firm global architecture, engineering and construction
                      management firm. A Fellow of the American Institute of Architects, Dr.
                      Jennings holds the National Council of Architectural Boards (NCARB)
                      certificate and is registered to practice architecture in multiple states. He is a
                      member of the College of Fellows of the American Institute of Architects
                      (FAIA), Project Management Institute (PMI), and the American Planning
                      Association (APA). He is a director of the Charles Moore Foundation in Austin,
                      Texas. Dr. Jennings was a founding member and researcher of both the RMJM
                      Integrated Practice Research Program and Zofnass Infrastructure
Richard W. Jennings             Managing the Design Project                     Spring 2020       Page 6


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
                           Sustainability Research Initiatives at Harvard University where he authored a
                           number of case studies and was a contributor to the research and content of
                           Infrastructure Sustainability and Design published by Routledge, 2013. Dr.
                           Jennings has also taught Professional Practice at the Rice University School of
                           Architecture. He received a Doctor of Design (DDes) degree from the Harvard
                           University Graduate School of Design, and a Master of Design Studies (MDes)
                           degree with Distinction from the Harvard University Graduate School of
                           Design, where he received the Dimitris Pikionis Award for highest academic
                           achievement. He also holds Master of Business Administration (MBA), Master
                           of Architecture (MArch) and Bachelor of Science degrees.
Contact & Hours:           Dr. Richard W. Jennings, FAIA
                           The University of Texas at Austin
                           School of Architecture
                           Email: rjenn@msn.com or rjenn@utexas.edu
                           Telephone: 512-496-6450
                           Office: GOL 2.204. Hours by Appointment
Notes:
Grading
Attendance & Participation        20%
Written Assignments               25%
Midterm Paper                     25%
Final Paper                       30%
Late work
Late work will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
Absences
Class attendance and participation is important and is therefore part of the course grade. Excused
absences are for religious holidays, illnesses, or extenuating circumstances due to an emergency.
Attendance
Regular attendance at all class meetings is expected. A student who misses class or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the professor
in advance of the absence so arrangements can be made to complete an assignment or cover the class
material within a reasonable time after the absence.
Guest Speakers
The exact dates of guest speaker appearances are subject to change. Guest speakers take time from
their day to speak to the class. Class attendance is important at all times but is essential when a guest
speaker is present.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Students are expected to comply with university policies and are encouraged to become familiar with
the resources available through the university some of which are listed below. However, students
should visit the appropriate university website for the latest the polices and resources.
Richard W. Jennings                  Managing the Design Project                     Spring 2020      Page 7


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if
you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must
cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary
action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
https://deanofstudents.arizona.edu/policies/code-academic-integrity
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Richard W. Jennings                   Managing the Design Project                   Spring 2020       Page 8


Managing the Design Project
Spring 2020
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
  • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
      Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
  • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
      week of class.
  • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
      enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University
      of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
###
Richard W. Jennings                   Managing the Design Project                   Spring 2020      Page 9
