University of Texas School of Architecture
Living Wall (In)Formatics
Fall 2018
ARC 327R, ARC 386M, LAR 388, and CRP 383
Instructor: Associate Professor Danelle Briscoe
UTSOA Living Wall, 2015
Overview
This seminar will research, design and discuss living wall systems, specifically focusing on those of
hot and dry climates. A living wall —or system of plants rooted in growing media attached to a wall
itself— holds potential environmental benefits for buildings and dense urban conditions. As such,
the course will investigate historical, contemporary and emerging methods and examples of this
alternative facade formation.
In addition, such biological systems offer data to discern and visualize multi-scalar aspects of
nature in the urban condition. Most conventional design projects and planning endeavors in the
built environment rarely monitor and report upon site performance and benefits. In fact, the
Sustainable Sites Initiative (SITES), a comprehensive rating system for developing sustainable
landscapes, acknowledges this discrepancy and encourages projects to plan for monitoring and
reporting activities. Building on its interdisciplinary roots, the course will also discuss the
performance metrics of a living wall that address topics in urban ecology, architecture, landscape
architecture, and operations and maintenance. To these ends, performance data from living walls
include physical information, such as surface temperatures, sound decibels, soil media
characteristics, irrigation use, and maintenance activities. The course will aim to examine these
factors with regard to a research and design process.


Projects
The course is divided into three projects each with a specific emphasis on a corresponding living
wall investigation: research, design and thesis.
         Project 1 Each student will research and present a contemporary living wall system.
         Templates and specific data inquiries will be provided.
         Project 2 Each student will progress through a series of focused strategies in order to
         develop a desired component and living wall system design. Students will engage hands
         on development and methodology with the Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Research
         Center
         Project 3 Each student will culminate their research and design processes. The optimal
         material logic and behavior from Project 2 will be further developed in written and
         modeled format.
Class format
         The class will typically act as a lecture and discussion group, with occasional field trip,
critique, workshop or guest lecturer. On occasion, the course will function like a hands-on, self-
directed project based seminar. The class will address fundamental theoretical issues of material
reality via representation.   Students are expected to come prepared to discuss readings and
verbally and visually present research. Presentation of work is to be expected on due date. In the
second half of the semester, student will write a short paper based on their research, living wall
design and topical thesis.
Requirements
         Class times                       2- 5pm Th, Sutton 3.114
         Office hours:                     GOL 4.134, 9am – 11am, Monday (or by appointment)
         Contact                           briscoed@utexas.edu/ 512.810.3133
Evaluation
         10%      Participation
         90%      Project          Topic                    Output
                  (20%) 1:         Research                 diagrams/presentation
                  (40%) 2:         Design                   living wall design & diagram
                  (30%) 3:         Thesis                   research abstract/diagrams


Schedule *
                               Introduction | course overview | questionnaire
        08.30. 18     W 01     Lecture: HISTORY
                               begin Project 1
                               Reading and discussion
        09.06. 18     W 02
                               Lecture: CLIMATE
                               Reading and discussion *Central Standard (2823 South Congress)
        09.13. 18     W 03
                               Lecture: TYPOLOGY
                               Site visit to LBJ Wild Flower Center
        09. 20. 18    W 04
                               Tour Guide Dr. Hans Landel, LBJWFC Conservation Ecologist
        09. 27. 18    W 05     Project 1 presentations (Group 1)
        10. 04. 18    W 06     Project 1 presentations (Group 2) | Begin Project 2
                               Reading and discussion: DESIGN
        10. 11. 18    W 07
                               Visit UTSOA Living Wall/ Talk with Marcus Hogue
                               Danelle at ACADIA conference
        10. 18. 18    W 08
                               Independent Site visit/documentation Mopac
        10. 25. 18    W 09     Work session /Fabrication production
        11. 01. 18    W 10     Project 2 Review/Presentations
                               Begin Project 3
        11. 08. 18    W 11
                               Lecture: TBD
        11. 15. 18    W 12     Individual Work session/ critiques
        11. 22. 18    W 13     HOLIDAY
        11. 29. 18    W 14     Project 3 final presentations
        12. 06. 18    W 15     Final submission of semester course work
     *subject to change as necessary with guest lecturers, field trip, etc.


References
             (A web site on Canvas provides all required assignments, reference materials and copies of the lectures.)
             Week 1 Readings
             Waldheim, Charles. “Three: Planning, Ecology, and the Emergence of Landscape”
             Landscape as Urbanism. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016, pp50-67.
             McHarg, Ian. “Nature in the Metropolis” Design with Nature. Garden City: Natural History
             Press, 1969, pp 55-65.
             Week 2 Readings
             Orff, Kate. “Scale” Toward an Urban Ecology. New York: The Monacelli Press, 2016 pp 197-
             214.
             Udeshika Weerakkody et al. “Particulate matter pollution capture by leaves of seventeen
             living wall species with special reference to rail-traffic at a metropolitan station”. Urban
             Forestry & Urban Greening. Journal 27 (2017) Elsevier, pp 173-186.
             Week6 Readings
             Cook, Robert E. “Do Landscapes Learn? Ecology’s “New Paradigm” and Design in
             Landscape Architecture” in Projective Ecology, edited by Chris reed and Nina Marie Lister.
             New York, Actar Publishers, 2014, pp 218-237.
             Week 7 Readings
             Briscoe, Danelle. 2014. “Parametric Planting: Green Wall System Research + Design using.
             BIM,” In Design Agency, Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the Association for
             Computer Aided Design in Architecture (ACADIA), edited by David Gerber, Alvin Huang
             and Jose Sanchez. Cambridge: 333–338.
             Veljko Prodanovica et al. “Optimisation of lightweight green wall media for greywater
             treatment and reuse”. Building and Environment. Journal 131 (2018) Elsevier, pp 99-107.
Hardware/Software
It is required that you have a graphically capable laptop able to run modelling and visual
programming software. Each assignment will have further defined expectations/requirements
specified. Readings will be downloadable from the class Blackboard site. The programs will also be
available on the computers in SUT Computer Lab.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused absences
will be encouraged to drop from the course. The minimum penalty for more than three unexcused
absences is a full letter drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact the instructor prior to
class if you expect to be late or miss class.
A student who is absent from a class for the observance of a religious holy day may complete the
work missed within a reasonable time after the absence, if proper notice has been given in
advance of the days to be missed. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject
to the normal academic penalties.
**All students, faculty and staff who wish to use the SOA woodshop are required to take EHS’s new on-line training
(https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ehs/class.WBX?s_course_comp=0&s_course_prefix=OH&s_course_number=0500 ) and pass a short
exam at the end. As this training is supplemental to SOA’s woodshop training, no one is excluded or grandfathered from the


requirement; both are required in order to use the woodshop’s tools and equipment. As part of our efforts to comply with this
mandate, the woodshop will soon have a card reader installed at the entrance, similar to those on Goldsmith’s and Sutton’s exterior
doors. We will thereafter keep the door to the woodshop locked (from the outside) at all times. Those who have taken the on-line
EHS training will be able to use gain access to the woodshop during operating hours by simply swiping their UT ID cards at the door;
those who have not taken the on-line training will not be allowed to enter the woodshop. NO EXCEPTIONS CAN BE MADE.
Basis of Assessment
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in
other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may
be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of
issues.
Grading for studio courses is broken into three components: 1/3 grasp (ideas combined with an
appropriate process of inquiry), 1/3 process (the consistent and rigorous development of ideas)
and 1/3 resolution (the understanding of the project and its architectural implications).
A/ A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/ B/ B- : above average
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/ C/ C- : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with
dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas. (Please note: a C or better is
required for the course to count towards the graduate student’s program of study.)
D+/ D/ D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of
presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and
knowledge base.
F : failure
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
this grade will be assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
X : (excused incomplete)
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS for absences, late work and late arrivals.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific
physical need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in
order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are
available on campus through the Services for Students with Disabilities, also found via the web at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
