                                Cultural Anthropology, Fall 2019
                        ANT 302 (30860+), MW, 9:00-10:00am, (FAC 21)
                        Dr. John Hartigan, https://twitter.com/aesopsanthro
                       Tel.232-9201; E-mail: johnhartigan@austin.utexas.edu
            Office Hours (SAC 4.158): Mon. & Wed. 2:00-3:00pm (& by appointment)
             Teaching Assistants: Christina Gonzalez, Erin Wheeler, Jimmy Beverage.
Objectives: This class has two objectives. The first is to present students with an overview of the
idea of culture and a general survey of the anthropological perspective on the realms of human
meaning. The second is to engage students in a more detailed glimpse of one broad cultural
order: modern industrialism and capitalist society. This course progresses from a basic
groundwork for cultural analysis to a more developed examination of the cultural forms that
structure our daily lives. We will conclude this course by considering how the emergence of the
postindustrial economy and the diffuse process of globalization are changing cultural identities.
Dynamics: The lectures and readings will present various aspects of cultural phenomenon, using
examples drawn from around the globe and our everyday lives. You must read the required texts
and attend class daily if you want to understand and benefit from the lectures. Section
discussions will be geared towards clarifying texts and grappling with the insights and issues
raised in lectures, readings, and films.
Grading and Course Requirements: Evaluations in this course will be based on two exams and
one ethnographic project. The first exam will cover the first seven weeks of the course, and the
second one will cover the remainder; each will represent 30% of your grade. The ethnographic
project will also account for 30% of your overall grade. Class participation (i.e. active
involvement in discussions, attendance, etc.) will count for 10% of the final grade.
Attendance Policy: Attendance for lectures is expected and is mandatory for discussion
sections. Students with two or more unexcused absences from discussions will have their final
evaluation reduced by at least one letter grade.
Books:
The Tapestry of Culture: An Introduction to Cultural Anthropology, by Rosman and Rubel.
Culture Builders: A Historical Anthropology of Middle-Class life, by Frykman and Lofgren.
Driving After Class: Anxious Times in an American Suburb, Rachel Heiman.
Additional readings will be posted on Canvas.
Class Schedule:
Week 1
August 28: Introduction.
Week 2
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 1.
September 4: Culture


Week 3
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 2.
September 9: Ethnography
September 11: Social Organization
Week 4
Readings: Tapestry, pgs 210-219; Foley, “Great American Football Ritual”; “Body Ritual
Among the Nacirema,” Miner; “Restaurants, Ideal Postmodern Institutions” and “Tipping: An
Anthropological Meditation,” in Restaurants Book.
September 16: Ritual
September 18: Ritual
Week 5
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 3 & 4.
September 23: Language & Culture
September 25: Learning Culture
Week 6
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 5.
September 30: Symbols
October 2: Symbols
Week 7
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 10 & 11.
October 7: Myth
October 9: Religion
Week 8
October 14: 1ST EXAM
October 16: Race; Readings: http://www.understandingrace.org/ (take “human variation” quiz).
Week 9 [ethnographic research topics due in discussion sections]
October 21: Kinship; Readings, Tapestry, Chapter 6
October 23: Economics; Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 8
Week 10
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 9; Culture Builders, Chapters 1-2.
October 28: Power
October 30: Industrial Society
Week 11
Readings: Culture Builders, Chapters 3-6.
November 4: Industrial Society
November 6: Industrial Society


Week 12
Readings: Driving, Chapters 1-4; “White Spatial Imaginary,” George Lipsitz.
November 11: Class Culture in the U.S.
November 13: Class Culture in the U.S.
Week 13
Readings: Driving, Chapters 5-6.
November 18: Class Culture in the U.S.
November 20: Nations and Transnational Identity
Week 14
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 13-14.
November 25: Nations and Transnational Identity
Week 15
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 12.
December 2: Artistic Dimensions
December 4: Concluding reflections.
Last Class
December 9: 2ND EXAM.


Ethnographic project: (7 pgs, due December 14th) Based on interviews and additional
observations, you will write an ethnographic analysis of a cultural setting or dynamic in Austin.
The goals are 1) to apply what you have learned about culture in this course; 2) to develop some
facility with ethnographic observation and description. You will be presented with numerous
examples of such projects over the course of the semester. As well, these projects will be the
subject of extensive consideration in the weekly discussion sections. These projects will be your
opportunity to try out this approach to social science research. Your project may be comparative,
by trying to compare one or more settings, or you could singularly focus on just one location.
Ethnographic research is assembled from an array of preliminary tasks, which will be covered
and assessed in discussion sections over the last few weeks of the term. Such preliminary tasks
include:
= Identify your cultural assumptions and orientations.
= Formulating a cultural question or frame of analysis.
= Practicing techniques of observation and interviewing.
= Identifying relevant units of analysis.
= Analyzing portions of interviews.
A detailed rubric for this assignment will be presented and discussed during a lecture session.
Use of laptops: Refrain from using mobile devices during lectures and discussion sections,
because these generally create a distraction. Limit laptop usage to notetaking for this course. If
such usage becomes a problem, requiring repeated requests to desist from such usage, your class
participation grade will be reduced to zero.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
UT Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html) Familiarize
yourself with University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of plagiarizing:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Penalties for violation of this Code can include failure of the course and University disciplinary
action.
