            Community and Social Development
                                           AFR 374C
                                         Maymester 2019
Professor: Omi Osun Joni L. Jones, Ph.D.             Teaching Assistant: Angelica Allen
jonijones@austin.utexas.edu                          aja1188@utexas.edu
                 Changes in the syllabus are expected and necessary.
“. . . globalization and immigration make Africans the subjects of an indescribable suffering.
For many Africans, immigrating signifies ameliorating their material conditions. A
contrario, filmmakers from the continent insist on the fact that the West’s economic
performance is made possible by the exploitation of immigrant and clandestine labor. . .”
                  Frieda Ekotto, Cameroonian Professor/Novelist, University of Michigan
What is Africa to me:
Copper sun or scarlet sea,
Jungle star or jungle track,
Strong bronzed men, or regal black
Women from whose loins I sprang
When the birds of Eden sang?
From the scenes his fathers loved,
Spicy grove, cinnamon tree,
What is Africa to me?
                  “Heritage,” Countee Cullen, Harlem Renaissance Poet
“Cultural identity is. . .a matter of ‘becoming’ as well as ‘being.’
                  Stuart Hall
Course Description
In this Maymester course, students will participate in social change strategies that
Ghanaians employ to strengthen their individual lives, their communities, and their
environment. These strategies include the work of art for social justice institutions, non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), and social service agencies. The course involves both
experiential and classroom learning, with an international-based service learning
component that intentionally integrates theatre for social change, community service,
academic learning, and civic engagement. Key concepts include diaspora, Africa, identity,
enslavement, “development,” and critical ethnography.


Course Objectives
As a result of this course, students should know the rudiments of ethnographic research,
understand the political construction of Africa by Western nations, and be able to
implement art as social change strategies. This course is particularly relevant for students
interested in critical race theory, identity formation, in service learning, and art for social
change.
Texts
Homegoing, Yaa Gyasi
All Other Course Readings Available On Canvas
Assignments
Reading Reports (30 points)
In small groups you will make 20-minute reports on course readings.
Each student in the group can take on one of the following tasks:
       1. Identify the argument or major idea that the writer is exploring. Cite a passage
           from the reading that encapsulates this idea.
       2. Identify and explain an important concept from the reading.
       3. Suggest how the reading specifically relates to identity formation.
       4. Connect the reading to a theory or idea discussed in class.
       5. Create an embodied way for the class to understand some aspect of the essay.
Reading Report, Group 1
Azia, Amie, Frances, Mbayi
Reading Report, Group 2
Peyton, Deja, Tia, Natalie
Reading Report, Group 3
Jacob, Kiaria, Chris, Latoya


Field Work Notebook (30 points)
In a notebook that you can carry with you throughout the day, you will document your
experiences using the following guidelines:
    1.  citational data: date, time, location, event, people present, attitude,
    2.  observant participation details,
    3.  reflections on your positionality,
    4.  challenges and discoveries encountered during fieldwork, and
    5.  questions you want to pursue.
Each entry should include each of these five items. Number each entry. There must be at least
two entries each week, for a total of six entries.
Art as Social Change Presentation (30 points)
Each student will create a 15-30-second performance that includes 1) an excerpt from
Homegoing, 2) an excerpt from at least one of the readings on Canvas, and 3) some
reflections from their fieldwork notebook. In small groups under the direction of a
graduate student, you will present a synthesis of their individual performances. Each
ensemble member must contribute text and specific embodiments to the presentation.
As the individuals become an ensemble, consider the relationship between art, identity,
and social change. Explore both verbal text, movement, and silence. What questions did
you arrive in Ghana with? What questions will you take home? These performances do not
have to be memorized. Be creative! Try something new! Allow the experience of Ghana to
inspire you!
Participation (10 points)
Students are expected to study readings carefully, be prompt for all activities, support the
success of the other students, bravely create presentations, and engage actively on each
day of the program. In addition, there may be pop quizzes over the reading material that
will contribute to your participation grade.


Course Schedule
May  28 Leave U.S.
     29 Arrive Accra, Ghana
     30 Orientation: HLG Coordinator
        Discussion: Syllabus/Agreements
        Tour: Accra
        Exercise: Family Tree
        Read: Homegoing, Yaa Gyasi
     31 Guest Lecture: Professor from the University of Ghana
        Discussion: “Art, Activism, and Ethnographic Protocols”
        Tour: Walking Tour of the University of Ghana
June 1  Scavenger Hunt; Welcome Dinner
     2  Excursion: Kumasi
     3   Return to Accra
     4  Visit: Abibigroma National Theatre of Ghana
     5  Guest Lecture: Professor from the University of Ghana
        Read: “Race Across the Atlantic: Theorizing Africa and/in the Diaspora,” in
        The Predicament of Blackness: Postcolonial Ghana and the Politics of Race,
        Jemima Pierre
        Reading Report, Group 1
     6  Visit: Botanical Gardens
     7  Guest Lecture: Professor from the University of Ghana
        Read: “Reverse Diaspora: Dissonance of Memory, Voyages of Hope, and
        Degrees of Return,” in Brazilian-African Diaspora in Ghana: The Tabom,
        Slavery, Dissonance, Memory, and Locating Home. Kwame Essien.
        Reading Report, Group 2
        Visit: African Women’s Development Fund
     8  Excursion: Torgorme
     9  Return to Accra


10 Film Night
11 Work with Ghanaian Groups
12 Work with Ghanaian Groups
   Read: “Lose Your Mother.” Saidiya Hartman (begins on p. 84)
   Discussion Leader: Angelica Allen
13 Excursion: Elmina and Cape Coast
14 Excursion Continued
15 Excursion: Kakum
   Return to Accra
16 Read: “Ewe Music and Dance,” in An African Music and Dance Curriculum
   Model: Performing Arts in Education, Modesto Amegago
   Reading Report, Group 3
   Individual Performances Complete
17  Art as Social Change Rehearsal
18 Tour: Accra Markets/Fieldwork Sites
19 Fieldwork Notebooks Due
20 Art as Social Change Presentations
   Farewell Ceremony
21 UT Students Leave Accra
22 All UT students in U.S.
