                                        Integrated Communication for Sports
                                                ADV 305S (05890) PR305S (06455)
                                                                Fall 2019
Class meets: MWF 10:00 to 11:00                                                  Office: BMC 4.430
Instructor: James Dalthorp, Jr.                                                  Office Hours: Wed 9:30 to 10:30 and by appt.
Email: jdalthorp@austin.utexas.com
Phone: 310-874-4169
TA: Reid St. John, Ryan Romero                                                    Office: TBD
Email: reidst.john@utexas.edu                                                    Office hours: TBD
          ryanromero@utexas.edu
                                                     Course Description
The course provides a foundational perspective on how brands evaluate and incorporate targeted integrated marketing
communications strategies to connect with and impact their target audiences as well as how sports organizations (leagues, teams,
tours, etc. use integrated communications to reach prospective fans and customers.
  What will I learn?
• How an integrated approach to marketing communications enables impact and efficiency compared to non-integrated approaches
• How major brands use integrated techniques and tactics to increase the effectiveness of their sports marketing efforts
• How sports advertising offers unique benefits to large brand advertisers
• How sponsorship provides an opportunity for brands to associate with popular sports, teams and athletes
• How sport organizations seek profit and use analytics together with integrated marketing communications to drive fan enthusiasm
and business results
• How sports organizations use business storytelling to maximize the effectiveness of marketing communications
  Learning Outcomes
1. Students will be able to discern whether a marketing communications effort is integrated or non-integrated
2. Students will be able to identify how unique integrated marketing techniques might fit a specific market situation
3. Students will be able to determine how sports organizations use tools like analytics to guide and determine marketing
communications and target engagement through fan messaging
4. Students will be able to build integration into various tactics that might make up a brand or sports organization campaign
5. Students will be able to identify productive narratives and then use a knowledge of business storytelling to bring those narratives
to life within a sports organization.
  How will I learn?
Through enthusiastic classroom discussions that will be a of combination of brief lectures, in class discussions, assigned readings,
study of case histories, through the personal experiences of sports industry guests. There will be short assignments and one group
project will be used to help achieve the learning outcomes. Observe and understand how our course topic is playing out in real time
will be accomplished with the use of Sports Business Journal discussions.
  Pre-requisites for the course:
University GPA of 2.25 or higher
  How to succeed in this course
Successful students in their class keep up with the readings and come to class prepared to participate in lively discussion. Your
enthusiasm and love for sports is a plus, but remember we will be looking at the course material from the perspective of a
business’s trying to thrive – a very competitive game in its own right with a great deal of strategy and nuance
                                                                       1


                                                     Course Requirements
  Required Materials
Most readings will be made available on Canvas. There is one required textbook that we will use in the second half of the course:
The Sports Strategist
Irving Rein, Ben Shields, Adam Grossman
Oxford University Press
ISBN 9780190267445 (paperback)
Copyright 2015
Sports Business Journal
Students are required to take an on-line semester subscription to Sports Business Journal within a discounted program offered
by the publication. Sign up information will be posted on Canvas
                                                      Classroom expectations
  Class Participation
Class participation is essential and ranks at the top of factors students use to define a valuable course. Class participation forms part
of your grade in this class. Credit for the 6 participation points available will be based upon the student turning in 3x5 index cards
(which students should always carry a supply of) with their name, EID the topic they contributed to and a description of the
contribution. Two points will be awarded for each appropriately completed and accepted card. We will work to make a Google doc
available to record
  Class Attendance
Attendance is required for all class meetings and contributes a potential of 4 points to your final grade. In class assignments will get a
score of zero in the case of unexcused absences. For each unexcused absence after the second instance, a student will lose one of
the available 4 attendance points. An excused absence is defined as a documented illness, documented University-related absence
(sports team travel) and religious holidays (prior notification required). Excused absence for illness requires health provider
documentation. Attendance will be taken through daily class participation. Excused absences due to sports participation can be
arranged in advance through the instructor.
  Behavior expectations
Be polite and civil. Do not create distractions. Excessive non-class related conversations or device use qualifies as a distraction.
Training for the workplace, the importance of exhibiting professional behavior.
  Assignments
     1) Approximately 10 class prep assignments based on the readings and learning tied to class topics will be given, often in the
          form of a Canvas Discussion or a Canvas Quiz (Quizzes are designed to make sure top line content is absorbed and the
          alert the instructor to areas of reinforcement. Discussions are designed to prepare students to express a variety of views
          in the upcoming class). If greater or fewer number of class prep assignments are ultimately given, the available points will be
          divided by the fewer number of assignments ultimately given.
     2) Other Class Prep Assignments include 3 (three) Sports Business Journal days which require reading a number of issues and
          submitting a written summary of 3 (three) articles prior to a class discussion. Additionally, a Bio Assignment of an individual
          is included (Quizzes are designed to make sure top line content is absorbed and the alert the instructor to areas of
          reinforcement. Discussions are designed to prepare students to express a variety of views in the upcoming class).
     3) Two group projects will be assigned. One requires students to research and analyze brand integrated efforts to market
          through sports using the Super Bowl as a vehicle. The second group project asks students to analyze an NBA franchise
          marketing situation and develop possible narratives and communications examples using practices discussed in class.
  Exams
Two (2) exams will be given, one near the middle of the term and another non-cumulative one at the end of the term. Typically,
these exams are a mix of multiple-choice questions and True/False questions, but they may contain other types of questions as well.
Each exam counts for 25% of the final grade.
  Grading for this Course
The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to which
you have done so.
                                                                       2


 Graded Elements                                                          Points possible               Percent of Total Grade
 1. C l a s s P r e p A s s i g n m e n t s                            100                             10
 2. A t t e n d a n c e                                                0                               0
       •
 3. P a r t i c i p a t i o n                                          100                             10
 4. E X A M 1                                                          200                             20
 5. E X A M 2                                                          200                             20
 6. G r o u p P r o j e c t 1                                          200                             20
 7. G r o u p P r o j e c t 2                                          200                             20
 TOTAL                                                                 1000                            100
Course Outline
      All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
      https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
      Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to note these
      changes when announced by email, Canvas Announcement, or announced in class (I will do my best to ensure that you receive
      the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
   Week        Date    Day       Class Topic                           Out of class activities         Assignments due
  1        28 AUG      W         Course overview / expectations    Reading 1: Defining Integrated
           30 AUG      F         Review reading assignment         Marketing Communications
  TOPIC 1 INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
                                                                                                       Project Teams assigned
  2        4 SEPT      W        Integrated Sports Marketing        BIO Assignment DUE                  Brands Assigned
                                Case History: Bud Light, P&G       Targeted Team Brand study           PROJECT 1 ASSIGNED
           6 SEPT       F       Managing IMC Strategic            Team Strategic Insights              QUIZ 1
                                 TOPIC 2: ADVANTAGE of SPORTS for BRAND ADVERTISERS
  3
           9 SEPT      M         Large live audiences             Reading 2: Live Sports Advertising
           11 SEPT     W         Program Integration               Introduction to
                                                                  Sports Business Journal
           13 SEPT     F         Benefits in Action                                                    QUIZ 2
                                                                      3


                TOPIC 3: BRAND USE SPONSORSHIP TO MARKET through SPORTS
4
  16 SEPT  M Sports Business Journal Day       Reading 3: Sponsorships
  18 SEPT  W Player and Team Partnerships
              “Shoe Dog” Nike Phil Knight
  20 SEPT   F Branded Content                                           QUIZ 3
5  23 SEPT M   Image Transfer + Association
   25 SEPT W   Exclusivity, Activation options
   27 SEPT F   Ambush Marketing tactics                                 PROJECT 1 DUE
   30 SEPT M   Sports Business Journal Day
6               TOPIC 4: ENDOSEMENT and CAUSE MARKETING
   2 OCT   W                                                            PROJECT 2 ASSIGNED
   4 OCT    F                                                           QUIZ 4
   7 OCT   M   Review
7                                                                       EXAM 1 prep and assessment
   9 OCT   W   EXAM I
   11 OCT F    Red River Rivalry
                                                  4


TOPIC 5: FAN ACTIVITY
8    14 OCT M                                            Reading 4: Fan Avidity
     16 OCT W
     18 OCT    F                                                                              QUIZ 5
                                  TOPIC 6: CRAFTING A DISTINCT IDENTITY
9    21 OCT    M Brand, graphics, design                 Reading 5: Sports Strategist Ch 2
     23 OCT W      Implementation and regulation of
                   the team brand identity              Team Sports Day: Wear your stuff
     25 OCT    F   The Refresh Dilemma                                                       QUIZ 6
                                TOPIC 7: STORYTELLING and NARRATIVE
10
     28 OCT M       The Nature of Stories                Reading 6: Sports Strategist Ch 3
     30 OCT W       Building characters                 Dan Jenkins, Jim Bouton, and the
                    Three act plot structure            Greatest Sports Books of All-Time
     1 NOV     F    Imagery, story, setting                                                  QUIZ 7
     4 NOV     M    Sports Business Journal Day
11
                      TOPIC 8: BUSINESS STRATEGY JUST WIN AND THE MONEY FOLLOWS
     6 NOV W        Industry Needs Revenues
     8 NOV     F    Tickets and Promotions                                                   QUIZ 8
     11 NOV M       The Analytics of “Moneyball”        Greatest Sports Films of All-Time
12   13 NOV W       Greatest Stories “Brian’s Song”
     15 NOV    F    ESPN 30 for 30 “Return to Junction”                                    QUIZ 9
TOPIC 8: SPORTS ORGANIZATION COMMUNICATIONS PLAN
     18 NOV M       Business Objectives                  Reading 7: Sports Strategist
13   20 NOV W       Marketing Objectives                 Chapter 1 Ticket Sales
     22 NOV F       Tactics and Execution                                                  PROJECT 2 DUE
                                                        Complete Reading 8:
14   25 NOV M       Target Marketing                    Sports Strategist Chapter 5        QUIZ 10
     27 NOV    W             THANSGIVING NO CLASSES
     29 NOV    F
     2 DEC     M    1969 “The Big Shootout” 50 Years     ABC Sports NCAA 100 Year Promo
15
     4 DEC     W    Review for Exam
     6 DEC     F    EXAM 2
                                                            5


                                                          Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
    Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
    there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible.
    Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you
    to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect
    you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
    As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. If you miss a
    smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be impacted significantly.
    Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
           Grade            Cutoff           Points needed
           A                94%              940
           A-               90%              900
           B+               87%              870
           B                84%              840
           B-               80%              800
           C+               77%              770
           C                74%              740
           C-               70%              700
           D                65%              650
           F                <65%             <650
 GRACE POLICY: Time-bank options
     Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate any unexpected,
     unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not have to utilize this policy, but if you
     find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to e-mail me as soon as possible to notify
     me that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy one of two ways (please choose, and let me know):
                 You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
                 You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
 Absences
     If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with the necessary
     information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with your team members; you are
     responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a class.
     Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating
     circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday, please let us
     know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be responsible
     for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
                                                                 6


      If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-down and notes
      on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise questions, you
      may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific questions you have in advance so
      that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •    You have a right to respect.
     •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
          environment.
     •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded
          or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
          and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your experience
          with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the
          quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
          and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters
are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the
Gender and Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may
make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
 Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that
      make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
      me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
      committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs
      with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
      documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
      at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
      authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
                                                                   7


      Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
      getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
      on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
      rather than later is often helpful.
      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
      we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
      improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
      workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
      in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
      (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to prevent high-risk
behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about
BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
      Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
      isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
      The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
      512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
      alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
      exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
      given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
      Fire Prevention Services office.
 •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
      sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
      committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
                                                                 8


     misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
          1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
          2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
               involved in a Title IX investigation.
          3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
     which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
     Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
     Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
     they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an
     official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options
     and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
     University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
     integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
     own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
     plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
     understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and theUniversity Honor Code which can be found at the following
     web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
     which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
     are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                                9
