Design Firm Leadership                                                                       August 19, 2018
Syllabus, Fall 2018                                                                       Subject to revision
ARC 327R | ARC 386M | ARI 350R | ARI 386M
Professor:
Dr. Richard Jennings, FAIA
Time:
Tuesdays, 2-5 pm
Room:
SUTTON 2.110
Description
This course introduces students to the management and leadership of professional design and
engineering firms including architecture, interior design, planning, architectural engineering, landscape
architecture, civil and structural engineering, MEP engineering and other types of professional service
firms operating in the AEC industry. Using lectures and case studies, written assignments, and
presentations by real-world clients and principals of successful professional firms including architecture,
structural engineering, interior design and real estate development, this course invokes a considered
inquiry into the nature and challenges of producing high quality design and engineering services within
the context of the business realities of professional practice. This course provides insights into such
issues as: industry conditions within which professional service firms operate; the process of starting,
managing and leading those firms; marketing, branding, and positioning of professional practices;
business planning and strategic decision-making for design firms; professional service firm economics
and financial management; methodologies for establishing and negotiating adequate professional
service fees, determining economic billing rates and billing multiples; budgeting and controlling firm
professional labor costs and expenses; management theory and its practical application to professional
service firms; the unique nature of design and engineering firm organizational culture; communications,
risk assessment and mitigation; succession planning, professional service firm valuation and ownership
transition.
Assignments
Assignments include assigned readings, three individual written assignments, and a final paper, project,
or case study on a topic of the student’s choice that is relevant to the course in lieu of a final
examination. The individual assignments include preparation of a business plan explaining how one
might start and lead a new design firm; development of a financial model of a professional design firm;
and an essay on design firm leadership and culture. The final project is a 10-15 page essay on a topic of
the student’s choice that is relevant to the course, or alternatively, a case study of a design firm that is in
context with the topics covered in the course.
Evaluation
Student evaluations will be based on attendance and class participation (25%), the three written
assignments (35%), and the final paper, project, or case study (40%). If you must miss a class,
assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. The UT Honor Code applies:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/spot_honorcode.php
Page 1                        © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


Textbook
No textbook is required for this course. All of the suggested readings and references for this course will
be provided in digital PDF format via the Canvas website and include numerous articles and excerpts
from texts on business planning, leadership and management of professional service firms, and other
publications such as The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice; The Next Architect and How
Firms Succeed, by James Cramer and Scott Simpson; The Trusted Advisor by David Maister, and other
relevant publications. The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice, is available via the UT library
website at: http://www.utxa.eblib.com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/patron/FullRecord.aspx?p=1443899
Syllabus
Session 1 September 4        Introduction and Overview of the Design and Construction Industry
                             Course overview, discussion of topics to be covered, assignments, grading,
                             review of syllabus, pedagogical expectations; introduction to the scope and
                             dimensions of professional design practice, leadership and management;
                             overview of the design and construction industry; industry trends; types of
                             professional design firms; career opportunities.
                             Suggested Readings: Adams, “Pearls From My Career;” Zenger, “Making
                             Yourself Indispensable.” PSMJ, “Five Leadership Skills.”
Session 2 September 11       Starting and Leading a Design Firm
                             Discussion of the process of starting and leading design firms; preparing a
                             business plan, choosing partners, capitalization and funding, hiring people,
                             organizing for success, management and leadership; forms of practice.
                             Suggested Readings: AIA 4.2, “Starting an Architecture Firm,” from The
                             Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice 15th Ed. Sahlman, “How to
                             Write a Great Business Plan” and “Business Plan Elements;” Thompson,
                             “Pathway to Principal;”
                             Guest: Milton Hime, AIA, Founder and Principal, Studio 8 Architects.
                             Founded in 2003, Studio 8 has grown to a staff of 30 people with offices in
                             Austin and San Antonio providing architecture and interior design services to
                             an impressive array of clients. The firm’s designs have been recognized by
                             the American Institute of Architects and the International Interior Design
                             Association. Design is the firm’s passion and its goal is to create notable
                             work through collaboration with its clients. (Confirmed.)
                             Assignment 1: Prepare a high-level “Strategic Business Plan” for a new
                             design firm. Due before midnight, September 25.
Session 3 September 18       Firm Identity, Strategy, and Strategic Planning
                             Introduction to categories of design firms, markets, project delivery and
                             pricing as strategy, diversification and firm planning. Discussion of strategic
                             planning; positioning design firms in a competitive environment; discussion
                             of analysis techniques.
                             Suggested Readings: AIA 4.3, “Strategic Planning for the Design Firm” from
                             The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice; Coxe, “Charting Your
                             Course;” Cramer, “Better Perpetrator Than Victim;” Russell, “Is Bigger
                             Better?”
                             Guest: Jeff Pace, Managing Director, HPI Real Estate Services. Jeff Pace
                             leads HPI’s Corporate Services group and directs the tenant representation
Page 2                       © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


                       and investment sale business lines. During his 30 years of experience in
                       commercial real estate he has negotiated leases representing over 8 million
                       square feet valued in excess of $1.4 billion, overseen the
                       acquisition/disposition of over 3 million square feet of office projects valued
                       over $600 million, development of 2.5 million square feet of Class “A” office
                       projects and provided asset management oversight for 6 million square feet
                       of office projects. (Confirmed.)
Session 4 September 25 Marketing, Pricing and Negotiating Design Commissions
                       Discussion of how design firms obtain commissions; the “Marketing
                       Telescope;” the proposal process; determining fees; and negotiating
                       agreements.
                       Suggested Readings: SMPS, “Sell-Do-Win-Business; AIA 5.1, “Marketing and
                       Public Relations” and AIA 5.2 “Seeking the Project” from The Architect’s
                       Handbook of Professional Practice; Weber, “Beyond the House.” Resources:
                       Jennings, “Marketing Terms;” McGraw-Hill, “Marketing for Architects:’
                       Scotti, “6 Ways to Make your Sales Pitch More Powerful.
                       Assignment 1, “Strategic Business Plan” due before midnight.
Session 5 October 2    Continue Marketing Discussion
                       Differentiating the design firm in the competitive professional design
                       services environment; capitalizing on the special expertise of design firm
                       founders and leaders.
                       Suggested Readings: Fisher, “Branding from the Inside;” AIA 4.4 “Firm
                       Identity and Expertise” from The Architect’s Handbook of Professional
                       Practice; “Keys to Business Development for Newly Promoted Architects;”
                       Wickersham, “Changing the Way We Practice Part I – Gehry.”
                       Guest: Kevin Blackburn, Principal, STG Design. Mr. Blackburn, a graduate
                       of Texas A&M University leads STG Design’s marketing and business
                       development group. Founded in 1976, STG Design has offices in Austin,
                       Houston, Nashville and Tucson. The firm employs an integrated approach to
                       architecture, interior design and planning. STG has designed Civic, Cultural,
                       Commercial, Education, Entertainment, Healthcare, Hospitality, Industrial,
                       Interiors, Planning and Urban Design, Religious, Residential Multi-Family and
                       Sports project types. (Exact date to be confirmed.)
Session 6 October 9    Nontraditional Design Practice
                       Discussion of alternatives to traditional design practice: consulting and
                       advising, integrated practice, designer-led design-build firms, and other
                       nontraditional practices and careers.
                       Suggested Readings: Kim, “Blue Ocean Strategy;” Nanda, “Strategy and
                       Positioning in Professional Service firms;” Wickersham, “Changing the Way
                       We Practice Part II – SHoP.”
Session 7 October 16   Introduction to Design Firm Economics
                       Discussion of design firm accounting, finance and economics; the basic
                       accounting equations; the “matching concept;” cash versus accrual
                       accounting; introduction to financial statements including key accounting
                       concepts; Income, Balance Sheets, and Cash Flow statements.
Page 3                 © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


                      Assignment 2: Prepare an “Economic model of a Professional Design Firm.”
                      Due before midnight, November 6.
                      Suggested Readings: AIA 8.1, “Financial Planning” and AIA 8.2 “Financial
                      Management Systems” in the Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice;
                      Pederson, “How to Make Money;” XL Insurance, “Getting Paid.”
                      Guest: Charles Naeve, P.E. co-founder of Architectural Engineers
                      Collaborative. Chuck Naeve is founding principal of Architectural Engineers
                      Collaborative. He has managed structural engineering projects and business
                      activities of engineering firms for over thirty years. Chuck has practiced
                      extensively in the United States, as well as internationally. Known for
                      creating architectural structures in support of building architecture, and for
                      developing sustainable building structures in harmony with the natural
                      environment, Chuck has been recognized with honorary membership in the
                      American Institute of Architects, Austin and Texas Chapters for his
                      significant contributions to the field of architecture and to the built
                      environment. (Exact date to be confirmed.)
Session 8, October 23 Design Firm Operations and Financial Performance
                      Continue discussion of the financial metrics of successful design firms;
                      performance indicators; utilization planning; the multiple concept;
                      professional compensation; project reporting and control; managing for
                      profitability.
                      Suggested Readings: AIA 8.3 “Maintaining Financial Health,” The Architect’s
                      Handbook of Professional Practice; Design Intelligence, “Metrics of
                      Success.”
Session 9 October 30  Understanding the Client & the Trusted Advisor Concept
                      Discussion of types of clients, their expectations, needs and perspectives;
                      coalescing the client and team; discussion of differing perspectives of clients
                      and design professionals; strategies and tactics for more effective client
                      management; introduction to the “trusted advisor” concept by David
                      Maister and how it can facilitate improved client relationships; discussion of
                      how architects can become more than consultants to their clients.
                      Suggested Readings: Maister “The Trusted Advisor Notes;” AIA Thinking Like
                      a Client; Maister, “Young Professionals Cultivate Friendships;” AIA 6.1,
                      “Client Relations” from The Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice.
                      Guest: Gregory J. Weaver, Executive Vice President, Catellus Development
                      Corporation. Mr. Weaver is responsible for acquisitions and development
                      throughout the country’s Southern and Midwest regions. He also currently
                      leads the Mueller airport redevelopment, a 700-acre, sustainable mixed-use
                      development in the heart of Austin, Texas; Prairie Glen Corporate Center, a
                      92-acre corporate campus and part of the 1,200-acre Glenview Naval Air
                      Station redevelopment situated 20 miles north of Chicago; and CirclePoint
                      Corporate Center, a 65-acre, 1.3-million-square-foot office project in
                      Westminster, Colorado.
                      During five years of ProLogis ownership, Mr. Weaver served as Catellus’
                      President and Managing Director and was responsible for integration and
                      branding activities, as well as providing oversight for the company’s mixed-
Page 4                © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


                       use developments nationwide and a $1 billion retail portfolio. (Exact date to
                       be confirmed.)
Session 10 November 6  Delivering Design Services
                       Overview of design firm organization and the process of project delivery
                       approaches, including traditional and alternative approaches such as design-
                       build, CM and Integrated Project Delivery.
                       Assignment 2 “Economic Model of a Design firm” due before midnight.
                       Suggested Readings: AIA 11.4, “Project Delivery Methods” from The
                       Architect’s Handbook of Professional Practice; Simpson and Cramer,
                       Revisiting the Design Enterprise Cycle.
Session 11 November 13 Design Firm Leadership and Culture
                       Discussion of people, organization and culture as applied to design firms;
                       how leaders set and influence design firm culture.
                       Suggested Readings: Pressman, “Creating Firm Culture for Innovative
                       Design;” DeLong, “When Professionals Have to Lead Chap 1-3 Outline;”
                       Goleman, “What Makes a Leader?” Also additional articles on leadership for
                       professional design services firms will be uploaded.
                       Assignment 3: Prepare a “Design Firm Leadership & Culture” Essay. Due
                       before midnight, November 27.
Session 12 November 20 Seeking Design Quality at a Profit
                       How design firms pursue quality design and yet remain economically viable.
                       Discussion of the conundrum design firms often face when attempting to
                       deliver the highest quality design solutions for their clients while keeping
                       their firms economically viable.
                       Suggested Readings: Ladendorf, “When Practicing Architects Must
                       Manage.”
Session 13 November 27 Ownership Transition
                       Discussion of the life cycle of professional firms; planning for the future;
                       leadership succession; ownership transition; buy-sell agreements; methods
                       of valuing design firms for internal transfer of ownership; and the selling,
                       merging and acquiring of design firms.
                       Suggested Readings: AIA 4.9, “Ownership Transition” from The Architect’s
                       Handbook of Professional Practice; Pressman, “Succeeding at Succession;”
                       AIA, Essential Elements of Ownership Transition.”
                       Assignment 3 “Design Firm Leadership & Culture” due before midnight.
Session 14 December 4  The Future
                       The importance of leadership in design practice; discussion of trends
                       affecting the future of design practice; innovative practice models; the
                       effect of disruptive technologies and other trends and forces affecting
                       design practice. Summary of course topics follows.
                       Suggested Readings: Zaleznik, “Leaders and Managers;” Simpson,
                       “Outrageous Predictions;” Council for Interior Design Accreditation (CIDA),
                       “Future Vision.”
Page 5                 © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


Contacts & Hours             Dr. Richard Jennings, FAIA
                             Adjunct Professor of Architecture
                             Email: rjenn@msn.com
                             Mobile: 512-496-6450
                             Office Hours: By Appointment
Assignments
                             Assignment           Topic                          Due Date
                             Assignment 1         Strategic Business Plan        September 25, 2018
                             Assignment 2         Financial Model of Firm        November 6, 2018
                             Assignment 3         Design Firm Culture Essay      November 27, 2018
                             Final Project        Final Essay, Topic of Choice   December 11, 2018
Guest Speakers (*)
                             Speaker                   Firm                           Date
                                                       Studio 8 Architecture &
                             Milton Hime, AIA                                           September 11, 2018
                                                       Interior Design
                             Jeff Pace                 HPI Real Estate                  September 18, 2018
                             Kevin Blackburn           STG Design                         October 2, 2018
                             Charles Naeve             AEC Structural Engineers          October 16, 2018
                             Gregory Weaver            Catellus Development             November 27, 2018
                             (*Speaker dates to be confirmed)
Instructor
Dr. Richard W. Jennings, FAIA is an Adjunct Professor of Architecture at The University of Texas at
Austin School of Architecture and Senior Consultant with the Environmental Financial Consulting Group
(EFCG) in New York City, the leading M&A advisory and financial consulting firm focused exclusively on
the AEC industry, providing advisory services to architecture and engineering firms in the areas of
valuations, mergers and acquisitions, internal ownership transition, peer benchmarking, and financial
consulting. Previously a Lecturer in Architecture at the Harvard University Graduate School of Design, Dr.
Jennings has more than 30 years of experience leading design firms, the design and construction of
large-scale commercial projects, and real estate development projects. He co-founded a nationally-
operating architectural and planning firm with offices in Houston and Dallas and for almost two decades
served as its managing principal, president and CEO. Prior to founding that firm, he was a Principal and
Division Director of a 700-person Houston-based global architecture, engineering and construction
Page 6                       © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


management firm. A Fellow of the American Institute of Architects, Dr. Jennings is registered to practice
in multiple states and holds a National Council of Architectural Boards (NCARB) certificate. He has been
elected to the College of Fellows of the American Institute of Architects (FAIA) and is a member of the
Project Management Institute (PMI) and other associations. He is a director of the Charles Moore
Foundation in Austin. He was a founding member and researcher of the Harvard University Integrated
Practice research initiative and the Zofnass Program for Sustainable Infrastructure, where he authored a
number of case studies. Dr. Jennings taught Professional Practice at Rice University School of
Architecture. He holds a Doctor of Design (DDes) degree and Master of Design Studies (MDes) degree
with Distinction from the Harvard University Graduate School of Design where he received the Dimitris
Pikionis Award for highest academic record. Dr. Jennings also holds Master of Business Administration
(MBA), Master of Architecture (MArch) and Bachelor of Science degrees.
University Policies
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
      • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
      • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
      • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you]
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]
Page 7                        © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning,
use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their
writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and
prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth
and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
          building.
Page 8                        © 2018 Richard W. Jennings


    •  Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
       week of class.
    •  In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
       enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
       University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    •  Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
       procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Page 9                     © 2018 Richard W. Jennings
