                            Anthropology 302, Digital Section (78520)
                                    Cultural Anthropology
                                    Summer 2019 , June 4-July 9
                                  Online at the following website:
                         https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251011
                                        Professor Circe Sturm
                                  Email: circe@austin.utexas.edu
                  Online Office Hours: Mondays, 2:00 pm – 4:00 pm via Zoom
                  Links can be found on class Canvas page and at this address:
                               https://utexas.zoom.us/j/3869961508
                          Graduate Teaching Assistant Megan McQuaid
                                   Email: mmcquaid@utexas.edu
                  Online office Hours: Tuesdays, 10:00 am-12:00 pm via Zoom
                  Links can be found on class Canvas page and at this address:
                              https://utexas.zoom.us/j/97978399240
                             Graduate Teaching Assistant Chris Farrell
                                    Email: cfarrell22@utexas.edu
                 Online office Hours: Wednesdays 1:00 pm – 3:00 pm via Zoom
                  Links can be found on class Canvas page and at this address:
                                          Course Description
By studying a range of selected topics and case studies, this online course introduces you
to the cultural diversity of human beings and will provide you with tools for thinking
critically about the classic concepts, theories and methods of cultural anthropology. Our
primary objective will be to understand both the universal manner in which all human
beings constitute themselves through culture, and the great diversity of specific cultural
expressions that have resulted from these processes. In the past anthropologists have
pursued these ends by studying distant and “exotic” peoples, the more different from “us”
the better. In this class we will critically examine this “we/they” dichotomy and how it has
shaped the discipline. We will also explore what happens when we turn the
anthropological lens back on our own societies and experiences.
                                            Course Format
This is the digital version of the introductory course in Cultural Anthropology, Anthropology
302. Unlike most other courses offered at the University of Texas, more often than not you
will be viewing this class online (from the comfort of your own home, library, or coffee joint)
rather than in-person. The official class website where you will log in to participate is as


follows: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251011. Delivered via the Internet, you are
expected to “attend” class by logging into the course site to watch video lectures and
participate in class activities, however you may do this on your own pace, as long as you
keep up with the materials required for the regularly scheduled exams. It is very important
that you treat logging into the course website the way you would treat attending a
traditional course held in a classroom. This means that you must cover all the assigned
readings and lectures as required by the examination dates. You cannot wait to take the
exams at your own pace. All students will take examinations at the same time, helping to
ensure that everyone completes the course in a timely fashion. As you watch lectures, you
will also have the opportunity to participate in instant polls and other online exercises.
These items will automatically appear as you view the lectures.
                                         Assigned Readings
       1.   Conrad P. Kottak (2018), Cultural Anthropology: Appreciating Human Diversity,
            18th edition. *Available using Connect, access code purchased at University Co-op
            or directly for the publisher (website link for Connect conveniently located on
            Canvas website for the class, along with video instructions about the Connect
            website and the unique features of the digital textbook), McGraw Hill Publishers,
            Guilford, CT.
       2.   Bourgois, Philippe (2002) In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio, 2nd
            edition. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. This is a traditional paper copy of
            the book available from the University Co-op, though digital versions are also
            available from various sources, including the publisher and online sites such as
            Kindle, Amazon, etc.
       3.   Selected Chapters and Articles, available for viewing and download on Canvas.
                                            Requirements
Because the course relies upon a blend of online lectures and exercises, reading in advance
is encouraged. Students should view the recorded lectures with questions and ideas in
mind. Students are also required to keep up with the key points presented each week. If you
are having difficulty with any of the ideas presented in class, then it is your responsibility to
chat with other students or to attend office hours, virtually or in person, with the professor
or graduate teaching assistant to clarify course materials. During regularly scheduled office
hours (see above), individual members of the teaching team are able to meet with you can
field questions on line via chat, video conferencing or by appointment, if they are not
otherwise engaged with a student. The physical location for in-person office hours is listed
above. Please use these different opportunities to your advantage.
Assignments will be due as listed in the syllabus and there will be no make-up exams,
incompletes, or time extensions, except in the case of emergencies or required university
activities. To document such occurrences, please provide a physical copy of a medical or


 other written excuse, ideally signed by someone other than a family member, to any
 member of the teaching team.
 The scale for final grades is such that 97 to 100% = A+, 94 to 96% = A, 90 to 93% = A-; 87
 to 89 = B+, 84 to 86 = B, 80 to 83% = B-; 77 to 79% = C+, 74 to 76% = C, 70 to 73%
 = C-; 67 to 69% = D+, 64 to 66% = D, 60 to 63% = D-; 59% and below = F.
 You will be evaluated and assigned a grade on the following basis:
 3 Exams                                          300 pts.
 Participation (see requirements below)           100 pts.
 Family Altar Exercise                            100 pts.
                                                  500 pts.
 Your grade is determined by your total points scored, scaled against everyone else in the
 class. No extra credit assignments are available.
 Exams will be taken online and are comprised of multiple-choice questions. They must be
 taken at the specific dates and times listed below in the syllabus. The exams are generally
 about 50% from lecture and 50% from the texts and films. Cheating will not be tolerated!
 Please be aware that we have extensive systems in place for monitoring cheating in the
 online classroom. Anyone caught cheating will be charged under the academic misconduct
 code. Please see the University Honor Code for more information:
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
 Class Participation is primarily based on interfacing with online resources, including
 consistently viewing lectures in their entirety, successfully completing instapolls in each of
 the lecture modules, and completing the online surveys. We are able to monitor how often
 you log into the class site, how active you are when using it, and how much time you spend.
 Therefore, your participation grade will be largely based on the following three features:
1.  Instapolls (successful participation in instant polling during lecture viewing) 60 points; two
    instapolls are associated with most lectures, not including films. You will see that the
    lecture topics are broken up into smaller segments, including the instapolls. The answers
    to the instapolls are to be found in viewing the relevant lecture materials. You will receive
    credit for answering the instapolls correctly.
2.  Flash Card Assignments 30 points; five flash card terms will need to be identified fully
    before each of the three exams. Detailed instructions will be provided with the terms and
    the due dates are listed in the syllabus. These key terms will help you prepare for the
    exams and keep you on track with lecture viewing. You will be able to pull the definitions
    from both lectures and assigned readings.
3.  Online surveys 10 points; before you can access course material you must complete the
    pre-course module, which contains information and resources to prepare you for online


  success and will introduce you to the class format. This module also includes several short
  surveys. You will be awarded an automatic 5 points for completing these surveys; these 5
  points will count toward your participation grade.
Piazza is an online discussion platform that the course utilizes, though your participation in
Piazza is optional and not a required component of your grade. However, many students
find that Piazza provides them with a useful forum for discussion of key concepts and
getting clarity on any questions they might have about course materials and requirements.
Access to Piazza can be found via a link on the Canvas website. The TA and Professor will
keep track of student questions as they are posted and will monitor these discussions,
providing feedback when needed.
Guidelines for the Family Altar exercise are posted on Canvas in the course documents and
become relevant when we do the unit on kinship and hold a virtual conference.
Course Flags GC CD
Technical Requirements: An internet-enabled device. All students are required to have
access to an internet-enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are
not supported. Your computer should meet the following requirements:
  -  Laptop or desktop computer
  -  2GB memory/RAM
  -  Modern operating system (macOS or Windows)
  -  Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox
Please confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting
https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html, before the start of class on June 7th, 2018.
Technical Support: technical support for students will be available through Canvas.
Any student in this course who has a disability that may prevent him or her from fully
demonstrating their other abilities should contact me personally as soon as possible so we
can discuss the necessary accommodations to ensure your full participation in the class and
to facilitate your educational opportunities. If not already registered, students with
disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
I reserve the right to amend or change the course syllabus as necessary, primarily due to
any unforeseen circumstances that may arise during the course of the semester.
However, any changes in the syllabus should not adversely affect your grade or workload.
Also, the concealed carry of handguns is not permitted in my office, located in SAC 5.122, at
any time. I will be providing oral notice of this during the first week of class. If you have any


questions or concerns, please contact me directly. Relax and enjoy the summer course!
Course Schedule
Key: K = Kottak Textbook, Respect = In Search of Respect, CNV = Article Posted on Canvas.
All readings are to be completed on the day assigned.
Date    Topic Readings
Lecture 1      Introductions and Aims of the Course Assignments: Post Image of Snack
One thing they cannot tolerate
Lecture 2      Cultural Anthropology—What? Why? How?          K Ch. 1 Exercise: Snack Day
Lecture 3      The Features of Culture and Cultural Relativism       K Ch. 2 Discuss: One
thing they cannot tolerate
Lecture 4      Language: American Tongues (Film) K Ch. 5 &
               CNV Whorf
Lecture 5      Language and Communication Cont.                      CNV Miner
        Discuss Nacirema
Lecture 6      Participant Observation and Ethnographic      K Ch. 3 Fieldwork: Methods and
Theory
Lecture 7      Race, Ethnicity and Systems of Social Inequality      K Ch.


Lecture 8       Ethnicity and Race Continued: Whiteness and          CNV McIntosh The
Invisible Knapsack
Lecture 9       Economic and Political Systems        K Ch. 7 and 8 June 19th      First Flash
Card Assignment Due
June 20th       FIRST EXAM, Online from 6:00 pm to 7:30 pm
Lecture 10      Theoretical Frames: Materialism vs. Idealism Respect Intro & Ch. 1
Lecture 11      Marxism 101 Respect Ch. 2 & 3
Lecture 12      The Interpretive Turn CNV Geertz Respect Ch. 4
Lecture 13      Theory Applied: Okie Noodling (Film)         Respect Ch. 5
Lecture 14      Gender, Sexuality and Status         K. Ch. 9
SXSW video: Imagining switching genders
Lecture 15      Families, Kinship and Descent          K Ch. 10
         Begin working on Family Altar exercise
Lecture 16      Marriage: Small Happiness (Film)      K Ch. 11
Lecture 17      Religion        K Ch. 12
Lecture 18      Ritual and Women: Texas Tavola (Film)         CNV Seriff
Respect Ch. 6
July 1st Second Flashcard Assignment Due
July 3rd        SECOND EXAM, Online from 6:00 pm to 7:30 pm
Lecture 19      The World System and Colonialism(s)           K Ch. 13 and 14 Ted Talk:
Cultures at the Edge of the World      CNV Hughes
July 8th Family Altar Assignment Due, Post online
Lecture 20      Virtual Conference on Family Altars Respect Ch. 7& 8 Lecture 21 Applied
and Activist Anthropology: Ethics      K Ch. 4


 Lecture 22 Practice Theory                     Respect Ch. 9, Finish
                                                All, incl. epilogue
 Lecture 23 What is Modernity? A Critique
                                                BB: M. Foucault
 Lecture 24 Exam Review                                   K Ch. 15
 July 10th  Third Flash Card Assignment Due
July 11th   THIRD EXAMINATION, Online from 6:00 pm to 7:30 pm


1

2

3

4