                        U.S. MASCULINITIES
                    AMS 370/WGS 335                                  Professor:         B. Alex Beasley
                    Spring 2020                                                         BUR 402
                    Unique #: 31180/45030                                               beasley@austin.utexas.edu
                    Burdine 436A                                     Office Hours:      Tuesdays & Thursdays,
                    9:30am – 11:00am T/Th                                               3:30-4:30pm
                                                                                        Wednesdays, 12:30-1:30pm
                                                                                        or by appointment
What does it mean to be a man? Hiding in plain sight, the idea of masculinity is often taken for granted in
American culture. Whereas femininity is discussed at length in the media and popular culture—through
national debates about “leaning in,” for instance, or girls’ and women’s struggles with body image—
masculinity is rarely given the same attention. Yet masculinity, like femininity, is constructed by cultural ideas
about sex, gender, class, and race and has changed dramatically over time. Moreover, ideas about manhood and
masculinity have shaped American political, economic, and cultural history in profound ways.
This course explores varied ideas about masculinity in the U.S. from the nineteenth century through the
present. We will focus on four primary questions: How have the meanings of manhood changed over time?
How have ideas about manhood and manliness affected the history of work in the U.S.? How have ideas about
masculinity impacted U.S. international relations? And how do ideas of masculinity intersect with ideas about
race, class, and sexuality? Through these questions, we will consider how masculinity relates to ideas about
violence and self-sufficiency. We will engage with interdisciplinary literature in history, American Studies,
urban studies, gender studies, and anthropology to answer these questions.
Required Materials
     • A required course reader is available for purchase at Jenn’s Copies (2518 Guadalupe).
     • Leslie Feinberg, Stone Butch Blues (1993)
               o The book is now out of print, but you can find it used at the bookstore, at PCL, used online, or
                    download a free PDF at www.lesliefeinberg.net
Course Format
This is a discussion seminar, and we will spend most of our time discussing the assigned readings. Occasionally, I will
give brief lectures to provide a historical overview and place the readings into context. However, the emphasis in each
class session will be on discussion of both the assigned reading and primary materials that we will examine together in
class. Because of this format, it is essential that you complete all of the assigned reading each week. If you have
concerns about keeping up with the reading, please get in touch with me immediately.


The aim of this course is help you to think historically and analytically. We will work to figure out what we are able to
know about the past; which sources can help us to get at that knowledge; and what the limits and silences of various
types of sources might be. At the same time, we will consider how the authors we read construct arguments, and we will
critically evaluate the persuasiveness of these arguments. Ultimately, you will be working out the tensions inherent in
thinking through how the past can—and should—matter in the present.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this course, students will:
      1. have a deeper knowledge of the history of gender and masculinity in the United States.
      2. be able to understand and articulate the ideas and perspectives of historical actors.
      3. have a greater understanding of how historians construct arguments based on historical research.
      4. be able to evaluate primary source evidence in relation to secondary sources.
      5. be able to construct an original argument from an evaluation of primary source evidence.
Flags
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you in the
process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a
question, problem, or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
This course also carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in
an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity
to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established
by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Attendance and Participation
You are expected to attend every class and to come prepared. Class sessions will primarily involve discussion of the
assigned texts, and if you are absent or unprepared, you will not be participating fully in the course and it will adversely
affect your grade. You are expected to be an active participant in the class, which means meaningfully contributing to
classroom discussions. If you have concerns about classroom participation, please come discuss it with me – we may be
able to make modified arrangements if speaking up in class is challenging for you.
You must bring the readings with you to class each day (book or course packet).
If you are going to be absent, you must notify me by email, in advance if possible. If you need to miss class for medical
or religious reasons, your absence will be excused as long as you notify me. By UT-Austin policy, you must notify me
of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
All documentation for excused absences is due at the latest one week after the date of the absence.
                                                                                                                             2


If you have three unexcused absences, your final course grade will be lowered by 1/3 letter grade for each subsequent
absence (i.e. a final grade of an A- becomes a B+ if you have four unexcused absences, or a B if you have five). Please
note that excessive tardiness will also affect your grade.
Laptops may be used for notetaking only. Please do not have your cell phone out during class. (If you are expecting an
emergency call or otherwise need to have your phone available during class, please let me know.)
Students adding the course after the first meeting must make up missed assignments. Please contact me immediately in
person or via email to make up missed work.
I prefer to communicate by email. I will be communicating to the class via email throughout the semester, and I will be
using only your UT email address unless you instruct me otherwise. Please make sure that your UT email address is
working and that your mailbox has space. You must check your UT email daily. You are responsible for all
communications sent via email.
Assignments and Grading
     • Attendance and Class Participation                                     15%                          ongoing
     • Primary Source Analysis (3-5 pages)                                    20%                          DUE 2/20 11:59p
     • Synthesis Essay (5-7 pages)                                            20%                          DUE 3/12 11:59p
     • Lead Group Discussion                                                  5%                           ongoing
     • Final Research Project                                                 40%
               o Proposal & Bibliography (15%)                                                             DUE 4/16 11:59p
               o Research Paper (10-12 pages) (20%)                                                        DUE 5/14 11:59p
               o Class Presentation (5%)                                                                   5/5-5/7
Your attendance and class participation grade depend on your coming to class prepared and participating in discussion.
We may also do occasional in-class journaling and reading response exercises that will count toward this part of your
grade.
We will discuss your two short papers (the primary source analysis and the synthesis essay) in class. Your final research
paper will be a 10-12 paper on a topic relevant to masculinity in the U.S. We will discuss how to choose a topic more
thoroughly in class. You must use at least two primary sources, two secondary sources (not from the course syllabus),
and two in-class readings to write this paper. You will present your research to the class during the last week of the term.
All papers should be submitted electronically via the class Canvas site.
You need to secure an excuse from me at least 3 days before the due date if you have a legitimate reason to turn in
work late. Unexcused late work will lose 1/3 of a letter grade per day late and will receive a failing grade after 5 days.
No extensions will be granted for more than 3 days beyond the original due date except in the most extreme
circumstances.
Lateness policy for the Final Research Paper: Your research paper is due on May 14 by 11:59pm. Unless you have
prior authorization from me to turn it in late, for each hour that your paper is late, you will be deducted 1/3 letter grade.
                                                                                                                              3


Grading Guidelines
We will discuss writing expectations clearly and thoroughly in class before the first assignment is due. In general, you
should strive for the following in your essays:
      • Your essay should not simply summarize the material but analyze it.
      • You should have a clear and debatable argument.
      • You should clearly use evidence from your sources.
      • You should demonstrate critical thinking in your writing.
      • Your communication should be clear and grammatically correct.
      • You must follow Chicago style for citations of your sources.
                                                        Grade Scale:
                      A 4.0 (93-100)                                                     C 2.0 (73-76)
                     A- 3.67 (90-92)                                                   C- 1.67 (70-72)
                     B+ 3.33 (87-89)                                                   D+ 1.33 (67-69)
                       B 3.0 (83-86)                                                     D 1.0 (60-63)
                     B- 2.67 (80-82)                                                   D- 0.67 (60-62)
                     C+ 2.33 (77-79)                                                F 0.00 (59 and below)
                          A: Exceptional; shows mastery of the material and fresh, original insight.
                 B: Above average mastery of material; few grammatical mistakes; interesting argument.
                             C: Adequate comprehension of material; some grammatical errors.
                           D: Failure to adequately understand material; many grammatical errors.
                     F: Lacking basic understanding of course material or failure to fulfill assignment.
University Resources and Policies
I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-6222, http://www.uwc.utexas.edu.
The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis.
Students who are found guilty of academic dishonesty will fail the course and be reported to Student Judicial Services.
Plagiarism occurs if you represent as your own work any material that was obtained from another source, regardless of
how or where you acquired it. For examples of plagiarism, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_plagiarism.php.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                                                                                                            4


Course Outline
** For the page numbers on which you can find a particular reading, refer to your course packet’s table of contents.**
Week 1: What Makes a Man?
   • T 1/21: Welcome
   • Th 1/23
             o Reading:
                    § Eva Cherniavsky, “Body,” from Keywords for American Cultural Studies
                    § “Introduction,” pp. 1-14 & “Violence” from Rebecca M. Jordan and Katrina Karkazis,
                         Testosterone: An Unauthorized Biography
                    § Anne Fausto-Sterling, “Why Sex Is Not Binary: The Complexity Is More Than Cultural. It’s
                         Biological, Too.” New York Times October 25, 2018.
Week 2: Doing Masculinity
   • T 1/28
             o Reading:
                    § Jack Halberstam, “Gender,” from Keywords for American Cultural Studies
                    § C.J. Pascoe and Tristan Bridges, “Exploring Masculinities: History, Reproduction,
                         Hegemony, and Dislocation,” in Exploring Masculinities: Identity, Inequality, Continuity,
                         and Change
   • Th 1/30
             o Reading:
                    § Christopher Castiglia, “Interiority,” from Keywords for American Cultural Studies
                    § R.W. Connell, “The History of Masculinity,” from Masculinities
                    § Michael Kimmel, “The Birth of the Self-Made Man,” from Rachel Adams and David
                         Savran, The Masculinity Studies Reader
Week 3: Masculinity & Race
   • T 2/4
             o Reading:
                    § Roderick A. Ferguson, “Race,” from Keywords for American Cultural Studies
                    § “Introduction” pp. 1-9 & “Color: Slavery, Freedom, and Ancestry” from Martha Hodes,
                         White Women, Black Men: Illicit Sex in the 19th-Century South
   • Th 2/6
             o Reading:
                    § “Murder: Black Men, White Women, and Lynching” in Hodes, White Women, Black Men
Week 4: Masculinity & Capitalism
   • T 2/11: CLASS MEETS AT THE HARRY RANSOM CENTER
             o Reading:
                    § NONE
                                                                                                                      5


   •    Th 2/13
            o Reading:
                    § David F. Ruccio, “Capitalism,” from Keywords for American Cultural Studies
                    § “Domestic Life in the Diggings” from Susan Lee Johnson, Roaring Camp: The Social World
                        of the California Gold Rush
Week 5: Masculinity & Empire
   • T 2/18
            o Reading:
                    § Shelley Streeby, “Empire,” from Keywords for American Cultural Studies
                    § “‘Teaching Our Sons to Do What We Have Been Teaching the Savages to Avoid’: G.
                        Stanley Hall, Racial Recapitulation, and Neurasthenic Paradox” in Gail Bederman,
                        Manliness and Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and Race in the United States,
                        1880-1917
   • Th 2/20
            o Reading:
                    § “Theodore Roosevelt: Manhood, Nation, and ‘Civilization,’” in Bederman, Manliness and
                        Civilization
            o PRIMARY SOURCE ANALYSIS DUE
Week 6: Queer Masculinities
   • T 2/25
            o Reading:
                    § Siobhan B. Somerville, “Queer,” from Keywords for American Cultural Studies
                    § “Trade, Wolves, and the Boundaries of Normal Manhood” from George Chauncey, Gay
                        New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890-1940
   • Th 2/27
            o Reading:
                    § “The Forging of Queer Identities and the Emergence of Heterosexuality in Middle-Class
                        Culture” from Chauncey, Gay New York
Week 7: Masculinity & Empire
   • T 3/3
            o Reading:
                    § Sarah Steinbock-Pratt, “It Gave Us Our Nationality: US Education, the Politics of Dress and
                        Transnational Filipino Student Networks, 1901-45,” from Stephan F. Miescher, Michele
                        Mitchell, and Naoko Shibusawa, Gender, Imperialism and Global Exchanges
   • Th 3/5
            o Reading:
                    § “Like a Boy of Twelve” from Naoko Shibusawa, America’s Geisha Ally: Reimagining the
                        Japanese Enemy
                                                                                                                 6


Week 8: Masculinity & Race
    • T 3/10
           o Reading:
                    § Norman Mailer, “The White Negro” (1957)
                    § James Baldwin, “The Black Boy Looks at the White Boy Norman Mailer” (1961)
                    § “The White Race and Its Heroes” from Eldridge Cleaver, Soul on Ice (1968)
    • Th 3/12: NO CLASS
           o SYNTHESIS ESSAY DUE
Week 9
    • Tu 3/17: SPRING BREAK
    • Th 3/19: SPRING BREAK
***NOTE: AFTER BREAK WE WILL READ STONE BUTCH BLUES IN ITS ENTIRETY. YOU MIGHT
WANT TO GET A HEAD START OVER BREAK SO YOU DON’T FALL BEHIND.
Week 10: Masculinity & Capitalism
    • T 3/24
           o Reading:
                    § “Are You Man Enough? Sixties Breadwinner Liberalism” from Robert Self, All in the
                        Family: The Realignment of American Democracy Since the 1960s
    • Th 3/26
           o Reading:
                    § “A Strange But Righteous Power: The Breadwinner Conservatism of Forgotten Americans”
                        from Self, All in the Family
Week 11: Queer Masculinities
    • T 3/31
           o Reading:
                    § Leslie Feinberg, Stone Butch Blues, Chapters 1-13
    • Th 4/2
           o Reading:
                    § Leslie Feinberg, Stone Butch Blues, Chapters 13-26
Week 12: Masculinity & Race
    • T 4/7
           o Reading:
                    § “Preface” and “Dreams Deferred: The Patterns of Punishment in Oakland” from Victor Rios,
                        Punished: Policing the Lives of Black and Latino Boys
    • Th 4/9
           o Reading:
                    § “Proving Manhood: Masculinity as a Rehabilitative Tool” from Rios, Punished
                                                                                                             7


Week 13: Queer Masculinities
   • T 4/14
           o Reading:
                    § “Rape, Race, and the Violent Prison” from Regina Kunzel, Criminal Intimacy: Prison and
                        the Uneven History of Modern American Sexuality
   • Th 4/16
           o Reading:
                    § “Lessons in Being Gay” from Kunzel, Criminal Intimacy
           o RESEARCH PROPOSAL DUE
Week 14: Masculinity & Empire
   • T 4/21
           o Reading:
                    § “Introduction” & “The Vietnam War Story” from Kathleen Belew, Bring the War Home:
                        The White Power Movement and Paramilitary America
   • Th 4/23
           o Reading:
                    § “Race War and White Women” from Belew, Bring the War Home
Week 15: Masculinity & Capitalism
   • T 4/28
           o Reading:
                    § “Introduction” & “Resentment’s Roots” from Arlene Stein, The Stranger Next Door: The
                        Story of a Small Community’s Battle Over Sex, Faith, and Civil Rights
   • Th 4/30
           o Reading:
                    § “Angry White Men and Women” from Stein, The Stranger Next Door
Week 16
   • T 5/5: Research Presentations
   • Th 5/7: Research Presentations
                                      FINAL PAPER DUE 5/14 11:59p
                                                                                                             8
