COURSE 350R / 368R/386 M/388R THEORY AND PRACTICE OF URBAN DESIGN
THE NATURE OF PUBLIC SPACE
INSTRUCTOR: BARBARA HOIDN
        Hannah Arendt herself acknowledged architecture in a famous 1964 interview: she starts by
        observing that a central problem of the modern world is that nobody cares any longer what the world
        looks like.
        INTERVIEWER: "World" understood always as the space in which politics can originate?
        ARENDT: I comprehend it now in a much larger sense, as the space in which things become public,
        as the space in which one lives and which must look presentable. In which art appears, of course. In
        which all kinds of things appear.
Space is empty. Its emptiness leaves things open.
Public space symbolize the social contract amongst citizens, between the citizens and the city´s
administrative representatives. Beyond the city limits the wider public space is expression of a
collective cultural achievement and economy. It summarizes parks, accessible landscapes, public
infrastructure, public transportation.


The way public space is used and valued constitutes individual and common values.
How do contemporary planners, architects, politicians, and artists currently assess the significance
of public space for civic democratic developments?
Public space used to be constituted by intentional design reflecting a political form of government
and economy. The design resulted in politically classifiable typologies and styles.
However, public space in a city´s map is no longer defined in the traditional sense by streets,
squares and green spaces enclosing public space as the direct negative form of the built volumes.
It is not only created by those interior spaces that Giambattista Nolli identified in 1748 as publicly
accessible spaces, it is not only found in the often cited arcades of the 19th century.
Since the early 20th century public space meant primarily the investment in transportation
infrastructure, hospitals, sports stadiums and shopping centers.
The non-programmed patches of grass in modern housing areas were mistaken for public or half
public space and therefor ended without use and life.
From the 1990ies onwards, neoliberal tendencies and privatization added forms of simulated public
life in gated communities and controlled malls and commercial areas.
Today, the internet and its selective public audience can be added to the list of public space.
The question of how architecture can produce “public spaces” isn’t simply a problem of naïve
benevolent modern architecture vis-à-vis neo-liberal privatization but firstly of the deconstruction of
the place and the home and secondly of the forces external to architecture that are interwoven in
this process.
The home is no longer simply a place or a dwelling but a story, a narrative, a sense of belonging; it
appears as a desire and search for new destinations rather than a place in the past or place of
origin. It is closely linked to the individual work situation and personal life plan. Sharing starts at
home.
On the other hand, space appears not as an object but as a process: Space is the mediator
between mental and social activities and is thus conceived as a social product.
What are the public spaces of modern life?
The latest reconquest of public space as a political sphere in the Arabic world, in Eastern Europe,
in Turkey, in Spain, in the USA, brought the relevance of streets, squares or parks to everyone´s
consciousness. The mass demonstrations on the streets of Leipzig and Berlin, the Boulevard El
Habib Bouruiba, on Tahir Square in Cairo or on Maidan Square in Kiew, in Taksim Gezi Park in
Istanbul, in Zucotti Park in New York or on Florissant Avenue in Ferguson have in some cases lead
to the demise of totalitarian regimes, in others to the assertion of civil rights, in short: to a global
political weaponizing of public space. There is a unifying international agreement.


Undoubtedly, public space is a memorable characteristic of a city or town, or any polis-like
community tolerant enough to allow freedom of expression and political opposition.
There is an international curiosity to “copy and paste” habits and customs from other cultures to
one´s own cultural context to underline the polyglot nature of the contemporary city.
The expectations of public space change perpetually and are currently expanded by new modes of
uses, new means of transport, service and communication.
Unlike in the first Greek “politi” the contemporary public space is of course not any longer
understood as the built architectural pinnacle of society in the form of an amphitheater, temple,
stoa, stadium or “mall”.
Clearly, the contemporary focus is not on the architectural properties of any one building in
isolation programmed for public spectacles, but rather on an ensemble of buildings as the site of
civic space, or more likely, on a community as a whole as a locus of civic-architectural experience.
It's in this sense that one relates to architecture not as the aesthetic spectator of particular products
of architectural virtuosity, but something closer to the relation between a citizen and his/her "polis."
If the effect of an ensemble of architectural creation is not the constitution of some kind of "polis,"
at least ideally, then the idea of architecture as a source of "citizenship" is a hollow one.
Thus, the contest for public space and its design in modern society should be discussed on three
levels: politically, economically and socio-culturally
The seminar will explore physical public spaces and phenomena of virtual public space.
      1        Significant public space concepts of Western Culture transformed over time (world
               cities)
      2        Significant public space concepts of Asian Culture transformed over time (world cities)
      3        Revisiting public space concepts of “the heroic modern international period” 20th
               century: Architecture and Landscape
      4        The impact of contemporary artists in the Public Space
      5        Recent case studies: International administrative agendas for Public Space
      6        Fight for Rights_ The Civil Movements and Mass Events
      7        Virtual Public Space: Physical co-work-live projects by the Silicon Valley companies
      8        Shared spaces, new programs
               Social and political implications and impacts on urban design
COURSE ORGANISATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
Students will give two presentations in the class during the semester. Selected readings will
supplement the seminar and will be discussed in the class


CLASS MEETINGS:
     Tue and Thu
     9:30 -11:30 am
     WMB 4.118
     First day of class is THU Jan 24, 2019
EDUCATIONAL OBJECTIVES:
A chronological approach to the history and theory of Public Space helps to reveal certain
permanent phenomena inherent to the development of cities and ‐ over the course of time‐
redundant patterns of and reasons for change.
An encyclopedic knowledge of the history of cities and related cultural theory is a prerequsite for
independent research in Urban Design; to obtain a critical opinion and to contribute to
contemporary urban design debate both practically and theoretical
EVALUATION & ACADEMIC POLICY
All required work and the presentations must be submitted on time. Late work will be reviewed at
the discretion of the instructor. The student´s success at developing ideas and concepts, depth of
redaing, epth of presentation, participation in class discussion and a demonstration of reiterative
comprehensive working process are the major components of the student´s evaluation. Four
unexcused absences can constitute grounds for removal from the course.
An incomplete (I) is assigned as a temporary defrement of a final grade, and is assigned at the
discretion of the instructor because of legitimately unavoidable and extenuating circumstances.
Attendance is mandatory and, please, be on time.
Classes will start promptly at 9:30 am. If you miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in ordre to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
GRADE CRITERIA AND GUIDELINES :
20 % attendance
20 % discussion
60 % presentations (2x)
Bibliography:
Lefebvre, Henri The Production of Space (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 1991): 68-168.
Baudrillard, Jean “The Evil Demon of Images” in The Continental Aesthetics Reader, ed. Clive
Cazeaux (London: Routledge, 2000): 444.


Hannah Arendt, The Human Condition (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1958)
Jacobs, Jane. The Death and Life of Great American Cities, 1961
Mitscherlich, Alexander The Inhabitability of our Cities,1965
Guy Debord, The Society of Spectacle, 1967, 1995
Frampton, Kenneth. 1979. "The Status of Man and the Status of his Objects: A Reading of The
Human Condition." In Hannah Arendt: The Recovery of the Public World, ed. Melvyn A. Hill. New
York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0312360711
Sennett, Richard The Fall of Public Man, 1977
John Friedmann, Planning in the Public Domain, Princeton University Press, 1987
Harvey, David Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to the Urban Revolution, Verso, 2012
Keen, Andrew, The Internet is not the answer, Atlantic 2015
Ed. Hoidn, Barbara, Demopolis_The Right to Public Space, 2016 Park Books
