                        J362F / Journalism Portfolio / Unique #: 73355
                                       Summer 2019
Meeting time: Mon-Friday 12:30-2 p.m. Meeting place: BMC 3.208
Instructor: Michael Pearson, Lecturer in Journalism.
Email: mchl.pearson@gmail.com Twitter: @mapearson55 Office: Journalism Bullpen
Cell Phone: 512-954-5017
Office hours: Mondays and Wednesdays 11:30 a.m.-12:30 p.m. Location TBD. And by
appointment. Also, I am free to hang around as needed after most classes.
Course descriptions and objectives
This portfolio class simulates a newsroom experience as you polish newsgathering skills and
journalistic values across all media: print, broadcast and on-line. You will bounce ideas and seek
feedback from classmates and your instructor, to produce and refine two publishable/broadcast-
worthy multimedia news packages which will be posted on your own portfolio site.
Objectives
At the end of the course, you
    •   Will be able to gather information, images and sound for use in online and digital formats
    •   Will be able to generate newsworthy story project ideas
    •   Will apply the best practices for producing digital journalism stories
    •   Will be able to use appropriate reporting and production tools
    •   Will have created a professional online portfolio, which demonstrates your ability to
        integrate multimedia storytelling elements into each assignment
        Required Texts and other materials
            •   Read the Austin American-Statesman and the Daily Texan every day, and keep up
                with the news generally
            •   AP Stylebook, online Recommended
            •   Broadcast News & Writing Stylebook
Classes
The class should be viewed as a newsroom at a professional news organization. I am your editor.
Your colleagues are your fellow student journalists. You will share your knowledge and opinions
about campus, local, regional, national and international stories worth reporting and writing. You
also will share your knowledge of working in different mediums: writing and editing for print
and online journalism; video and video production and editing (where applicable); audio and
audio production and editing (where applicable); and creation and development of your unique
portfolio site using the content produced in this class and elsewhere.


Attendance
Consistent and prompt attendance and participation are critical in your preparation to become a
professional. Therefore, class attendance is required.
Labs and Equipment
Open lab times for working on your project will be available in the Digital Media Labs on the
fourth floor of the CMA, or the PCL media lab on the ground floor.
Camera, video and audio equipment may be checked out in HSM 2.102. HSM is on the other
side of the CMA building. https://moody.utexas.edu/technology
Other Resources
     1. Lynda.com. A website of video tutorials on a vast array of techniques for video and
         audio, as well as Excel and lots more. Is available to you. It’s free to us on the UT
         campus. Try this URL:
         https://sites.utexas.edu/oe/ut-staff-professional-development/lynda-com-ut-portal/
     2. http://transom.org/ This is a free site that provides detailed explanations of myriad of
         topics regarding recording audio. Of particular interest is the section on various
         techniques.
Deadlines
In the real world, there are few valid excuses for late assignments and missed deadlines. J362F is
a training course and we expect you to be organized and meet deadlines. Part of what you’ll learn
in here is time management.
Story pitches
One of the traits of a great reporter is finding good story ideas, rather than relying on
assignments from editors. In this class, I’ll help you develop this key aspect of reporting. The
important thing is for you to begin thinking 24/7 about good story ideas. Some of the best ideas
will come to you when you’re not looking for them!
On pitch days, you’ll come prepared with a strong story pitch and a backup. Like in a news
meeting in working newsroom, we – together - will select which story idea is most newsworthy
and workable with your student colleagues offering suggestions and informational leads. The
entire class is expected to weigh in and contribute questions, perspectives, suggestions, leads.
This will help everyone sharpen their focus and come up with terrific stories. This level of
engagement will be a major factor in your class participation grade. We are all in this together!
Submit them to Canvas before class. You’ll pitch your story idea and we’ll discuss.


In the field
If you run into roadblocks that are beyond you -- or you are unsure how to handle a situation --
call your professor/editor. If you find out that your story is taking an unexpected turn, CALL ME
AND LET ME KNOW and ask for guidance. Don’t assume you can do a story that I have not
approved. You may get a 0 for that assignment.
News package
Each news package must include these elements:
        1.  A text story
        2.  Photos to accompany the story
        3.  A video and/or audio component (preferably a complete story)
        4.  Tweets and Facebook postings
Print Story
Each print story must include these elements:
        1.  Three sources
        2.  Photos to accompany the story
        3.  600 to 800 words*
        4.  Tweets or Facebook posting
Online Story
Each online story must include these elements:
        1.  You being creative
        2.  Video or photos
        3.  Must have a writing component
        4.  Must be promoted via social media
Your news packages will be posted to your online portfolio site.
You will have 5-10 minutes to present your work in class. So, make sure you have posted before
class.
General grading
Plus-minus grading will be used for this course. A = 94-100 A- = 90-93 B+ = 87-89 B = 84-86
B- = 80-83 C+ = 77-79 C = 74-76 C- = 70-73 D+ = 67-69 D = 64-66 D- = 60-63 F = 0-60


Project 1 (30% of final grade)
Story Idea/Pitch = Complete/Incomplete
Print Story = 10 percent
PKG, 1st Version = Complete/Incomplete
Final PKG 20 percent
Project 2 (50% of final grade)
Story Idea/Pitch = Complete/Incomplete
Print Story = 10 percent
PKG, 1st Version = Complete/Incomplete
Final PKG = 40 percent
Final Portfolio (10% of final grade)
Attendance/Class Participation (10% of final grade)
This grade will be judged on attendance, keeping your editor informed on assignment progress
and – this is important – your engagement in class when discussing story ideas, pitches and
suggestions offered by you and your colleagues.
NOTE: Each of the five assignments – Project 1 Print Story, Project 1 Final PKG, Project 2
Print Story, Project 2 Final PKG and Final Portfolio – will be graded using a point-based rubric.
Story pitches and first version PKGs will not be graded. Presentation and completion of these
assignments under deadline will be considered into your class participation grade.
Deadlines
Story 1
Pitch (orally presented in class): Tues., 7/16
Print Story: Mon., 7/22
Package (PKG with audio/video, first effort): Tues., 7/23
Final (Revised) PKG: Thurs., 7/25
Story 2
Pitch (orally presented in class): Mon., 7/29
Print Story: Wed., 7/31
Package (PKG with audio/video, first effort): Tues., 8/6
Final (Revised) PKG: Fri., 8/9
Web Portfolio
Initial Design & Set-Up: Mon., 8/12
Final Portfolio Presentations (in class): Mon., 8/12; Tues., 8/13; Wed., 8/14
Final Day of Class
Final Thoughts: Thurs., 8/15
Since this class will simulate a working newsroom, most time in class will be spent working


on your stories. I will be your editor working with each of you one-on one. There may be
some lecture time but it will be minimal. We will have presentations by other specialists to
help you do your best work.
Social media
If you don't have one, please create a Twitter account; this course relies heavily on social media
interaction. (See p. 1 for our Twitter handles and follow @utjschool.) You’ll be expected to
Tweet and FB links to your story.
Facebook groups to join
https://www.facebook.com/groups/texasjournalism/
Use of Canvas for this Class
In this course, Canvas — a Web-based course management system with password-protected
access at http://canvas.utexas.edu —is used to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, etc.
Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-
mail address. You should check your email regularly and frequently—to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your email address at University of Texas Honor
Code
https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior


permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University.
For information on academic integrity and plagiarism, see
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Students with Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's
Office in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized
services are available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities.
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Attendance University accepted exceptions
Attendance is part of the grade for this course. Only medical emergencies authenticated with a
doctor’s note or family bereavement confirmed by a signed letter from one of your parents are
excusable absences.
Family reunions, birthdays/anniversaries, etc., or holiday travel are not excusable absences from
this class. If you will miss a class for reasons of religious or military observance you must let us
know WELL IN ADVANCE see UT policy below, not the day before. You will still need to get
assignments in a day before or after the due date. Plan ahead.
Absence for military service
In accordance with section 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code, a student is excused from
attending classes or engaging in other required activities, including exams, if he or she is called
to active military service of a reasonably brief duration. The maximum time for which the
student may be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board as
"no more than 25 percent of the total number of class meetings or the contact hour equivalent
(not including the final examination period) for the specific course or courses in which the
student is currently enrolled at the beginning of the period of active military service." The
student will be allowed a reasonable time after the absence to complete assignments and take
exams. Policies affecting students who withdraw for military service are given above.
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html


Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside
when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following
policies regarding evacuation:
o Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
    nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
o If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
o In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
    Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
    the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Grace Policy: Time-bank options
Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate any
unexpected, unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not
have to utilize this policy, but if you find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I
encourage you to contact me as soon as possible to notify me that you are using our grace policy.
You may use this policy one of two ways (please choose, and let me know):
    • You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
    • You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
Absences
If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team
with the necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in
communication with your team members; you are responsible for letting both us and your team
know if you cannot make it to a class.
Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for
this absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if
applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a
run-down and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while
you were gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting
to discuss. Email specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our
time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
    • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    • You have a right to respect.
    • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.


    •   You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
        improve your learning environment.
    •   You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
        shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
        with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
        overwhelming.
    • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
        others. • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy
        that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
        someone is excluded.
    • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each
        other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender
pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you
use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite
your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary
action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Standards of
Conduct and Academic Integrity principles.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution.
Religious Holy Days
Please notify me at least fourteen days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day.
If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment or a project in order to observe a


religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your
needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644
(video phone).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning
how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support at the Counseling and Mental
Health Center.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please call 512-471-3614 or drop in for a visit at JES A332.
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a
culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Additional Services for Students
University Writing Center
Libraries
ITS


Student Emergency Services
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. You can also submit a report online at the
BCAL web site. Your report can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Campus Safety and
Security.
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
        re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
        The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at:
The office of Emergency Preparedness provides information on safety apps for your mobile
device, emergency preparedness manual, and a guide for surviving an active shooter situation.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
        have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more


information about reporting options and resources, visit the Title IX Office web site or contact
them by email at titleix@austin.utexas.edu
                                            -30-
