                 ME 338 Syllabus - Summer 2020
Lecture:
MWF 2:00 pm – 4:00 pm
Instructors:
Prof. Michael Cullinan
Office: ETC 4.154
Phone: (512) 471-0262
Email: Michael.Cullinan@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours:
Mon/Wed: 4-5pm or by appointment
Michael Cullinan is inviting you to a scheduled Zoom meeting.
https://utexas.zoom.us/j/9446623421
Teaching Assistants:
Hanyu Zhu
Email: zhuhanyu@utexas.edu
Office Hours: TBD
Text:
Norton, Robert, Machine Design: An Integrated Approach, 6th Edition
Course Summary:
Undergraduate level course on modeling, design, integration and best practices for use of
machine elements such as bearings, springs, gears, cams and mechanisms. Modeling and analysis
of these elements is based upon extensive application of physics, mathematics and core
mechanical engineering principles (solid mechanics, fluid mechanics, manufacturing, estimation,
computer simulation, etc...). These principles are reinforced via a substantial design project
wherein students model, design, fabricate and characterize a mechanical system that is relevant
to a real world application. Students master the materials via problem sets/quizzes that are
directly related to, and coordinated with, the deliverables of their project. Student assessment is
based upon mastery of the course materials and the student's ability to synthesize, model and
fabricate a mechanical device subject to engineering constraints (e.g. cost and time/schedule).
Learning Objectives:
By the end of the course students should be able to:
       Define yield stress, ultimate stress, elastic modulus and strain
       Describe how the structure of materials effects the mechanical properties of those
        materials
       Calculate principal stresses and deflections in mechanical systems


       Calculate von Mises stresses
       Explain the types of failure mechanisms possible in mechanical systems (ductile, brittle,
        fatigue, wear, etc.)
       Model failure mechanisms in shafts and beams
       Calculate fatigue life of mechanical systems
       Design shafts and shaft couplings
       Select an appropriate bearings for a mechanical system
       Analyze the lifetime of a sliding and rolling bearing elements
       Design, model, and analyze gearing systems
       Calculate transmission ratio of planetary gear systems
       Calculate stress in gears
       Design lead screws and belt drives
       Calculate stress and predict failure in bolted joints
       Design springs for mechanical systems
       Use finite element software to analyze the stress, defection, and fatigue life of mechanical
        systems
       Create physical embodiments of mechanical systems modeled in class
       Work effectively in problem-solving teams and effectively communicate project results to
        other engineers
Prerequisites:
ME 311 and EM 319
Grading:
       Exams: 45% (15% each)
       In class exercises and quizzes: 10%
       Project: 30%
       Homework: 15%
Examinations:
There will be three examinations throughout the semester. These exams will be semi-cumulative
as prior course information is necessary but will not be directly tested. Students will be allowed
to prepare one 8.5” x 11” piece of paper with notes and equations for the exam. All required
charts and graphs will be included with the exams.
Homework:
All homework must be submitted in class on the due date. Students may collaborate on
homework assignments but must clearly indicate who they worked with at the top of each
submitted assignment. However, any evidence of plagiarism or other forms of scholastic
dishonesty will not be tolerated.


Special Notes:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Academic Dishonesty:
Students         are      required       to       review        the      UT      Honor         Code
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/spot_honorcode.php) and the Dean of Students web
page discussion of plagiarism (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php).
Religious Holidays:
University policy requires that you notify the instructor, as far in advance of the absence as
possible, of any pending absence for the observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given
an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Class Project:
This class will focus on (i) understanding the role of concepts, principles, design process, best
practices, mathematics, physics and engineering modeling within mechanical design; and (ii)
rigorous application of concepts, principles, design process, best practices, mathematics, physics
and engineering modeling to realize a complex and high quality mechanical design. You will learn
“by doing” and learn by gaining insight/perspective via interaction with the staff. This year in ME
338, teams of about 5-8 students will model, design, and simulate the performance of a remote
control car. Each team will design a ‘group’ RC car and must design at least one car. The
construction and analysis of a device that meets functional requirements is a critical element of
receiving a good grade in this class. The final performance evaluation of the RC cars will be
performed during the final exam time slot.
Design notebook
Each student must keep a design notebook. These must be a dedicated notebook in which all of
your ideas, calculations, and records are stored. Loose papers must be stapled or glued in; no
loose papers will be included in the grading. We encourage you to paste in pictures of the parts,
SolidWorks models or SolidWorks simulation results when appropriate. The purpose of the
design notebooks is to show how you went through the design process and to see what each
individual contributed to the final design. These notebooks are meant to be similar to what you
would keep at a design firm if you were designing a new piece of equipment.
Final report
A final report is required and will be due at the time of the final exam. The purpose of the report
is for you to convince the staff that you learned and used the course material properly. The
contents of the report are up to the group; however it would be reasonable to include
descriptions of your group’s activities, calculations, predictions, results, lessons learned and
performance data. All reports are 12 point font, double-spaced and 1 inch margins.


Course Schedule:
 Date    Topic                         Reading               Homework             Project Milestones
 6/5     Intro, Materials              Ch.2
 6/8     Load Analysis, Beam           Ch. 3.0-3.10
         Loading
 6/10    Loading Continued,            Ch. 4.0-4.9
         Principal Stresses
 6/15    Applied Stresses,             Ch. 4.10-4.11
         Singularity Functions
 6/17    Beam Deflections              Ch. 4.12-4.16         Homework #1 Due      Project Teams
                                                                                  Formed
 6/22    Beam Deflections
         Continued
 6/24    Ductile Failure, Brittle      Ch. 5.0-5.6           Homework #2 Due
         Failure
 6/29    Static Failure Continued
 7/1     Exam #1
 7/6     Fatigue Failure               Ch. 6.0-6.8
 7/8     Designing for Fatigue         Ch. 6.10-6.15         Homework #3 Due      Chassis and Axel
                                                                                  Design Due
 7/13    Shaft Loading                 Ch. 10.0-10.9
 7/15    Shafts Continued              Ch. 10.10-10.17       Homework #4 Due
 7/20    Exam #2
 7/22    Sliding Bearings, Rolling     Ch. 11.0-11.14                             Drive Design Due
         Bearings
 7/27    Gear Kinematics and           Ch. 12.0-12.13
         Elastomechanics
 7/29    Gears continued               Ch. 13.1-13.3         Homework #5 Due      Steering Design Due
 8/3     Belts and Power screws        Ch. 15.0-15.3
 8/5     Bolted Joints                 Ch. 15.4-15.12
 8/10    Bolted Joints Continued                             Homework #6 Due      Full CAD Assembly
                                                                                  Due
 8/12    Exam #3                                                                  Race Day Friday
ABET Program Outcomes Achieved through this Course:
              ABET Program Outcomes Achieved
       1      Ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying
   X
              principles of engineering, science, and mathematics.


  2 Ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs with
X   consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural, social,
    environmental, and economic factor.
X 3 Ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences.
  4 Ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations
X   and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering
    solutions in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts.
  5 Ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership,
X   create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet
    objectives.
  6 Ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret
X
    data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions.
  7 Ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning
X
    strategies
