                                                                             Wiebe ALD 331 Spring 2019
                             ALD 331: Restorative Practices in Education
                                                Spring 2019
Instructor: Molly Trinh Wiebe, Ph.D.
Email: mwiebe@utexas.edu
Unique number: 09465
Class Time and Place: SZB411, W, 4:00-7:00 pm
Office: SZB 242M
Office hours: Wednesday, 2:30-3:30 pm, and by appointment as requested
ABOUT THE COURSE
“It’s NOT a program, but a PROCESS.” – Gaye Lang
“Modern Western societies struggle with a lack of connection and with a failure to recognize their
interrelatedness. On the other hand, many highly communal societies struggle to make space for
different voices and perspectives. In our wonderfully complex, multi-cultural society, those two
worldviews are living side by side and have the opportunity to learn directly from each other. The
circle is a crucible for that learning. In the Circle we can find a healthy balance between individual
and group needs.” – Kay Pranis
This course is devoted to learning about and implementing restorative practices in education. It will
focus on exploring models of education discipline policies and practices (e.g., zero-tolerance policy,
suspension, expulsion), and how it adversely affects students’ social and emotional development and
academic trajectories; and most importantly, how restorative practices could serve as an alternative
model to address discipline in schools. The course will give special attention to the history and
principles of restorative practices as it relates to the school and the larger community; and
particularly, how restorative practices could serve as a way to address discipline by shifting the
emphasis from punishment to one focused on responsibility, accountability, respect, and restoration.
It is expected that in this course students will become familiar with the restorative process and will
come to understand how to facilitate restorative circles to build relationship and trust with students,
parents, peers and the community.
COURSEWORK OVERVIEW
This course is a collaborative teaching model that mirrors the restorative process. Students are
expected to contribute toward building and maintaining a deeply respectful and highly participatory
learning environment. Students can draw on their own life experiences, readings, and classroom and
community experiences to participate and contribute to class activities and discussions. Course
materials will be presented through a combination of restorative circles, class discussions, guest
lecturers, role-playing, student presentations and videos.
                                                       1


TEXTS
    • Readings on Canvas provided by the instructor
RECOMMENDED TEXT
    • Boyes-Watson, C. & Pranis, K. (2015). Circle forward: Building a restorative school community.
4-HOUR FIELD COMPONENT
This course includes a 4-hour field component: lesson planning, teaching, post-lesson reflection,
and class presentation. The field component is designed to provide you with an opportunity to
engage with restorative practices. This opportunity will allow you to teach a lesson using the circle
process in your practicum classroom, after-school program, student-based organizations, community
spaces, to name a few.
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY FLAG
This course carries the Independent Inquiry Flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent
investigation and presentation of your own work.
ATTENDANCE POLICY
You are expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing,
and to participate in all in-class activities and discussions.
The course instructor will take attendance at every class:
    •   Arriving to class 20 or more minutes late counts as an absence.
    •   Three tardies will be considered an absence.
    •   Missing two or more classes will result in the automatic loss of a letter grade.
If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you should contact your
instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, well in advance of the absence, so that alternative arrangements can
be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this reason, provide your
instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University specifies very few
other excused absences (e.g., jury duty). Documented illnesses will be considered on an individual
basis. When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from a
classmate or meeting with the instructor to make arrangements to make up work.
                                                       2


                                                                           Wiebe ALD 331 Spring 2019
CANVAS
Canvas is the primary platform through which I will communicate with you during the semester.
Please make sure you are receiving Canvas alerts and submit all assignments electronically on
Canvas. If you have any difficulty using Canvas, call 855-308-2494 or live chat with Canvas Support
on-line.
WRITING AND PROPER CITATION
All assignments should be written in APA 6 style, meaning 1-inch margins all around, double-
spaced, using Times New Roman 12 point font. You should carefully and thoroughly cite any
information you use from published materials. Failure to do so could have serious consequences,
including failing an assignment, failing the course, or suspension from the University. Policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Here is a web site with information on plagiarism.
Please review thoroughly: http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/writing/plagiarism.pdf
All formal written assignments will be graded according to the following criteria:
    • The degree to which the assignment has been completed thoroughly.
    • The degree to which the assignment has been polished and edited carefully.
    • The degree to which the assignment shows insight/thoughtfulness with respect to the topic,
         other course readings, and other classroom/teaching or reading experiences.
COMPUTER USAGE
Computers will be used at times for class activities. Otherwise, they should be kept closed unless
you are taking notes. As a professional, it is imperative that you are present mentally,
physically, and emotionally for all parts of class. I expect to see your active participation
throughout the class.
DATA MANAGEMENT
Back up your data! Computers, phones, and all electronic devices with processors, will break or
malfunction. It is your responsibility to manage the data that is important to you, including your
work for this class. You have many options to do so quickly and affordably, from cloud storage
with your UTexas Box account, as well as external hard drives or flash drives.
                                                    3


                                     UNIVERSITY INFORMATION
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS CORE VALUES AND HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Each student in this course is expected to abide by The University of Texas Honor Code. Any work
submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student’s own work.
SCHOLASTIC RESPONSIBILITY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University. So, take care to read and understand the
Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php. If you have
any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the assignment.
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at The University of Texas at Austin, and your instructor
will use this medium to communicate class information. You are therefore required to notify the
University of your preferred email account and to check it daily. All students may claim an email
address at no cost by going to http://www.utexas.edu/its/utmail/.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) as
soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More
information is available online at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS AND ACCOMMODATIONS
By The University of Texas at Austin policy, you must notify the course instructors of your pending
absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                       4


                                                                                    Wiebe ALD 331 Spring 2019
ABSENCE FOR MILITARY SERVICE
In accordance with sections 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code, a student is excused from
attending classes or engaging in other required activities, including exams, if he or she is called to
active military service of a reasonably brief duration. The maximum time for which the student may
be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board as “no more than
25 percent of the total number of class meetings or the contact hour equivalent (not including the
final examination period) for the specific course or courses in which the student is currently enrolled
at the beginning of the period of active military service.” The student will be allowed a reasonable
time after the absence to complete assignments and take exams.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Evacuation Guidelines
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Weather Situations
In the case of inclement weather conditions, check the updated UT weather advisory at
https://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/weather/.
Other University emergency information can be found at
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
The University of Texas at Austin has a wide variety of support services available for emotional,
psychological and academic aspects of campus life. You have access to all of these as a Longhorn.
Mental Health Resources
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050.
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. Your call can be anonymous.
University Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): https://cmhc.utexas.edu
Self-care is a critical part of academic success. The CMHC has confidential counseling and support services, as well as
a de-stress area called the MindBody Lab to help you unplug or refocus.
                                                          5


CARE Counseling
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to need
support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE
Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic
success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her
office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call
512.232.6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please include
your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on Tuesdays and Fridays
from 1:00-2:00pm. You will check-in at the College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216,
and they will let Danie know you are waiting. All services are confidential. None of your
information will be shared without your written consent. Come by and see us, we are here to listen.
Writing Resources
University Writing Center – uwc.utexas.edu
The UWC is now located in the Perry Castañeda Library’s (PCL) Learning Commons space, and has excellent
online resources as well as trained consultants available to assist you with your writing, free of cost. You can bring any
kind of writing to the UWC, not just academic writing.
Purdue Online Writing Guide (OWL): https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/
One of the best comprehensive tools to tell you everything you need to know about academic citation in various styles of
writing.
     • APA Citation Guide: https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/section/2/10/
     • MLA Citation Guide: https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/747/01/
                                                             6


                                                                        Wiebe ALD 331 Spring 2019
Grading Scale, Policies, and Criteria
Grades will be calculated according to the total of points earned (minus points deducted) divided by
the total points possible:
A:         93-100%                               C+:      77-79.9%
A-:        90-92.9%                              C:       73-76.9%
B+:        87-89.9%                              C-:      70-72.9%
B:         83-86.9%                              D:       60-69.9%
B-:        80-82.9%                              F:       Below 60
*Grades will NOT be rounded
Expectations for all assignments will be graded based on thorough completion. This includes
thoughtfulness with respect to the topic, course readings, and experiences and a polished final draft.
Assignments are required to be turned in on time. Grades will be lowered 5% (0.05) for each day
assignments are late. Please communicate immediately if you need more time to complete an
assignment. I will make arrangements with you.
                Assignments                           Due Date         Percentage     Points
1. Attendance, Participation and                  Jan 23rd-May 1st         10%           30
Professionalism
Attendance:
     • 20 minutes or more late counts as
         an absence
     • 3 tardies will be considered an
         absence
     • 2 or more absence will result in the
         automatic loss of a letter grade.
2. Reading Responses                             Weekly Wednesday,         25%           75
                                                       12:00pm
3.  Community Building Circle Facilitator         Jan 23rd-May 1st         15%           45
4.  Field Restorative Circle Lesson               Jan 23rd-May 1st         15%           45
5.  Independent Inquiry Project                   Jan 23rd-May 1st         10%           30
6.  Final Reflective Essay                        Friday, May 10th         25%           75
                                                      Total Possible:     100%          300
                                                    7


                                    COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
        1. Attendance, Participation, and Professionalism (30 points)
This criteria includes being on time, prepared for class, and participating actively in whole class and
small group discussions and activities. Computers will be used at times for class activities.
Otherwise, they should be kept closed unless you are taking notes. These expectations will be the
basis for your grade:
    • Actively listening and participating (talking) during whole class and small class activities,
    • Being involved and engaged during the entire class time,
    • Being prepared for class, having read ALL readings and done all assignments/homework
    • Talking to the instructor about any concerns you have with the class,
    • NOT engaging in activities not related to class (e.g., emailing, texting, social media,
        shopping, work for other classes).
        2. Reading Response (75 points)
        (due on the Wednesday before class by 12:00 pm)
The purpose of this assignment is to give you an opportunity to read and learn about restorative
practices in education. You are responsible for reading all course readings and writing a response to
share your thinking/questions/experiences with regards to restorative practices. Please post your
reading response to Canvas/Discussion. You must bring your textbook and other readings to class
each week.
As you interact with the readings, reflect on your personal lived-experiences (e.g., education, work),
respond to ideas you find especially compelling, elaborate on your thinking by making connections
to other readings or your experiences, and outline your puzzles and/or questions. It is “essential
that you attend to your felt reactions, and attempt to sort out what those reactions tell you …
[think] about [your] expectations and assumptions” (Zeichner & Liston, 2010). Read the
assignments through the eyes of an individual striving to positively work with youths and the
community. Think about how you can use this knowledge to extend or challenge what you already
know about students, teaching and learning, building relationships, community, and trust.
Instructions for writing your reading responses:
        • Please do not summarize the readings.
        • Your reading response should include one insight (Aha!) and one question (Huh?).
             Your Aha! and Huh? only need to be a sentence in length, but under each you will
             provide a brief explanation (100-300 words) as to how you arrived at your insight
             and why you are asking your question. *Note: You may also include: Hmm…;
             N-uhh; No; Maybe; Yes; Yay!; But, what about…?; This reminds me of …; This
             quote resonated with me because….
                                                   8


                                                                             Wiebe ALD 331 Spring 2019
        3. Community Building Circle Partner Facilitators (45 points)
        (Facilitators email lesson plan on Monday or Tuesday before class by 12:00 pm for feedback
        and approval)
        (Sign-up on Canvas)
The purpose of this assignment is to provide you with an opportunity to practice the circle process.
You will learn how to facilitate a Community Building Circle using the circle process and to develop
an understanding about what it means to plan, facilitate, and participate in a circle. As the facilitator,
you will have 25 minutes to facilitate the circle.
As the facilitator, you will:
        • Meet with the instructor to discuss your plans and ask questions;
        • Prepare a Community Building Circle lesson plan (use lesson plan template) with the
             following circle elements: opening, values, prompt #1, prompt #2 (optional), and closing;
        • Facilitate a Community Building Circle in class with your peers.
As the participant, you will:
        • Practice the elements of a circle with your peers;
        • Practice being a member of a circle; and
        • Practice relationship building and establishing trust through the circle process.
        4. Field Component – Restorative Circle Lesson: Community or Academic (45
        points)
        (Email lesson plan for feedback and approval)
        (Email instructor for presentation date)
Throughout the course, you will learn about and experience different types of restorative circles
during class. Using your knowledge, you will facilitate and perform a restorative circle in your
practicum classroom, after-school program, student-based organizations, community spaces, as part
of the course’s 4-hour field requirement. Your Restorative Circle Lesson Assignment will include
writing a lesson plan, implementing a restorative circle in your field (e.g., community or academic),
presenting your work in class, and writing a reflection. You will video/audio record the lesson.
Please keep the recorder trained on you. Please edit your video to 10-minutes. *Please Note: There
will be NO Credit for the course if the 4-hour field work requirement is incomplete. You will have
15-minutes to present. Your presentation will include the following components: Opening, Values
Round, Prompt #1, Prompt #2 (Optional), and Closing.
                                                      9


        5. Independent Inquiry Project (30 points)
        (Parts A-F due dates see below)
Throughout the course, you will have an opportunity to conduct an independent inquiry project
where you will engage in relevant edcuational activities in relation to school discipline policieis and
practices and restorative practices to reflect on your emotional and intellectual growth. There are six
parts associated with completinng your independent inquiry project:
Part A    Personal Schooling Experiences with regards to Education Discipline Policies and
          Practices Presentation (5 points) (due Week 4, February 13th, 4pm)
Part B    Museum Educator: Sabrina Mooroogen-Phillips, Blanton Muesum, 200-500 Words
          Reflection (5 points) (due Week 6, February 27th, 4pm)
Part C    Guest Speaker: Deborah Fowler, Texas Appleseed, 200-500 Words Reflection (5
          points) (due Week 8, March 13th, 4pm)
Part D    Guest Speaker: Shawn Bliss, Not Your Ordinary School, 200-500 Words Reflection (5
          points) (due Week 11, Apr 3rd, 4pm)
Part E    Interview #1: Practitioners or Peers (5 points) (due Week 13, Apr 17th, 4pm)
Part F    Interview #2: Students (5 points) (due Week 15, May 1st, 4pm)
*Practitioners/Peers: Teacher, Administrator, Counselor, School Resource Officer (SRO), Support
        Team, Friends, Family.
*Students: School-aged youths (K-12th).
        6. Final Reflective Essay (75 points)
        (due May 10th, 11:59pm)
The final reflective essay encourages you to reflect on course concepts, experiences, and readings
that have made a difference to you. In this essay, you should coherently describe, from your own
perspective, your intellectual and emotional growth in relation to the material learned during the
semester.
                                                     10


                                                                              Wiebe ALD 331 Spring 2019
            ALD331 Restorative Practices in Education: Tentative Schedule
               Please see Canvas for the most recent schedule of readings and assignments
   Class
  Meeting Class Topic and Activities                    Readings Due                      Assignments Due
1 01/23   Review course syllabus              • Why We Need Restorative               -Reading Response #1
          What is Restorative                     Practices (Video – reflect in
          Practices?                              class)
          Why we need Restorative
          Practices in Schools?
2 01/30   Restorative Circle Tiers            • Boyes-Watson & Pranis                 -Reading Response #2
                                                  (2015), pp. 395-416 (22)
                                              • Evans et al. (2013) (8)
3 02/06   Theoretical Foundations             • Boyes-Watson & Pranis                 -Reading Response #3
                                                  (2015), pp. 6-8; 17-26; 27-41
          How Circles Work                        (28)
4 02/13   Humanizing Educational              • De Lissovoy (2010) (19)               -Reading Response #4
          Theories                            • Noddings (2005) (9)
                                                                                      -II Part A
          Guest Speaker:
          Layne Krause                                                                -CBC Facilitator #P1
5 02/20   Effects of Discipline Policies      • Smith (2015) (18)                     -Reading Response #5
                                              • Fabelo et al. (2011) (7)
          Guest Speaker:
          Sabrina Mooroogen-Phillips,
          Blanton Museum Educator
6 02/27   Judicial Systems: Policies          • “Indigenous Justice Systems           -Reading Response #6
          and Practices                           Systems and Tribal Society”
                                                  (Restorative Justice On-line        -II Part B
                                                  Notebook, 2007) (9)
                                              • Tsui (2014), pp. 641-666              -CBC Facilitator #P2
                                                  (26)
7 03/06   Global Discourse: Effects           • Heitzeg (2009) (21)                   -Reading Response #7
          on Perceptions
          Guest Speaker:
          Deborah Fowler, Texas
          Appleseed
8 03/13   Classroom Discourse                 • Cadzen (2001) (28)                    -Reading Response #8
                                                                                      -II Part C
                                                                                      -CBC Facilitator #P3
9 03/20         SPRING BREAK                           SPRING BREAK                       SPRING BREAK
                                                   11


10 03/27  The Facilitator’s Role in      • Umbreit & Armour (2011),      -Reading Response #9
          Restorative Practices            Chapter 9 (14)
                                         • Raye (2004) (13)
          Guest Speaker:
          Shawn Bliss, NYOS
11 04/03  Critical Issues in Restorative • Cunneen (2004) (10)           -Reading Response #10
          Practices                      • Lohmeyer (2017) (16)
                                                                         -II Part D
                                                                         -CBC Facilitator #P4
12 04/10  Restorative Practices in       • Worthy (2014) (23)            -Reading Response #11
          Action: Student – Teacher
          Relationship                                                   -CBC Facilitator #P5
13 04/17  Restorative Practices in       • Maloch (2005) (49)            -Reading Response #12
          Action: Student – Teacher
          Relationship                                                   -II Part E
                                                                         -CBC Facilitator #P6
14 04/24  Restorative Practices in       • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 4-5  -Reading Response #13
          Action: Student, Teacher,        (14)
          Administrator Perspectives     • Schumacher (2014) (13)        -CBC Facilitator #P7
15 05/01  Whole-school Restorative       • Evans & Vaandeering           -Reading Response #14
          Practices                        (2016) (5)
                                         • Code Switch (2017-18)         -II Part F
                                           Podcast:
                                           #1: A Year of Love and        -CBC Facilitator #P8
                                           Struggle in a New High School
                                           #2: ‘They Can’t Just Be
                                           Average,’ Lifting Students Up
                                           without Lowering the Bar
                                           #3: To Fail or Not to Fail:
                                           The Fierce Debate Over High
                                           Standards
                                           #4: Is Ron Brown High School
                                           Working?
16 05/10              No Class                       No Class            Please post your Final
   Friday  Final Reflective Essay Due      Final Reflective Paper Due    Reflective Paper to
                                                                         Canvas by Friday, May
                                                                         10th, 11:59pm
                                            12
