                                                      INVISIBLE GLOBAL MARKET (MKT 382)
                                                                      SPRING, 2019
Course:                             MKT 382
                                    Invisible Global Market
                                    Rowling Hall 5.402; T-Th 930-11AM
Instructor:                         Dr. Vijay Mahajan
                                    Office: CBA 3.228         Tel: 512-471-1128
Office Hours:                       T-Th 12:30-1:30 in the Rowling Hall Faculty Lounge, 5th
                                    Floor 5.416 (and by appointment in my office)
Teaching Assistant:                 Ryan Kenny
                                    Email: rakenny1985@utexas.edu
                                    Office Hours: As needed
Course Web Page:                    Canvas
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course will focus on the unique characteristics of the world’s developing markets and the
relevant market strategies.
Developing markets, which are home to 86 percent of the world’s population, not only represent
the future of global commerce but present rich opportunities today. These opportunities can be
seen in growing markets for luxury goods among a newly minted luxury class, entry-level
automobiles and appliances for a burgeoning middle class and low-cost products for poor and
rural customers. Today about half of the estimated 1.7 billion members of the “consumer class”
live in the developing world and this percentage is increasing year by year.
But companies won’t realize these opportunities through the market strategies that work in the
markets of the developed world. In developing markets, there are no smooth superhighways, no
distribution networks, and, in many cases, no electricity. These markets are younger, behind in
technology (but rapidly catching up) and inexperienced as consumers. These characteristics,
which can present obstacles, also create opportunities for companies with the right strategies.
Specifically, the course objectives are:
                § Provide students with an understanding of the unique market realities of the
                    developing counties.
                § Discuss creative and profitable market strategies that are being implemented
                    by companies to leverage the 86% opportunity.
                                             -1-


               §    Understand the important role being played by NGOs, Foundations, social
                    organizations and entrepreneurs in addressing the social problems of the
                    developing countries.
The course will be of particular value to students planning careers in management consulting,
NGOs, foundations, social organizations and multinational companies.
The format of the course will include lectures by the instructor, guest speakers and group
presentations by students.
REQUIRED COURSE MATERIAL
Vijay Mahajan and Kamini Banga, The 86 Percent Solution: How to Succeed in the Biggest
Market Opportunity of the Next 50 Years, Pearson Prentice Hall, Paperback, 2010. (86%)
Vijay Mahajan, Rise of Rural Consumers in Developing Countries: Harvesting 3 Billion
Aspirants, Sage Publications, 2016. (RISE)
RECOMMENDED COURSE MATERIAL
Vijay Mahajan, Africa Rising: How 900 Million African Consumers Offer More Than You
Think, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2009.
Vijay Mahajan, The Arab World Unbound: Tapping into the Power of 350 million Consumers,
Jossey: Bass (Wiley), 2012.
Here are some of the reviews on these books:
    1. “New York Times, October 2, 2005,”
       http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/02/business/yourmoney/02shelf.html?pagewanted=pri
       nt&_r=1&
    2. “Harvard Business Review, July-August 11, 2012,” https://hbr.org/2009/07/the-new-
       frontiers
    3. “KNOWLEDGE@WHARTON, July 15,2009,”
       http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/walk-the-market-tapping-into-africas-900-
       million-consumers/
    4. “The Economist, August 11, 2012,” http://www.economist.com/node/21560243
    5. “KNOWLEDGE@WHARTON, February 19,2013,”
       http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/vijay-mahajan-understanding-the-potential-
       and-power-of-arab-consumers/
    6. “Los Angeles Times, August 26, 2012,”
       http://articles.latimes.com/2012/aug/26/business/la-fi-books-20120826
    7. “Shanghai Daily.com, January 6, 2017”, http://www.shanghaidaily.com/opinion/book-
       review/Tradition-technology-spur-rural-spending-in-developing-countries/shdaily.shtml
                                             -2-


     8. “KNOWLEDGE@WHARTON, January 26, 2017,”
        http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/why-companies-need-to-understand-rural-
        markets-in-developing-countries/
     9. “Indian Management magazine, October 2017,” https://medium.com/texas-
        mccombs/three-billion-rural-consumers-can-marketers-profit-from-them-792d141049f4
 GRADING
             §    Group Presentation of chapter issues/solutions
                 ×     Overall performance (Instructor evaluation)                      15%
                 ×     Peer Evaluation                                                  10%
             § Individual McKinsey Report on “Market Opportunities                      55%
                  in the Rural 86% World”
                  Please see the video on Canvas prepared by a student from one of the earlier
                  classes on how to write the McKinsey Report.
             §    Class participation                                                   20%
                  In addition to the class attendance, this also includes:
                  (a) Three (3) takeaways per chapter of length one page max per chapter, from
                      the assigned chapter(s) before the beginning of each class, starting with
                      Chapter 1 (86%), Chapter 1 (RISE) and Chapter 2 (RISE) on February 5.
                      Only hard copy will be accepted. Late submission will not be graded. If you
                      are unable to come to class, please have someone else bring it to the class.
                      You should turn in your take-away from these chapters at the beginning of
                      the class. Please see the video on Canvas prepared by a student from one of
                      the earlier classes on how to write takeaways.
                  (b) Posting three (3) stories spread throughout the semester from popular
                      media on developing countries on the class Facebook page. These stories
                      should be related to the material discussed in the class. On the last day of the
                      class, please let the class TA know about the three stories you have posted
                      for grading purposes. Please contact the TA so you can be added to the
                      Facebook page.
 NO ELECTRONICS POLICY
 To show respect to your fellow classmates, guest speakers and the professor, please refrain from
 using your laptop or mobile phone in class. Use of laptops and other electronic devices during
 class will result in a reduction of your participation grade.
Videos on how students from earlier classes approached the assignments including Takeaways
and McKinsey Report are available on Canvas
                                                 -3-


     (1) Group Chapter Presentation
There are ten chapters in the 86% Solution book (and a Conclusion chapter). We will divide the
class into groups. Each group will be asked to pick a chapter (other than the chapters 1 and 10).
The presentation in the class should (1) discuss the main takeaways in the assigned chapter with
the examples NOT included into the book and recent data (if possible), and (2) develop
exercises etc. to make the presentation interactive and INVOLVE the class. Students will
present for 1.5 class sessions (approximately 110 minutes, with the remaining half session set
out for class discussion.) Grading is relative to the other group presentations. It will be based on
research, and presentation style including class involvement. Please make sure that the
presentation content stays relevant to the chapter.
NOTE: Every Group will receive a pre-presentation briefing by the Teaching Assistant. Please,
set the briefing date in advance and make sure it is convenient for all of the Group members and
Teaching Assistant as well. The briefing is to take place 2-3 weeks before the presentation date.
     (2) McKinsey Report: Market Opportunities in the Rural 86% World
Most of the population in the 86% World lives in rural areas (e.g. India, China and Africa). It
has been suggested that both local and multinational companies have mostly focused on
meeting the needs of the urban consumers ignoring a vast majority of the population living in
the rural 86% world. Table 1 lists top 30 countries with the largest rural population. Table 2
gives rural profiles of BRICS countries.
                                Top 30 Countries with Largest Rural Population 2016
                                                                   Household         Rural
                           GDP       Population       GDP per
        Country                                                   consumption     population  Percent rural (%)
                        (bln $US)     (millions)    capita($US)
                                                                    % of GDP       (millions)
          India           2,264         1,324          1,710          59%            885.4          67%
         China           11,199         1,379          8,123          39%            595.9          43%
       Indonesia           932           261           3,570          55%            118.9          46%
        Pakistan           279           193           1,444          80%            117.4          61%
      Bangladesh           221           163           1,359          69%            105.9          65%
         Nigeria           405           186           2,176          78%            95.6           51%
        Ethiopia            72           102            707           70%             82            80%
        Vietnam            205            93           2,214          64%             61            66%
    United States        18,624          323          57,638          69%            58.8           18%
      Philippines          305           103           2,951          74%            57.6           56%
  Egypt, Arab Rep.         333            96           3,478          83%            54.3           57%
  Congo, Dem. Rep.          32            79            406           79%            44.9           57%
        Tanzania            47            56            879           65%            37.6           68%
 Russian Federation       1,283          144           8,748          53%            37.4           26%
         Kenya              71            48           1,455          78%            35.8           74%
                                                 -4-


        Uganda               24            41          580          77%           34.7             84%
       Myanmar               63            53         1,196         50%           34.6             65%
        Thailand            407            69         5,911         46%           33.4             48%
          Brazil           1,796          208         8,650         64%           29.2             14%
         Mexico            1,047          128         8,209         66%           26.1             20%
         Sudan             1,048           40         2,415         78%           26.1             21%
      Afghanistan          1,049           35          562         110%           25.3             22%
          Nepal            1,050           29          729          85%           23.5             23%
   Iran, Islamic Rep.      1,051           80         5,219         49%            21              24%
         Turkey            1,052           80        10,863         60%           20.8             25%
        Germany            1,053           83        42,070         53%           20.2             26%
       Uzbekistan          1,054           32         2,111         61%           20.2             27%
     Mozambique            1,055           29          382          72%           19.5             28%
      South Africa          295            56         5,285         60%           19.4             29%
           Italy           1,859           61        30,675         61%           18.7             30%
 Table 2 – Profile of BRICS countries (2016)
                                                             Household        Shadow         Urban
                      GDP        Population     GDP per     consumption     economy (as    Population
     Country      (in $US Bln)    (millions)  capita ($US)    % of GDP       % of GDP)         %
      Brazil         $1,796          208         8,650          64%             34%           86%
     Russian         $1,283          144         8,748          53%             39%           74%
      India          $2,264         1,324        1,710          59%             17%           33%
      China         $11,199         1,379        8,123          39%             10%           57%
  South Africa        $295            56         5,285          60%             23%           65%
       USA          $18,624          323        57,638          69%              8%           82%
 Sources: World Bank Data 2017; Shadow economy from ACCA (the Association of Chartered Certified
 Accountants)
McKinsey and Company (a global consulting company) has set up a task force to further study
this issue in different countries. Given your experience with the 86% world, you have been
asked to serve as the chairperson for one country of your choice. Your final report needs to
include three chapters, in addition to the introduction (telling the reader what to expect in your
report) and conclusion chapters (with main takeaways and recommendations). This report
should focus on only one developing country of your choice.
For examples please reference the following McKinsey Reports on China in 2013 and Africa in
2018:
China: https://www.mckinsey.com/quarterly/the-magazine/2013-issue-3-mckinsey-quarterly
Africa: https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/middle-east-and-africa/africas-
overlooked-business-revolution?cid=other-eml-alt-mkq-mck-oth-
1811&hlkid=604d7c20c4c84dcf8ed1042b7f2a2676&hctky=2020200&hdpid=ad95c082-8714-
4a60-9204-caeaf71e2199
                                               -5-


• The book on rural consumers (RISE) will serve as a background for the report
• You may wish to look at this article: Mamta Kapur et al, “Unlocking the wealth in rural markets”, Harvard
  Business Revue, June 2014, pp 113-117
                                  McKinsey Report Structure and Deliverables
         A. Chapter 2: This chapter should give an overview of the rural vs. urban markets
             in the country that you have selected: how does this country define rural vs.
             urban markets? How has this composition (% rule vs. urban) changed in the last
             decade or so? Where are the rural market concentrations in this country? What
             are the differences between rural vs. urban markets that may help a company to
             identify opportunities (e.g., pick the metrics that will be helpful to understand
             market opportunities such as demographics, occupations, consumer behavior,
             access to infrastructure including educations, housing, health, telecom,
             entertainment, and utilities, etc.) Several sources including the IMF and the
             World Bank could be helpful to you. Look for individual country government
             websites also.
             Maximum length is 10 pages (double-spaced, 12-point font) excluding tables,
             figures, etc. You may wish to develop the chapter around a table that includes
             two columns of Urban/Rural and compares them on several metrics. The chapter
             can elaborate on this table with examples/case studies. The chapter should
             conclude with major takeaways. The introduction of this chapter should tell the
             reader what to expect in this chapter.
             Due Date: Session 11 (2/26)
             Grade: 15%
         B. Chapter 3: This chapter should focus on how companies (i.e., local,
             multinational, NGO) market their products/services in the rural markets in the
             country identified in Chapter 2 (e.g., product design, distribution, pricing,
             advertising, promotion, CSR initiatives, alliances, use of technology, etc.). If you
             like, you can also focus on only one company so long you have enough
             information for this chapter. Maximum length is 10 pages (double-spaced, 12-
             point font) excluding tables, figures, etc. The chapter should conclude with major
             takeaways. The introduction of this chapter should tell the reader what to expect
             in this chapter.
             Due Date: Session 19 (4/2)
             Grade: 15%
         C. Chapter 4: Technology (e.g. mobile phones) is changing the ways companies,
             NGOs, and public sectors are engaging with the rural consumers in providing
                                               -6-


                and communicating products and services (e.g. health, education, banking, etc).
                Discuss in this chapter the role and importance of technology in the country that
                you are studying.
                Maximum length is 10 pages (double-spaced, 12-point font) excluding tables,
                figures, etc. The chapter should conclude with major takeaways. The
                introduction of this chapter should tell the reader what to expect in this chapter.
                Due Date: Session 25 (4/23)
                Grade: 15%
            D. Final Report should include the above three chapters, an introduction and
                conclusion (i.e two additional chapters). You may wish to revise the above three
                chapters based on the comments from the instructor and your friends and
                colleagues for the final report. Maximum length (introduction and conclusion) is
                10 pages (double-spaced, 12-point font).
                Final Report Due Date: Session 30 (5/9)
                Grade: 10%
**Note: Think through the entire report upfront. The three chapters are interconnected.
Think about chapters 3 and 4 before selecting a country for chapter 2. Grading is relative to
the rest of the class. It will be based on thoroughness of your research, data, insights, and
recommendations.**
CLASS PARTICIPATION / ATTENDANCE
Each of you is expected to contribute to class discussions. To do well, you must actively
participate in presentations and class discussions. Any student who has two unexcused class
absences will have his or her end of semester grade reduced by one-half grade. Each additional
unexcused absence will result in the student’s grade being reduced by an additional one-half
grade. Excused absences do not include obligations to other classes or otherwise worthy
university or professional activities. Excused absences are for personal events and if you are
unable to attend a particular session, please inform us as soon as possible. Out of respect for
your fellow classmates, all students must arrive on time for class and not leave until the class is
formally dismissed. YOU MUST PLACE YOUR NAME CARD IN FRONT OF YOU IN
EVERY CLASS TO RECEIVE CREDIT FOR YOUR ATTENDANCE AND CLASS
PARTICIPATION.
PEER EVALUATION
To ensure that each presentation group member performs responsibly, 10% of the total grade
will be based on a peer evaluation conducted at the end of the semester. Group members will
rate each group member, including themselves, on a 10-point scale. The average of these ratings
will be the peer evaluation score. For example, if you rate yourself 8, and other members rate
                                              -7-


you 9, 8 and 9, your peer evaluation will be 8.5. You should be honest and impartial in your
evaluations. The instructor reserves the right to correct and/or discard evaluations if they appear
to be questionable. The evaluation form is included into your course package (see page 10). It
should be filled out and returned to the instructor after the group’s presentation.
ABOUT THE INSTRUCTOR
Vijay Mahajan holds the John P. Harbin Centennial Chair in Business at Mccombs School of
Business, University of Texas at Austin. He has received numerous lifetime achievement
awards including the American Marketing Association (AMA) Charles Coolidge Parlin Award
for visionary leadership in scientific marketing. The AMA also instituted the Vijay Mahajan
Award in 2000 for career contributions to marketing strategy. In 2006, he received the
Distinguished Alumnus Award from the Indian Institute of Technology (Kanpur) for his
contributions to management research. He served as the dean of the Indian School of Business,
Hyderabad, from 2002-2004. He served as the Associate Dean for Research for the McCombs
School of Business, University of Texas at Austin, from 1991-1994.He served on the World
Economic Forum Global Agenda Council for The Arab World from 2012-2014.
Professor Mahajan is author or editor of thirteen books including his recent 2016 book, Rise of
Rural Consumers in Developing Countries: Harvesting 3 Billion Aspirations. These books have
been translated into twelve languages. His book, The 86% Solution, received the Book-of-the-
Year award (Berry-American Marketing Association) in 2007 and Convergence Marketing and
Africa Rising were among the finalists for the same award in 2003 and 2010 respectively.
Professor Mahajan has been invited by The World Bank, several Think Tanks and more than
120 universities and research institutions worldwide for research presentations. He has also
been the editor of the Journal of Marketing Research. Professor Mahajan has consulted with
various Fortune 500 companies and has delivered executive development programs worldwide.
Dr. Mahajan received B.Tech in Chemical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology
at Kanpur, his M.S. in Chemical Engineering and Ph.D in Management from the University of
Texas at Austin.
His research has been reported and reviewed in dozens of media outlets in many countries
including CBS ,BBC ,NPR, Wall Street Journal, NY Times , Washington Post . LA Times ,
Financial Times UK, Economist , Harvard Business Review , Time magazine,
Knowledge@Wharton, Fast Company, Shanghai Daily, Ode , Inc., Economic Times
India,Indian Management magazine, IndiaNow ( India Brand Equity Foundation/Ministry of
Commerce and Industry) , Livemint ( India) , Austin-American Statesman, Hindu Business Line
, Jeune Afrique France, African Business UK, Gulf News , Asharq Alawsat UK, Chosunilbo
South Korea ,Absatzwirtschaft Germany, LaPresse Canada, Lactualite Canada, The Island Sri
Lanka, Lider Crotia, MS Marketing Srbija Serbia, Management Today UK , Domus Italy ,
Business Day South Africa, Politiken Denmark , The Nation UAE, Kitaab Singapore.
                                             -8-


ABOUT TEACHING ASSISTANT:
Ryan Kenny is a second-year masters candidate at the LBJ School of Public Affairs at UT
Austin. His policy interests include global development and social innovation. Ryan holds a
B.A. in Accounting and Finance from Texas Christian University in Fort Worth. He has 6+
years of experience in accounting and financial consulting for biotech, tech and energy
companies in Dallas and San Francisco. He is also a former Peace Corps Volunteer who
developed community-level food and income security solutions in rural Zambia. He is currently
researching policy and writing public-facing content for a statewide political campaign in
Texas.
Email:rakenny1985@utexas.edu Cell:(817) 307-2415
                                            -9-


Group #_______
                                            Confidential
                      Peer Evaluation Form for Group Presentation
                                              MKT 382
The purpose of this evaluation is to measure the contribution of each member of the group effort
in successfully preparing and presenting the Chapter. Each member will rate the relative
contribution of all members in the group on a 10-point scale. The average of these ratings will
be the peer evaluation score. For example, if you rate your contribution 8, and other members
rate you a 9, 8 and 9, then your peer evaluation will be 8.5. You should be honest and impartial
in your evaluations. The instructor reserves the right to correct and/or discard evaluations that
are questionable. Please use the scale shown below:
   Enter the name of each   Rate the member’s
   group member, yourself   contribution on the       Please provide some justification for your score below:
         first, below          0-10 scale:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
  Please return this form to Prof. Mahajan’s mailbox in the Marketing Department, CBA 7.202
                                                - 10 -


                          Class Schedule
      Advanced Marketing Management: The Invisible Global Market
SESSION Date           In-Class Topics
1        Tue   1/22
2        Thurs 1/24    •  Introduction
                       •  Overview
3        Tue   1/29
                       •  Developing Countries and The 86% Solution
4        Thurs 1/31    •  Chapter 1 (86%)
5        Tue   2/5     •  Chapters 1-2 (RISE)
6        Thurs 2/7
                       •  Chapter 2 (86%): Don’t Build a Car When You Need a Bullock
7        Tue   2/12       Cart
                       •  Chapters 3-4 (RISE)
8        Thurs 2/14    •  Guest Speaker: DKT International Brazil
9        Tue   2/19    . Chapter 2 (86%): Don’t Build a Car When You Need a Bullock Cart
                       •  Chapter 3 (86%): Aim for the Ricochet Economy
10       Thurs 2/21
                       •  Chapter 5-6 (RISE)
                       • Chapter 3 (86%): Aim for the Ricochet Economy
11       Tue   2/26
                       • Due: McKinsey Report Chapter 2
12       Thurs 2/28    •  Guest Speaker: Gates Foundation East Africa
13       Tue   3/5     •  Guest Speaker: Talent Edge India
                       •  Chapter 4 (86%): Connect Brands to the Market
14       Thurs 3/7
                       •  Chapters 7-8 (RISE)
15       Tue   3/12    •  Work on McKinsey Report
16       Thurs 3/14    •  Work on McKinsey Report
               3/18-
                       •  SPRING BREAK
               3/23
17       Tue   3/26    •  Guest Speaker: Social Cops India
18       Thurs 3/28    •  Chapter 4 (86%) Connect Brands to the Market
                       •  Chapter 5 (86%): Think Young
19       Tue   4/2
                          Due: McKinsey Report Chapter 3
20       Thurs 4/4     •  Chapter 5 (86%): Think Young
21       Tue   4/9     •  Chapter 6 (86%): Grow Big by Thinking Small
22       Thurs 4/11    •  Chapter 6 (86%): Grow Big by Thinking Small
23       Tue   4/16    •  Chapter 7 (86%): Bring Your Own Infrastructure
24       Thurs 4/18    •  Chapter 7 (86%): Bring Your Own Infrastructure
                       •  Chapter 8 (86%): Look for the Leapfrog
25       Tue   4/23
                       •  Due: McKinsey Report Chapter 4
26       Thurs 4/25    •  Chapter 8 (86%): Look for the Leapfrog
                                - 11 -


  27         Tue     4/30     •   Chapter 9 (86%): Take the Market to the People
  28         Thurs   5/2      •   Chapter 9 (86%): Take the Market to the People
  29         Tue     5/7      •   Chapter 10 (86%)
                              •   Conclusion and Wrap Up
  30         Thurs   5/9
                              •   Due: McKinsey Report Final
                              Submission Schedule
Key Takeaway Submission Schedule
 Tue                          2/5                                •  Chapter 1 (86%)
                                                                 •  Chapter 1-2 (RISE)
 Tue                          2/12                               •  Chapter 2 (86%)
                                                                 •  Chapter 3-4 (RISE)
 Thurs                        2/21                               •  Chapter 3 (86%)
                                                                 •  Chapter 5-6 (RISE)
 Thurs                        3/7                                •  Chapter 4 (86%)
                                                                 •  Chapter 7-8 (RISE)
 Thurs                        4/2                                •  Chapter 5 (86%)
 Thurs                        4/9                                •  Chapter 6 (86%)
 Thurs                        4/16                               •  Chapter 7 (86%)
 Thurs                        4/23                               •  Chapter 8 (86%)
 Thurs                        4/30                               •  Chapter 9 (86%)
 Thurs                        5/7                                •  Chapter 10 (86%)
                                                                 •  Conclusion (86%)
McKinsey Report Submission Schedule
 Tue                          2/26                           Chapter 2
 Thurs                        4/2                            Chapter 3
 Thurs                        4/23                           Chapter 4
 Thurs                        5/9                            Final
                                      - 12 -


Academic Dishonesty
I have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts damage the reputation of the
school and the degree and demean the honest efforts of the majority of students. The minimum
penalty for an act of academic dishonesty will be a zero for that assignment or exam.
The responsibilities for both students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are described
on http://mba.mccombs.utexas.edu/students/academics/honor/index.asp and on the final pages
of this syllabus. As the instructor for this course, I agree to observe all the faculty
responsibilities described therein. During Orientation, you signed the Honor Code Pledge. In
doing so, you agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities of the Honor Code. If the
application of the Honor System to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is
your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Insert specific guidance you have here. For example:
As specific guidance for this course, you should consider the writing of all examinations to be
an individual effort. Group preparation for examinations is acceptable and encouraged.
Homework assignments are to be turned in individually but I encourage you to work together in
answering the questions. You should, however, develop your own answer and not cut and paste
the work of others.
Students with Disabilities
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Services for Students with Disabilities
(SSD) is housed in the Office of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth floor of the Student
Services Building. Information on how to register, downloadable forms, including guidelines
for documentation, accommodation request letters, and releases of information are available
online at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/index.php. Please do not hesitate to contact SSD
at (512) 471-6259, VP: (512) 232-2937 or via e-mail if you have any questions.
Honor Code Purpose
Academic honor, trust and integrity are fundamental to The University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business community. They contribute directly to the quality of your
education and reach far beyond the campus to your overall standing within the business
community. The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business Honor System
promotes academic honor, trust and integrity throughout the Graduate School of Business. The
Honor System relies upon The University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct (Chapter 11
of the Institutional Rules on Student Service and Activities) for enforcement, but promotes
ideals that are higher than merely enforceable standards. Every student is responsible for
understanding and abiding by the provisions of the Honor System and the University of Texas
Student Standards of Conduct. The University expects all students to obey the law, show respect
for other members of the university community, perform contractual obligations, maintain
absolute integrity and the highest standard of individual honor in scholastic work, and observe
the highest standards of conduct. Ignorance of the Honor System or The University of Texas
Student Standards of Conduct is not an acceptable excuse for violations under any
circumstances.
                                              - 13 -


The effectiveness of the Honor System results solely from the wholehearted and
uncompromising support of each member of the Graduate School of Business community. Each
member must abide by the Honor System and must be intolerant of any violations. The system
is only as effective as you make it.
Faculty Involvement in the Honor System
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business Faculty's commitment to the
Honor System is critical to its success. It is imperative that faculty make their expectations clear
to all students. They must also respond to accusations of cheating or other misconduct by
students in a timely, discrete and fair manner. We urge faculty members to promote awareness
of the importance of integrity through in-class discussions and assignments throughout the
semester.
Expectations Under the Honor System
Standards
If a student is uncertain about the standards of conduct in a particular setting, he or she should
ask the relevant faculty member for clarification to ensure his or her conduct falls within the
expected scope of honor, trust and integrity as promoted by the Honor System. This applies to
all tests, papers and group and individual work. Questions about appropriate behavior during the
job search should be addressed to a professional member of the Career Services Office. Below
are some of the specific examples of violations of the Honor System.
Lying
Lying is any deliberate attempt to deceive another by stating an untruth, or by any direct form of
communication to include the telling of a partial truth. Lying includes the use or omission of
any information with the intent to deceive or mislead. Examples of lying include, but are not
limited to, providing a false excuse for why a test was missed or presenting false information to
a recruiter.
Stealing
Stealing is wrongfully taking, obtaining, withholding, defacing or destroying any person's
money, personal property, article or service, under any circumstances. Examples of stealing
include, but are not limited to, removing course material from the library or hiding it from
others, removing material from another person's mail folder, securing for one's self unattended
items such as calculators, books, book bags or other personal property. Another form of stealing
is the duplication of copyrighted material beyond the reasonable bounds of "fair use." Defacing
(e.g., "marking up" or highlighting) library books is also considered stealing, because, through a
willful act, the value of another's property is decreased. (See the appendix for a detailed
explanation of "fair use.")
Cheating
Cheating is wrongfully and unfairly acting out of self-interest for personal gain by seeking or
accepting an unauthorized advantage over one's peers. Examples include, but are not limited to,
obtaining questions or answers to tests or quizzes, and getting assistance on case write-ups or
other projects beyond what is authorized by the assigning instructor. It is also cheating to accept
                                              - 14 -


the benefit(s) of another person's theft(s) even if not actively sought. For instance, if one
continues to be attentive to an overhead conversation about a test or case write-up even if initial
exposure to such information was accidental and beyond the control of the student in question,
one is also cheating. If a student overhears a conversation or any information that any faculty
member might reasonably wish to withhold from the student, the student should inform the
faculty member(s) of the information and circumstance under which it was overheard.
Actions Required for Responding to Suspected and Known Violations
As stated, everyone must abide by the Honor System and be intolerant of violations. If you
suspect a violation has occurred, you should first speak to the suspected violator in an attempt to
determine if an infraction has taken place. If, after doing so, you still believe that a violation has
occurred, you must tell the suspected violator that he or she must report himself or herself to the
course professor or Associate Dean of the Graduate School of Business. If the individual fails to
report himself or herself within 48 hours, it then becomes your obligation to report the
infraction to the course professor or the Associate Dean of the Graduate School of Business.
Remember that although you are not required by regulation to take any action, our Honor
System is only as effective as you make it. If you remain silent when you suspect or know of a
violation, you are approving of such dishonorable conduct as the community standard. You are
thereby precipitating a repetition of such violations.
The Honor Pledge
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business requires each enrolled student
to adopt the Honor System. The Honor Pledge best describes the conduct promoted by the
Honor System. It is as follows:
"I affirm that I belong to the honorable community of The University of Texas at Austin
Graduate School of Business. I will not lie, cheat or steal, nor will I tolerate those who do."
"I pledge my full support to the Honor System. I agree to be bound at all times by the Honor
System and understand that any violation may result in my dismissal from the Graduate School
of Business."
The following pages provide specific guidance about the Standard of Academic Integrity
at the University of Texas at Austin. Please read it carefully and feel free to ask me any
questions you might have.
The Standard of Academic Integrity
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is highly valued and
seriously regarded at The University of Texas at Austin, as emphasized in the standards of
conduct. More specifically, you and other students are expected to "maintain absolute integrity
and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work" undertaken at the University (Sec.
11-801, Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities). This is a very basic expectation
that is further reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete
any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which
requires you to:
    •    acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                                             - 15 -


    •   complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
        assistance in preparing them;
    •   follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
        academic discipline; and
    •   avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
        student.
For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to Chapter
11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities.
What is Scholastic Dishonesty?
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines scholastic
dishonesty—basically, all conduct that violates this standard, including any act designed to give
an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
    •   Cheating
    •   Plagiarism
    •   Unauthorized Collaboration
    •   Collusion
    •   Falsifying Academic Records
    •   Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
        extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
    •   Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
        (e.g., multiple submissions—submitting essentially the same written assignment for two
        courses without authorization to do so)
Several types of scholastic dishonesty—unauthorized collaboration, plagiarism, and multiple
submissions—are discussed in more detail on this Web site to correct common misperceptions
about these particular offenses and suggest ways to avoid committing them.
For the University's official definition of scholastic dishonesty, see Section 11-802, Institutional
Rules on Student Services and Activities.
Unauthorized Collaboration
If you work with another person on an assignment for credit without the instructor's
permission to do so, you are engaging in unauthorized collaboration.
    •   This common form of academic dishonesty can occur with all types of scholastic
        work—papers, homework, tests (take-home or in-class), lab reports, computer
        programming projects, or any other assignments to be submitted for credit.
    •   For the University's official definitions of unauthorized collaboration and the related
        offense of collusion, see Sections 11-802(c)(6) & 11-802(e), Institutional Rules on
        Student Services and Activities.
Some students mistakenly assume that they can work together on an assignment as long as
the instructor has not expressly prohibited collaborative efforts.
                                              - 16 -


   •   Actually, students are expected to complete assignments independently unless the course
       instructor indicates otherwise. So working together on assignments is not permitted
       unless the instructor specifically approves of any such collaboration.
Unfortunately, students who engage in unauthorized collaboration tend to justify doing so
through various rationalizations. For example, some argue that they contributed to the
work, and others maintain that working together on an assignment "helped them learn
better."
   •   The instructor—not the student—determines the purpose of a particular assignment and
       the acceptable method for completing it. Unless working together on an assignment has
       been specifically authorized, always assume it is not allowed.
   •   Many educators do value group assignments and other collaborative efforts, recognizing
       their potential for developing and enhancing specific learning skills. And course
       requirements in some classes do consist primarily of group assignments. But the
       expectation of individual work is the prevailing norm in many classes, consistent with
       the presumption of original work that remains a fundamental tenet of scholarship in the
       American educational system.
Some students incorrectly assume that the degree of any permissible collaboration is
basically the same for all classes.
   •   The extent of any permissible collaboration can vary widely from one class to the next,
       even from one project to the next within the same class.
   •   Be sure to distinguish between collaboration that is authorized for a particular
       assignment and unauthorized collaboration that is undertaken for the sake of expedience
       or convenience to benefit you and/or another student. By failing to make this key
       distinction, you are much more likely to engage in unauthorized collaboration. To avoid
       any such outcome, always seek clarification from the instructor.
Unauthorized collaboration can also occur in conjunction with group projects.
   •   How so? If the degree or type of collaboration exceeds the parameters expressly
       approved by the instructor. An instructor may allow (or even expect) students to work
       together on one stage of a group project but require independent work on other phases.
       Any such distinctions should be strictly observed.
Providing another student unauthorized assistance on an assignment is also a violation,
even without the prospect of benefiting yourself.
   •   If an instructor did not authorize students to work together on a particular assignment
       and you help a student complete that assignment, you are providing unauthorized
       assistance and, in effect, facilitating an act of academic dishonesty. Equally important,
       you can be held accountable for doing so.
   •   For similar reasons, you should not allow another student access to your drafted or
       completed assignments unless the instructor has permitted those materials to be shared
       in that manner.
                                              - 17 -


Plagiarism
Plagiarism is another serious violation of academic integrity. In simplest terms, this occurs
if you represent as your own work any material that was obtained from another source,
regardless how or where you acquired it.
    •   Plagiarism can occur with all types of media—scholarly or non-academic, published or
        unpublished—written publications, Internet sources, oral presentations, illustrations,
        computer code, scientific data or analyses, music, art, and other forms of expression.
        (See Section 11-802(d) of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for
        the University's official definition of plagiarism.)
    •   Borrowed material from written works can include entire papers, one or more
        paragraphs, single phrases, or any other excerpts from a variety of sources such as
        books, journal articles, magazines, downloaded Internet documents, purchased papers
        from commercial writing services, papers obtained from other students (including
        homework assignments), etc.
    •   As a general rule, the use of any borrowed material results in plagiarism if the original
        source is not properly acknowledged. So, you can be held accountable for plagiarizing
        material in either a final submission of an assignment or a draft that is being submitted
        to an instructor for review, comments, and/or approval.
Using verbatim material (e.g., exact words) without proper attribution (or credit)
constitutes the most blatant form of plagiarism. However, other types of material can be
plagiarized as well, such as ideas drawn from an original source or even its structure (e.g.,
sentence construction or line of argument).
    •   Improper or insufficient paraphrasing often accounts for this type of plagiarism. (See
        additional information on paraphrasing.)
Plagiarism can be committed intentionally or unintentionally.
    •   Strictly speaking, any use of material from another source without proper attribution
        constitutes plagiarism, regardless why that occurred, and any such conduct violates
        accepted standards of academic integrity.
    •   Some students deliberately plagiarize, often rationalizing this misconduct with a variety
        of excuses: falling behind and succumbing to the pressures of meeting deadlines; feeling
        overworked and wishing to reduce their workloads; compensating for actual (or
        perceived) academic or language deficiencies; and/or justifying plagiarism on other
        grounds.
    •   But some students commit plagiarism without intending to do so, often stumbling into
        negligent plagiarism as a result of sloppy notetaking, insufficient paraphrasing, and/or
        ineffective proofreading. Those problems, however, neither justify nor excuse this
        breach of academic standards. By misunderstanding the meaning of plagiarism and/or
        failing to cite sources accurately, you are much more likely to commit this violation.
        Avoiding that outcome requires, at a minimum, a clear understanding of plagiarism and
                                              - 18 -


         the appropriate techniques for scholarly attribution. (See related information on
         paraphrasing; notetaking and proofreading; and acknowledging and citing sources.)
By merely changing a few words or rearranging several words or sentences, you are not
paraphrasing. Making minor revisions to borrowed text amounts to plagiarism.
    •    Even if properly cited, a "paraphrase" that is too similar to the original source's wording
         and/or structure is, in fact, plagiarized. (See additional information on paraphrasing.)
Remember, your instructors should be able to clearly identify which materials (e.g., words
and ideas) are your own and which originated with other sources.
    •    That cannot be accomplished without proper attribution. You must give credit where it is
         due, acknowledging the sources of any borrowed passages, ideas, or other types of
         materials, and enclosing any verbatim excerpts with quotation marks (using block
         indentation for longer passages).
Plagiarism & Unauthorized Collaboration
Plagiarism and unauthorized collaboration are often committed jointly.
By submitting as your own work any unattributed material that you obtained from other sources
(including the contributions of another student who assisted you in preparing a homework
assignment), you have committed plagiarism. And if the instructor did not authorize students to
work together on the assignment, you have also engaged in unauthorized collaboration. Both
violations contribute to the same fundamental deception—representing material obtained from
another source as your own work.
Group efforts that extend beyond the limits approved by an instructor frequently involve
plagiarism in addition to unauthorized collaboration. For example, an instructor may allow
students to work together while researching a subject, but require each student to write a
separate report. If the students collaborate while writing their reports and then submit the
products of those joint efforts as individual works, they are guilty of unauthorized collaboration
as well as plagiarism. In other words, the students collaborated on the written assignment
without authorization to do so, and also failed to acknowledge the other students' contributions
to their own individual reports.
Multiple Submissions
Submitting the same paper (or other type of assignment) for two courses without prior
approval represents another form of academic dishonesty.
You may not submit a substantially similar paper or project for credit in two (or more) courses
unless expressly authorized to do so by your instructor(s). (See Section 11-802(b) of the
Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for the University's official definition of
scholastic dishonesty.)
You may, however, re-work or supplement previous work on a topic with the instructor's
approval.
Some students mistakenly assume that they are entitled to submit the same paper (or
other assignment) for two (or more) classes simply because they authored the original
work.
                                                - 19 -


Unfortunately, students with this viewpoint tend to overlook the relevant ethical and academic
issues, focusing instead on their own "authorship" of the original material and personal interest
in receiving essentially double credit for a single effort.
Unauthorized multiple submissions are inherently deceptive. After all, an instructor reasonably
assumes that any completed assignments being submitted for credit were actually prepared for
that course. Mindful of that assumption, students who "recycle" their own papers from one
course to another make an effort to convey that impression. For instance, a student may revise
the original title page or imply through some other means that he or she wrote the paper for that
particular course, sometimes to the extent of discussing a "proposed" paper topic with the
instructor or presenting a "draft" of the paper before submitting the "recycled" work for credit.
The issue of plagiarism is also relevant. If, for example, you previously prepared a paper for one
course and then submit it for credit in another course without citing the initial work, you are
committing plagiarism – essentially "self-plagiarism" – the term used by some institutions.
Recall the broad scope of plagiarism: all types of materials can be plagiarized, including
unpublished works, even papers you previously wrote.
Another problem concerns the resulting "unfair academic advantage" that is specifically
referenced in the University's definition of scholastic dishonesty. If you submit a paper for one
course that you prepared and submitted for another class, you are simply better situated to
devote more time and energy toward fulfilling other requirements for the subsequent course
than would be available to classmates who are completing all course requirements during that
semester. In effect, you would be gaining an unfair academic advantage, which constitutes
academic dishonesty as it is defined on this campus.
Some students, of course, do recognize one or more of these ethical issues, but still refrain from
citing their authorship of prior papers to avoid earning reduced (or zero) credit for the same
works in other classes. That underlying motivation further illustrates the deceptive nature of
unauthorized multiple submissions.
An additional issue concerns the problematic minimal efforts involved in "recycling" papers (or
other prepared assignments). Exerting minimal effort basically undercuts the curricular
objectives associated with a particular assignment and the course itself. Likewise, the practice of
"recycling" papers subverts important learning goals for individual degree programs and higher
education in general, such as the mastery of specific skills that students should acquire and
develop in preparing written assignments. This demanding but necessary process is somewhat
analogous to the required regimen of athletes, like the numerous laps and other repetitive
training exercises that runners must successfully complete to prepare adequately for a marathon.
                                             - 20 -
