                ADV 382J THEORIES OF PERSUASIVE COMMUNICATION
                              /CONSUMER DECISION-MAKING
                                       Spring 2020 (#06745)
                                            BMC 4.206
                                 Wednesday 3:00 PM – 6:00 PM
                                 The University of Texas at Austin
Instructor:             Dr. Jeeyun Oh
                        Assistant Professor
                        Stan Richards School of Advertising & Public Relations
Office:                 BMC 4.320
Office hours:           Mon/Wed 1:30 pm – 2:30 pm
Email:                  jeeyunoh@utexas.edu
Prerequisite:           Graduate standing
Course Description
This graduate seminar course provides an introduction to contemporary theories of persuasion
that guide advertising campaigns and persuasive communications. We aim to understand why
consumers respond to persuasive messages the way they do and learn how to be effective in
persuading them. We will review representative academic works from advertising/PR, health
communication, persuasion, and mass communication fields and translate theoretical concepts in
these fields to designing a successful advertising campaign for a local business.
Course Objectives
At the end of the course, students will be able to:
    1. apply persuasion theories and concepts to solving advertising issues,
    2. understand how to derive effective communication strategies for advertising, public
        relations, and promotions from persuasion theories, and
    3. think theoretically and analytically.
Required Course Materials
Perloff, R. M. (2017). The Dynamics of Persuasion: Communication and Attitudes in the
Twenty-First Century (Routledge Communication Series) (6th ed.), Routledge Press.
*Journal articles are available on CANVAS (listed at the end).
                                                  1


Instructional Approach
The format of this course combines lecture with active discussion/participation. Students are
expected to complete assigned readings prior to each class meeting in order to actively
participate.
Course Requirements
                                  Digital Portfolio Project (35%)
You will work in a small group to prepare a state-of-the-art digital portfolio applying a
persuasion theory to the advertising/marketing practice of your chosen local business.
Semester Portfolio Assignments (28%). This portion of your grade includes choosing a local
client and a persuasion theory, interviewing the client, applying the theory to the client’s
advertising needs (3%), proposing an advertising/marketing/PR campaign or strategy through a
digital portfolio that addresses both the client’s needs and the theory’s persuasion potential
(20%), and a confidential peer review score (5%). Your digital portfolio must be useful to inspire
your client’s advertising/marketing practice, summarizing your proposed campaign strategy.
More details will be provided in class.
Final Presentation (7%). To assess and demonstrate the professional relevance of your chosen
theory, your team will “pitch” your chosen theory and the campaign idea based on the theory in
your final presentation.
                               Exams (Exam 1: 20%, Exam 2: 16%)
There will be two exams scheduled during the semester. It will cover materials presented in
readings, lecture slides, and in-class exercises. If you are unable to take the exam at the
scheduled time and location, you need to notify me at least two weeks prior to the test. Failure
to take a test will result in the grade of F. No questions about the test the day before it.
                                 Ad Example Assignments (18%)
You are required to read all the assigned journal articles and the textbook chapter every
week. After reading them, choose one of the readings and locate one advertisement example
(e.g., TV commercial, magazine ad, campaign website, mobile/social media ad, etc.) that
illustrates the main point of the article or the book chapter. In less than a double-spaced page,
you should provide (a) a Web link to your example and (b) a brief written explanation of how
your example addresses your chosen reading’s main point as well as the theory for the week.
You cannot use the same examples from your readings.
The assignments are due by 11:59 pm on the Sunday before we discuss the readings, except
for the very first assignment. Class discussion in the following week will center around selected
examples.
A total of eight assignments will be released. At least six assignments should be submitted (i.e.,
each assignment is 3% of your grade). The highest six scores will be counted toward your final
grade. No late assignment is accepted under any circumstances.
                                                   2


                                  Journal Article Presentation (5%)
In a small group, students will prepare a presentation that summarizes an advertising research
article. The presentation should include (a) the article’s theoretical background, (b) method and
major findings, and (c) your own ideas on how to use the findings and the persuasion theory to
design advertising/marketing materials. The presentation should be less than 10 minutes plus
Q&A.
Each week, up to two groups will perform presentations. You will be randomly assigned to one
of the articles in the reading list. A powerpoint and a one-page handout that summarizes your
presentation should be submitted due by 11:59 pm on the Tuesday before the scheduled
presentation to CANVAS. On the presentation day, the group will print out/distribute the
handout, and lead discussion after the presentation.
                                          Attendance (3%)
Attendance will be taken every day. For the third and fourth absences, your final grade will
be dropped a letter grade. For instance, if you missed three classes and had earned a B grade,
you will receive a C grade for the course. The 5th absence constitutes F for the course.
I expect you to arrive in class on time and to stay for the entire class. Two unexcused, tardy
arrivals will be considered one absence. A random exit will be considered an unexcused
absence.
In rare circumstances, students may be unable to attend class due to serious illness or crises.
These situations will be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. In general, notice must be given to
me at least 24 hours before the absence occurs. Excused absences may be due to a work
conflict (confirmation should be presented in advance), illness (a doctor’s excuse should be
provided at the first opportunity) or legitimate emergency situation. You are responsible for
any assignments given and all work missed when absent or late.
                                       Class Participation (3%)
Your active presence in class is vital to meeting the course requirements. Students are expected
to actively participate in class discussion. Doing your readings and receiving high scores on ad
example assignments can facilitate your active class participation.
Phones must be in silent mode and all technology (except for taking notes or performing in-
class activity on your laptop) must be put away during the class.
Late Work Policy
No late work will be accepted for the ad example assignment, semester portfolio, and final
presentation. Except for these, I may accept late work, but you will automatically lose 50% of
your score. Software, network or storage device failure is not a valid excuse for late work. No
assignment will be accepted two weeks past the due date.
                                                   3


Course Evaluation
           ASSESSMENT                                      PERCENT
           Exams                                                  36%
           Digital Portfolio Project                              35%
           Ad Example Assignments                                 18%
           Journal Article Presentation                            5%
           Attendance                                              3%
           Class Participation                                     3%
           TOTAL                                                100%
                                              SCHEDULE
          The instructor reserves the right to alter the syllabus during the semester.
 Week            Date                Class Topics
 1               Jan 22              Syllabus
                                     Chapter 1 Introduction to Persuasion
                                     *Assigned to a journal article presentation
                                     *First Ad Example Assignment due by Monday Jan 27
 2               Jan 29              Chapter 3 Attitudes: Definition and Structure
                                     Chapter 4 The Power of Our Passions: Theory and
                                     Research on Strong Attitudes
                                     Journal Article Presentation #1 (Miron & Brehm)
                                     Discuss Ad Example Assignment 1
 3               Feb 5               Chapter 5 Attitudes: Functions and Consequences
                                     Journal Article Presentations #2 (Olsen) & #3 (Morrison
                                     et al)
                                     Discuss Ad Example Assignment 2
 4               Feb 12              Chapter 7 Processing Persuasive Communications
                                     Journal Article Presentations #4 (Xiao et al) & #5 (Lee
                                     & Koo)
                                     Discuss Ad Example Assignment 3
                                     *Form groups for the final project
 5               Feb 19              Chapter 8 “Who Says It”: Source Factors in Persuasion
                                     Chapter 9 Fundamentals of the Message
                                     Journal Article Presentations #6 (Hamby & Brinberg)
                                     Discuss Ad Example Assignment 4
                                                4


6  Feb 26 Chapter 10 Emotional Message Appeals: Fear and Guilt
          Journal Article Presentations #7 (Emery et al) & #8
          (Muralidharan & Sheeha)
          Discuss Ad Example Assignment 5
7  Mar 4  *Choose a theory for the digital portfolio project and
          discuss potential clients
8  Mar 11 Exam 1
9  Mar 18 No class (spring break)
10 Mar 25 Chapter 11 Cognitive Dissonance Theory
          Journal Article Presentations #9 (Redondo & Charron)
          Discuss Ad Example Assignment 6
          Portfolio Meeting
          *Application of theory to the client’s needs due
11 Apr 1  Chapter 12 Interpersonal Persuasion
          Journal Article Presentations #10 (Comello et al) & #11
          (Burger et al)
          Discuss Ad Example Assignment 7
          Portfolio Meeting
12 Apr 8  Chapter 13 Advertising, Marketing, and Persuasion
          Journal Article Presentations #12 (Bargh et al, Exp 1) &
          #13 (Bargh et al, Exp 2 & 3)
          Discuss Ad Example Assignment 8
          Portfolio Meeting
13 Apr 15 Portfolio Meeting
14 Apr 22 Exam 2 (Take-home; no class meeting)
15 Apr 29 Final Presentations
16 May 6  Final Presentations
   May 11 *Digital portfolio and peer review due by 11:59 PM
                   5


Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/index.php)
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Policy on Religious Holy Days Observance
(http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance)
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence
as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence.
Students with Disabilities (http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd)
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's
Office in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized
services are available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. Faculty members and certain staff
members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that
they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit https://titleix.utexas.edu/ or contact the
Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Office for Inclusion and Equity (512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu)
Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual
orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion
and Equity.
                                                   6


Journal Article Readings
Note: Both the ad example assignments and journal article presentations share these readings.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social behavior: Direct effects of
trait construct and stereotype activation on action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71(2), 230.
Burger, J. M., Hornisher, J., Martin, V. E., Newman, G., & Pringle, S. (2007). The pique
technique: Overcoming mindlessness or shifting heuristics? Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, 37(9), 2086-2096.
Comello, M. L. N. G., Myrick, J. G., & Raphiou, A. L. (2016). A health fundraising experiment
using the “foot-in-the-door” technique. Health Marketing Quarterly, 33(3), 206-220.
Emery, S. L., Szczypka, G., Abril, E. P., Kim, Y., & Vera, L. (2014). Are you scared yet?
Evaluating fear appeal messages in tweets about the tips campaign. Journal of
Communication, 64(2), 278-295.
Hamby, A., & Brinberg, D. (2016). Happily Ever After: How ending valence influences
narrative persuasion in cautionary stories. Journal of Advertising, 45(4), 498-508.
Miron, A. M., & Brehm, J. W. (2006). Reactance theory: 40 years later. Zeitschrift für
Sozialpsychologie, 37, 9–18.
Lee, Y., & Koo, J. (2016). Can a celebrity serve as an issue-relevant argument in the elaboration
likelihood model? Psychology & Marketing, 33(3), 195-208.
Morrison, D. M., Golder, S., Keller, T. E., & Gillmore, M. R. (2002). The theory of reasoned
action as a model of marijuana use: Tests of implicit assumptions and applicability to high-risk
young women. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 16(3), 212-224.
Muralidharan, S., & Sheehan, K. (2018). The role of guilt in influencing sustainable pro-
environmental behaviors among shoppers: differences in response by gender to messaging about
England's plastic-bag levy. Journal of Advertising Research, 58(3), 349-362.
Olsen, S. O. (2001). Consumer involvement in seafood as family meals in Norway: an
application of the expectancy-value approach. Appetite, 36(2), 173-186.
Redondo, I., & Charron, J. P. (2013). The payment dilemma in movie and music downloads: An
explanation through cognitive dissonance theory. Computers in Human Behavior, 29(5), 2037-
2046.
Xiao, M., Wang, R., & Chan-Olmsted, S. (2018). Factors affecting YouTube influencer
marketing credibility: a heuristic-systematic model. Journal of Media Business Studies, 15(3),
188-213.
                                                  7
