                                  THE U.S. IN THE CIVIL RIGHTS ERA, SPRING 2020
                                             HIS 356P/AFR 374D/AMS321-9
                             Prof. Laurie Green        T-TH 11-12:30          MEZ 1.120
Office Hours: GAR 2.116. T 12:30-1:30, W 1-2, or by appointment.
Best contact information: Email: lbgreen@austin.utexas.edu (not CANVAS)
_______________________________________________________________________________________
COURSE OVERVIEW This upper-division lecture course allows students to gain a deeper understanding of civil rights
movements by placing them in the context of significant changes in US society from World War II to the 1970s, such as
urbanization, economic restructuring, and
new forms of mass media, and examining not
only the well-known events of the Civil Rights
Movement but struggles that may seem off
the beaten path. The course assesses popular
narratives       learned      from      annual
commemorations         and     social   studies
textbooks. This year marks the 65th
anniversary of the Montgomery Bus Boycott,
making it a good time to reconsider the
identity of Rosa Parks as a seamstress too
tired to give up her seat and Dr. King as the
planner and leader of the boycott. Closer to
home, we know UT established Black and
Mexican American studies departments in
2010 and 2014, but how many realize that 50
years ago, Black and Chicano students
demanded the creation of such departments? Although the Black civil rights movement forms the spine of the course,
we also concentrate on struggles among Latina/os. We look not only at what people did, but the historical elaboration
of ideologies that branded people and concepts in powerful ways. Instead of concentrating solely on federal policy,
national organizations, and famous leaders, we also study local struggles and local people, particularly in Texas.
Throughout, we consider what it means to study this history from the vantage point of 2020.
COURSE OBJECTIVES I expect that by the end of the semester, students will have:
     § Developed deeper understandings of struggles over racial justice in the mid-20th century US.
     § Gained a new perspective on the cultural, social, and political contexts of those struggles.
     § Learned new methods of approaching history, such as analyzing original historical documents
     § Developed skills in constructing original historical arguments based on a variety of evidence.
     § Collaborated in group projects with other students to present their ideas about key historical questions
          through different means, including the use of ClioVis timeline software, planning.
COURSE EVALUATION
Historical Document Analysis Assignments (3)          20% total, split among assignments.
Graded Group Projects (3)                             30% (same grade for all members)
Unit in-class essay exams (3)                         50% total (20% each)
AFTER FINAL GRADE IS FIGURED
Extra credit:                                         1-2 points extra credit for 350-word paper on one event.
Attendance – required                                 2 pts subtracted for each unexcused absence beyond 3.
COURSE STRUCTURE
The course is structured around three chronological and thematic units. Each unit includes lectures, readings,
assignments about historical documents, a group project, and an exam based only on this unit. We will cover lots of
material in this course, but I don’t expect you to memorize every detail. Pay most attention to the central themes


noted in the overview above and the cases that best illustrate them. I’ll post suggestions on how to read and take
notes effectively. Students have varying levels of historical knowledge and writing skills, so improvement factors into
my grading. To do well, ask for help when you need it, and get actively engaged in the course! You’ll have chances to
share thoughts, raise questions, and work on group projects.
REQUIRED READING FOR CLASSINGS: (complete by class date on which assignment appears)
BOOKS (Purchase at University Co-op Bookstore or find on reserve at PCL or online.)
Jones, William P. The March on Washington: Jobs, Freedom, and the Forgotten History of Civil Rights. ISBN: 978-
          0393349412
Martin, Waldo E. Brown v. Board of Education: A Brief History with Documents, Second Edition. ISBN: 978-1319087906
Sellers, Cleveland. River of No Return: The Autobiography of a Black Militant & the Life & Death of SNCC. ISBN: 978-
          0062824318
Theoharis, Jeanne. The Rebellious Life of Mrs. Rosa Parks. ISBN: 978-0807063484
Oropeza, Lorena. Raza Si! Guerra No! Chicano Protest and Patriotism during the Vietnam War Era. ISBN 0-520-24195-9
OTHER REQUIRED READINGS AVAILABLE ON CANVAS
CLASS POLICIES
NAMES AND GENDER IDENTITIES: If you prefer a name or pronoun not on the roster, let me know ASAP.
TECHNOLOGY IN THE CLASSROOM: You may use a laptop, tablet, or other such device to take notes, but lose that
privilege if you use it for activities unrelated to the class. Really. Phones should be put away with the sound off.
ATTENDANCE POLICY:
     1. Attendance is required. Students sign in just before or after class. (If you forget to sign in, you may bring in
          your notes to show you were in class.)
     2. Unexcused absences: You have 3 “freebies.” After that, I deduct 2 points for each additional unexcused
          absence from the final grade.
     3. Arriving late or leaving early: At my discretion, multiple instances of arriving substantially late or leaving early
          may be counted as an additional unexcused absence. However, if a situation arises in which you must arrive
          late or leave early, please contact me in advance.
     4. Excused absences include documented medical and mental health problems, personal or family emergencies,
          official university responsibilities, and religious holidays. If you are not sure about whether an absences is
          excused, please ask me.
     5. Keep in touch: If you miss over 2 consecutive class days, for whatever reason, please discuss with me as soon
          as possible.
EXTRA CREDIT: You can raise your final grade by 1-2 points by attending 1 approved event before the last class day,
and uploading to Canvas a 350-word (or longer) typed, double-spaced paper about your strongest impressions. Don’t
just summarize; tell me what you found most meaningful and why. Plan to stay for the entire event or, in the case of a
conference, an entire session. I will announce events as they arise, but suggestions are welcome. EXTRA CREDIT
PAPERS ARE DUE WITHIN 1 WEEK OF THE EVENT.
LATE WORK:
     § ASSIGNMENTS: You’re responsible for all written assignments, even if you miss class the day they are due. For
          an excused absence, submit them by the day after you return. For an unexcused absence, submit at the
          regular time. If you do not submit it on time, you may still submit it but will receive a full grade deduction for
          each calendar day it is late. If you are experiencing a longer-term problem and fall behind, speak with me.
     § GROUP WORK: It is paramount that you attend class during group projects and participate fully with your
          group for the duration of the project. If you miss a graded in-class project, contact me right away about
          whether you can join the project late or make it up another way.
     § EXAMS: Full credit for excused absences, a 10-point deduction for unexcused absences if the exam is taken
          on or before the next history department make-up time. After that, a loss of 10 more points for each
          additional day. History Department make-up exams occur every Friday, 2-4:45. Contact me to schedule.


ASSIGNMENTS. Grading rubrics attached to assignments.
HISTORICAL DOCUMENT ASSIGNMENTS are aimed at understanding how historians study original sources to address
their research questions. You’ll prepare for group projects by studying such sources independently, completing a set
of questions historians typically consider, and bringing your notes to the group. There are no “correct answers” to
questions about your understanding of these historical documents. You are graded on the fullness of your responses,
the usefulness of information you provide, and the strength of your analysis, not how perfect a writer you are.
GRADED GROUP PROJECTS involve the 1941 March on Washington Movement; Texas responses to Brown v. Board of
Education (1954); and the relationship between the ideas of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcom X. You will
instructions and a rubric for each project on Canvas. Each student is responsible for a specific contribution to the
project (developing a newspaper editorial, creating a timeline, debating the differences/similarities between King and
Malcolm X. However, the end result will represent the collaboration of all group members, thus you will all receive the
same grade. We begin with a “contract” dividing roles and committing to fully participating in the project.
ESSAY EXAMS take place in class at the end of each of the three units. NO BLUE BOOKS NEEDED, but black or blue pen
is. My exams involve real-life projects historians take on, and require you to take a stand on how best to understand
the civil rights struggles in the unit. I post the prompt a week in advance, discuss it in class, and hold office hours
and/or optional group sessions for those wanting to further discuss how to approach the prompt. To help you
remember examples, you are permitted one 3 X 5 card of notes. The notes cannot be your essay itself.
NON-GRADED GROUP DISCUSSIONS may appear in advance on the syllabus, or be announced on a particular class day.
It’s therefore important to come to class prepared, having completed reading and other assignments.
MORE INFORMATION:
GRADE VALUES (Reflects university equivalencies)
A+ = 97-100; A = 94-96; A- = 90-93               B+ = 87-89; B = 84-86; B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79; C = 74-76; C- = 70-73                D+ = 67-69; D – 64-66; D- = 60-63             F = below 60
      § Final grades ending in .5 or above are rounded up; grades ending in .49 or below are not.
      § The registrar does not allow A+ as a final grade, but I use it to recognize extraordinary work and it becomes
           part of your overall average.
CANVAS WILL BE USED for announcements, assignment details, grading rubrics, readings, lecture outlines, extra credit
opportunities, tips on note-taking, exams, and writing, and more. Most material will be in ASSIGNMENTS or on PAGES.
COMMUNICATION: For a timely response, email me at lbgreen@austin.utexas.edu, not Canvas. I return emails M-F
during business hours. Use a professional form of address in emails: Prof. Green, Dr. Green, but not “HEY”!
WHEN TO COME TO OFFICE HOURS: You want to talk more about subjects in class or connections to today. You want
to discuss an upcoming assignment. You want insight into how to improve your grade. You need advice about note-
taking. You feel overwhelmed or want more work. You have concerns about the course and want to share them with
me in order to improve the class. You are facing difficulties outside class that are preventing regular attendance or
your best performance. (You are never required to give me details). PLEASE NOTE:
           My office is a gun-free space.
           If you talk to me about sexual assault or suicidal thoughts, I am now required by law to report it.
           I am unable to write letters of recommendation for students in a lecture class unless I get to know them
           through office hours.
LECTURE POWERPOINTS will be posted on Canvas after (not before) lectures. They outline the main points of the
lecture and major topics of discussion, and include links and photographs.
SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS are provided, upon request, for qualified students. Contact Dean of Students office at
471-6259 or ssd@uts.cc.utexas.edu if you need accommodations but are not certified. Submit your letter about
approved accommodations early in the semester. Talk to me if you your letter is not available.


ACADEMIC INTEGRITY: The University of Texas adheres strictly to guidelines regarding academic integrity, including
cheating and plagiarism. These guidelines extend to all material found on the Internet, as well as to all print material.
Penalties for violations may include loss of credit for the course and a report to the Student Judicial Services. Please
familiarize yourself with guidelines on the Dean of Students website
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php For the history department’s own guidelines, see:
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/history/about/academic-integrity.php
FLAGS FOR THIS COURSE
Cultural Diversity in the United States courses increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American
cultural experience. Assignments cover the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization.
Ethics courses equip you with skills for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. Assignments
involve historical situations involving conflicts over ethics in real-life situations.
LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENT: The course may be used to fulfill 3 hours of the US history component of the university
core curriculum. It addresses these 4 core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board:
communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal responsibility, and social responsibility.
CHECK OUT NOT EVEN PAST, the UT History Department’s award-winning interactive website. It features columns by
professors and graduate students about their research, book reviews, film reviews, op-eds, and stories about archival,
visual, and aural documents that illuminate intriguing corners of the past.
                                           COURSE SCHEDULE AND ASSIGNMENTS
        I reserve the right to amend this schedule to better suit our pace, your interests, and other considerations.
                          We will discuss in class what to concentrate on for the next class reading.
Week 1
1/21       Why study the Civil Rights Movement in 2020?
1/23: Introductory lecture: Political Uses and Misuses of History
           READ FOR CLASS: Jeanne Theoharis, “The Political Uses and Misuses of Civil Rights History and
                    Memorialization in the Present” (Canvas)
                   UNIT 1: THE WAR AT HOME, THE WAR ABROAD: RACE AND AMERICAN DEMOCRACY
Week 2
1/28: Defending Democracy and Fighting Inequality in the Armed Forces
                    READ FOR CLASS: Oral histories with Black GIs, in Terkel, The Good War; and Takaki, Double Victory,
                    Ch. 5, 82-90 (both on CANVAS). Think about these readings from a comparative perspective.
1/30: Race and Democracy on the Home Front I: Work
                    READ FOR CLASS: Jones, Ch. 1; Takaki, Double Victory, Ch. 5, 90-110 (CANVAS)
                    In Jones, concentrate on what you need to know for a general understanding of the March on
                    Washington Movement. In Takaki, focus on general parameters of defense work among Mexicans
                    and Mexican Americans, including “Rosa the Riveters” and Braceros. Note a few important examples.
Week 3
2/4: Race and Democracy on the Home Front II: Organizing
                    READ FOR CLASS: Jones, Ch. 2
                    DUE: Historical Document Analysis Form, March on Washington Movement. Submit on Canvas
                    IN CLASS: BEGIN GROUP PROJECT
2/6: Race and Democracy on the Home Front III: Conflicts Within
                    NO READING. WORK ON GROUP PROJECT
                    IN CLASS: Groups present their projects.
Week 4
2/11: “We Return Fighting”: Veterans, Racial Militancy and Postwar Politics
                    READ FOR CLASS: Theoharis, Ch. 2, Up to footnote 80


2/13:      Mexican American Veterans and Postwar Civil Rights
                    READ FOR CLASS: Oropeza, Ch. 1, 35-46
                    IN CLASS: The Longoria Affair
Week 5
2/18: Cold War, Civil Rights
                    READ FOR CLASS: Mary Dudziak, Cold War, Civil Rights, Ch. 1 (CANVAS)
                    IN CLASS: Besides lecture, we will briefly discuss prompt for EXAM 1
2/20: Race and Popular Culture
                    READ FOR CLASS: Hughes, “’You Pay One Hell of a Price to Be Black’: Rufus Thomas and the Racial
                    Politics of Memphis Music”
           Exam study session and extra office hours after class. Details to be announced.
Week 6
2/24       (Monday): Study session, 12-1 pm. Place to be announced.
2/25: EXAM #1
                                      UNIT 2: FROM CIVIL RIGHTS TO FREEDOM NOW!
2/27:      Race and Schooling: An Introductory Lecture from a Comparative Perspective
                    NO READING FOR CLASS. Instead, begin reading for next week.
                    IN CLASS: Mid-Semester Survey: what’s working, what’s not? (10 minutes)
Week 7
3/3:       What Does “Equal” Mean?
                    READ FOR CLASS: Martin, Intro (7-19; 22-28); Documents 9, 10, 15-18
                    IN CLASS: Discussion of Plessy v Ferguson, in addition to lecture.
                    We will also focus on key distinctions in decisions along the way to Brown. In particular, why didn’t
                    Sweat v. Painter and McLaurin v. Oklahoma overturn separate but equal?
3/5:        Brown I and II and Their Aftermath
                    READ FOR CLASS: Martin, Documents 19, 20, 22, 28, 32, 33-44, 51. NOTE: You don’t need to read all
                    the response documents (33-44), but may choose that interest you most.
                    IN CLASS: Watch brief video on Prince Edward County case.
3/6-3/7, Fri.-Sat: The African American Intellectual History Conference is being held at UT this year and the program
is an exciting one! Please attend at least one session. If you attend an additional session, you may use it for extra
credit. If your work schedule makes it impossible for you to attend a session, please speak to me.
Week 8
3/10: Texas Responses to Brown: Start Group Projects
                    MEET AT PCL LEARNING LAB
                    READ FOR CLASS: Assigned 1954-1956 newspaper articles
                    DUE: Historical Document Analysis Form – Texas Responses
                    IN CLASS: Learn how to use ClioVis and begin group project
3/12: Texas Responses to Brown: Present Group Projects
                    MEET AT PCL LEARNING LAB
                    NO READING. Work on timeline individually and through CHAT function in ClioVis.
                    DUE: Final group timeline, ready to present in class. Before class
                    IN CLASS: Group Presentations.
                                              * * * * * SPRING BREAK * * * * *
Week 9
3/24: After Brown: New Forms of Organization, New Forms of Reaction
                    READ FOR CLASS: CONTINUE reading Theoharis, 53-150. It will be discussed 3/26.
                    FILM: Hoxie: The First Stand


3/26:   Rosa Parks and the Montgomery Bus Boycott in Historical Perspective
                  READ FOR CLASS: COMPLETE Theoharis, 53-150
                  IN CLASS: GROUP DISCUSSION. Please come prepared. Also discuss prompt for Exam 2.
                  Exam study session and extra office hours after class. Details to be announced.
Week 10
3/30 (Monday): Study session, 10-11 am. Place to be announced. NOTE: I will be out of town and thus not available for
                  office hours from Monday afternoon through Wednesday, so try to attend this session if you would
                  like help. I will respond to email as best I can while away and be available Thursday before the exam.
3/31    NO CLASS
4/2:    Exam #2
                        UNIT 3: Learning New Language: From Equality to Freedom to Liberation
Week 11
4/7:    Sit-Ins, Stand-Ins, SNCC, and CORE
                  READ FOR CLASS: Sellers, Ch. 1-4 (This is an autobiography and reads fast! Do your best.)
4/9:    Building a National Movement: The Freedom Rides
                  READ FOR CLASS: Sellers, Ch. 6-8; Theoharis, 159-64
                  IN CLASS FILM: Eyes on the Prize segment, “Ain’t Scared of Your Jails”
Week 12
4/14: Voting Rights: What does freedom mean and how do we get there?
                  READ FOR CLASS: Sellers, Ch. 9, Ch. 10, Ch. 11
4/16: The March on Washington and the Historical Narrative: Jobs and Justice? “I Have A Dream”?
                  READ FOR CLASS: Jones, Ch. 4, Ch. 5
Week 13
4/21: Martin Luther King Jr. and Malcolm X
                  READ FOR CLASS: Documents to be posted on CANVAS
                  GROUP PROJECT: Please be prepared. To be submitted at the end of class.
                  DUE: Historical Documents Analysis: Upload Form on Canvas.
                  You will get specific assignments.
4/23: Black Power (We will continue to discuss aspects of Black Power next week.)
                  READ FOR CLASS: Sellers, Ch. 12, Theoharis, Ch. 7
Week 14
4/28: The Chicano Movement
                  READ FOR CLASS: Oropeza, Ch. 2
                  Try thinking comparatively and relationally about the Black Power and Chicano movement.
4/30: Race, Protest, and Vietnam
                  READ FOR CLASS: Oropeza, Ch. 5 (optional: Ch. 4)
                  IN CLASS: Include discussion of Exam 3 prompt
        Exam study session and extra office hours after class. Details to be announced.
Week 15
5/5:    Looking to the Past to Go Forward into the Future
                  IN CLASS: We will spend part of class discussing the exam.
5/6 (WEDNESDAY) Study Session, 10-11. Place to be determined.
5/7:    EXAM #3
                                                      Congratulations!
