Art-Speak
Instructor: Jacob Stewart-Halevy
Office Hours: Tuesdays 2-4, WCP, 5.140
Description:
         Since the birth of aesthetics, art is often thought to communicate through sheer
perception, ritual, mimesis, and other seemingly non-linguistic means. Nevertheless, whenever
we try to report on, ascribe value to, or merely talk to one another about artworks, we rely on
communicative practices ranging from styles of academic discourse to registers of natural talk.
This course outlines a brief history of the manifold ways artists, critics, sociologists, conversation
analysts, and linguistic anthropologists have already tried to address the art world’s uses of
language.
         This initial outline provides students the tools to analyze recent shifts in art-speak at its
paradigmatic sites: around commercial art fairs and auction house sales; artist talks, studio visits,
and interviews; openings, curator walk-throughs, and biennial round-tables; press releases, show
reviews, and list-serves; on- and offline art-activist provocation, art-fashion cross-branding,
alongside academic publications and lectures. Through a multi-sited approach, we isolate
emergent structural features of language to get a sense of how the art world speaks today.
         Each week we will spend one session discussing the readings and the other as a lab,
working through relevant snippets, dialogue, and other examples of art-speak assigned through
the listening sessions.
Requirements:
         One museum-based ethnographic project. Three, two-page responses that perform close
readings of a text (a review, article, press release, speech, lecture, etc.) One of these responses
developed into an approximately 10 page final paper that isolates a synchronic feature of
contemporary art speak across the various sites of discourse analyzed in the course. See Canvas
for further information on individual assignments, readings, and listening sessions.
                                Part One: Welcome to the Art World
Week 1: What is an Art World?
Tuesday, January 21
Thursday, January 23
Week 2: Art as Collective Action
Jan.28
Jan.30
Week 3: Can Art Speak for Itself? Language as an artistic medium
Tuesday, February 4
Thursday, February 6
Week 4: Press Releases, Reviews, and The “International Art English” Debate.
Tuesday, February 11
Thursday, February 13
                                                                                                       1  


Week 5: Artist-Speak: Talks and Interviews
Tuesday, February 18
Thursday, February 20
Week 6: Artworlds Online: Sourcing, Networking, Trolling, Blogging
Tuesday, February 25
Thursday, February 27
                        Part 2: Professionals at Work/ Art Services
Week 7: Tours, Curator Walk-Throughs, Audio Guides
Tuesday, March 3
Thursday, March 5
                                       SPRING BREAK
Week 8: Exhibition Management and Design
Tuesday, March 10
Thursday, March 12
Week 9: Prices and Auctions
Tuesday, March 24
Thursday, March 26
                                     Part 3: Art Publics
Week 10: The Art Audience 1
Tuesday, March 31
Thursday, April 2
Week 11: The Art Audience 2
Tuesday, April 7
Thursday, April 9
Week 12: Public Reception
Tuesday, April 14
Thursday, April 16
Week 13: Socialization
Tuesday, April 21
Thursday, April 23
Week 14: The Diffusion of Art-Speak across Lifestyle Registers
Tuesday, April 28
Thursday, April 30
Week 15: Student Presentations on Final Projects
Tuesday, May 5
Thursday, May 7
                                                                    2  
