                                          Advertising Research
                                                Adv 344k
                                               Spring 2020
                                              Kahlor 06490
                                T/Th in BMC 2.106 from 9:30 to 10:45 a.m.
Teaching Team
Dr. Lee Ann Kahlor (pronounced kay-ler)
Associate Professor, Minority Liaison
Stan Richards School of Advertising & Public Relations
Moody College of Communication
The University of Texas at Austin
512.791.5726 | kahlor@austin.utexas.edu | Office BMC 4.370
(pronouns: she/her/hers)
Kahlor office hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays 11-noon in BMC 4.370 (also available by appointment)
Teaching Assistants - See Canvas for information about your TAs
ALL COURSE MATERIALS ARE AVAILABLE ON CANVAS. STUDENTS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR STAYING UP TO
DATE WITH MATERIALS POSTED THERE.
Course Policies Presented Alphabetically
(Note: On Canvas, students are able to browse these topics as Pages – with each topic having its own
page, the content is easier to read.)
Absences
Attendance matters in this class. We will have in-class activities and you must be in class to participate.
Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence. Lecture notes from previous
days are not available from the professor. You do not need to send doctors’ notes (or the like) to us
when absent. We have built into the course structure ways to either make up or drop work regardless of
circumstance. These include:
    • Automatic drop of 1 missed or low quiz grade
    • Automatic drop of 1 in-class poll
    • Automatic drop of 1 discussion post
    • The optional final exam on May 16th to replace a missing or low in-class exam grade
    • We allow 1 assignment re-write (or make-up)
Assignments
Worth 50% of final grade. Breaks down as follows:
SWOT                              18%
Photovoice analysis               5%
Twitter Video Badge               10%
Quantitative analysis             17%
These are individual assignments, not group assignments. Your work must be your own.


Your TA will work with you on assignments, as well as grade them. She/he will be available during face-
to-face office hours in the Belo building and by appointment and email. Questions about assignment
grades must be raised in the week following the posting of your grade. Always start with your TA.
Due dates are listed on the schedule below and are firm. All assignments are to be completed
individually, not as a group. You can revise one assignment for a better grade if you improve on the prior
version in substantive ways. Work with your TA if you are interested. It is important to work on these
while the information is still fresh.
Assignment Redo
You have the opportunity to redo one assignment of your choosing this semester. This is a chance to
improve an assignment grade or make up an assignment. You are welcome to submit your redo at any
point during the semester, however, the final deadline for all submissions is noon on Wednesday May
13, 2020 . When you submit a redo, YOU MUST contact your TA and tell them. We also strongly
recommend that you work with your TA prior to redoing an assignment, to ensure adequate
improvement is made.
Cheating, Dishonesty
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
Core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
Academic dishonesty is cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records,
and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty
includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or
an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. These are the course
guidelines and you must adhere to them. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the University. Please read at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php. (Links to
an external site.)
Among the activities that fit with the above policies are: participating in an in-class poll while not in
class (unless you have prior written approval from the professor) and looking at peers exams during
exam time.
Counseling, Mental Health
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there is support!
For immediate support:
     • Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
        3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
     • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     • CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please
        leave a message if she is unavailable
     • Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     • MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     • Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


Course Instructor Survey (CIS)
These are taken in the last week of class and I will set aside class time to do ours.
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ctl/ecis/
Course Format
Lectures provide the course content and supplement the readings, quizzes ensure concepts from
readings are learned weekly, in-class polls and discussion posts provide opportunities for in-class
engagement, assignments apply course concepts in practical ways, and exams offer assessments of
learning progress at key checkpoints.
Course Objectives
This course builds on Adv/PR 309 (or Stats 306, etc.) to further explore the research methods commonly
used in Advertising and PR. This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. This course is
foundational for your future courses (especially media, management and campaigns), your career, and
for your lifetime role as a consumer of research.
Discussion Posts, polls
This class features multiple ways for us to build an in-class community and share ideas.
We use Canvas for polling in class. These are NOT announced ahead of time and you have to be in-class
to get credit for participating. Participating in these when not in class, or leaving immediately following a
poll constitutes academic dishonesty.
I will drop one – this includes sick days, emergencies or technical failures.
Periodically we will post on Canvas discussion prompts to which you must respond within a given time-
frame.
I will drop one – this includes sick days, emergencies or technical failures.
We may also run a Qualtrics survey in class and participation will be recording for this as well. It will
count as a "poll."
All in-class activities for credit will be announced in class - so come to class..
Exams
Three in-class exams are scheduled during the term. See the Canvas Calendar for the scheduled dates.
Exams will cover materials presented in class and from assigned readings. Each in-class exam will
multiple choice and cover the 1/3 of the class up to that day.
A study guide will be provided about one week prior to each in-class exam.
After the exams are graded and the grades are posted, students will be given ONE WEEK to look over
the exam during office hours. Any concerns about the grading of each test must be resolved during this
one-week period.
The only make-up option is a cumulative optional make-up exam – this policy applies to anyone who has
missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who wants to try to improve an existing exam grade.
The optional make-up exam grade will replace the lowest in-class examination only if it is higher.
Otherwise, it will not be included in the calculation of the final grade. If anyone misses a regularly
scheduled examination for any reason, then she/he must take the optional final exam. The exam is given
during our scheduled final exam time.
The optional makeup exam will be the same length as other exams and students will receive a study
guide. You will be given the same amount of time to take the exam as for an in-class exam. It will be Sat.
May 16 at 9 a.m. There is no way to know now if you will want to take the optional exam, so schedule
travel at your own risk.


Grading, Grades
In-class polls                              5%
Discussion Posts                            5%
Weekly online quizzes                       8%
Exams                                       30%
Assignments                                 50%
Professionalism, research participation     2%
FINAL GRADES are NOT rounded up or down. For example, a B- is inclusive of all scores 80.000 through
83.999%.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93.999
B+ = 87-89.999
B = 84-86.999
B- = 80-83.999
C+ = 77-79.999
C = 74-76.999
C- = 70-73.999
D+ = 67-69.999
D = 64-66.999
D- = 60-63.999
Note: I do not respond the way you hope when you email me at the end of the semester about your
need for an extra .2 point to get a certain grade. Cutoffs are listed so you can work from day 1 to ensure
you are not on the edge by the end.
Identity, Discrimination
I am the Stan Richards School's Minority Liaison and I work extensively with minority and LGBTQI
students. Please lean on me as needed. I have experience helping students navigating identity-related
challenges, including racism and homophobia. To see some of the work we are doing in SRS, please visit
https://advertising.utexas.edu/about/diversity-commitment (Links to an external site.)
For other UT supports, visit:
     • The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual
         misconduct and discrimination. You can file a report of discrimination via online form, call to
         report discrimination at 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu.
     • The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing
         federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive
         federal financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination
         covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
     • The Equal Emplloyment Opportunityy Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal
         laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a
         protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in
         Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
     • Gender and sexuality support: https://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/
     • Facing Asian Stereotypes: https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/modelminority.html
     • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html


Moody Writing Support
THE MOODY COLLEGE WRITING SUPPORT PROGRAM
The program, located in BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students seeking to
improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have specialists in Journalism, RTF,
CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen core writing skills in
each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-hour appointments on
our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing process.
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting
Optional Final
An optional comprehensive make-up examination will be offered at our designated final exam time; it is
a make-up option for anyone who has missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who wants to try
to improve her/his course grade. This exam will replace the lowest regular in-class examination only if it
is higher. Otherwise, it will not be counted. This is the only make-up opportunity if any test was missed
for any reason – this includes sick days, travel or emergencies. It is the same format and length as an in-
class exam and you will be given the same amount of time as you are given for in-class exams, so show
up at the starting time.
THE DATE IS Sat May 16 at 9 am
Location is TBA
Professionalism
Professionalism
Please use a respectful tone when addressing me or your peers. Remain attentive and engaged in
lecture. Arrive at class on time, do not pack up early, and stay for the entire class period (or until
dismissed). Please refrain from distracting behaviors like watching movies in class or surfing the web.
Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence. Lecture notes from previous
days are not available from the professor.
Attitude and professionalism will be considered in determining final class professionalism grade.
Quizzes
Quiz 1 is a review of the course policies.
Aside from Quiz 1, all other quizzes are available on Canvas, are timed for 10 minutes, focus only on the
book, and consist of 8 questions each.
Quizzes are due by class time on the days noted on the class schedule below.
Quizzes disappear after the deadline and are not available for future studying, so look at results
carefully.
If a quiz is accidentally left up and you take it late, it will eventually be changed to a 0.
It is suggested that you complete the readings for the week, take notes and then take the quiz.
I will drop your one lowest quiz grade – this includes forgotten quizzes, sick days, travel, emergencies or
technical failures. You have one week from the day a grade is posted to resolve disputes.
NOTE: Sometimes Canvas crashes or freezes – I am not likely available the hours right before class.
Religious Holy Days
Notify us of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day,
especially if you must miss class, an exam, assignment, or project.
Research Study Participation Requirement


You must earn 2 research credits via studies that will become available throughout the semester at
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.). I do not honor research points
from other departments or schools. Do not take a study more than once (e.g., to meet another class’
requirements) or the credit will be voided. You will not receive extra credit in this class for participating
in more than 2 studies, although you may have additional research requirements in other classes.
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.)
Safety Concerns
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Sexual Harassment, gender discrimination, Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Students with Accommodations
The University provides academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Please arrange to take your exams in the SSD facility.
Remind me to send the exam there before the scheduled exam date, and have them email the exam
back to me for grading.
For other accommodations, please work with your TA and I to ensure your needs are met. If we are not
meeting your needs, please contact us so that we can do so. We want to help!
Textbook, Internet Access
Burns, Veeck & Bush (2017). Marketing Research, 8th Ed. Pearson. Buy at the Coop or online, bound
copy, eBook, value or international edition – wherever you can get it and in whatever form you desire,
just be sure to get the 8th edition only. You will need the text for weekly quizzes.
Also required – you must have a way to access Canvas and the Internet in class – a phone or laptop will
work.
Tutoring


Sanger Learning Center provides academic support for all UT Austin students. Each year, we help more
than 20,000 students achieve their academic potential with our free services.
Our main office is located in JES (Links to an external site.) A332 and are open Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5
p.m. Tutoring, workshops, and the Public Speaking Center have extended hours.
Come in for one-on-one (Links to an external site.) or drop-in (Links to an external site.) tutoring
Improve your study skills with a learning specialist (Links to an external site.)
Meet weekly with a peer academic coach (Links to an external site.)
Get help with public speaking assignments (Links to an external site.)
Attend a workshop (Links to an external site.)
https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc


Adv. 344K Course Schedule Spring 2020
Please let me know ASAP if dates don’t match Canvas. Canvas dates are the ones to follow.
 DATE          TOPIC                           READING QUIZ/topic              ASSIGNMENT DUE
 1/21-23      Intro to Research                Ch. 1-2
 1/28-30      Process, Problem, Objectives Ch. 3            1 – class policies
 2/4-6        Secondary data, SWOT             Ch. 5        2 – Ch. 5
 2/11-13      Qualitative research             Ch. 6        3 – Ch. 6           SWOT 2/11 9:30 a.m.
 2/18-20      Photovoice
 2/25-27      Review, Exam 1 2/27
 3/3-5        Content analysis, social media                                    Photovoice 3/3 9:30 a.m.
 3/10-12      Research design                  Ch. 4        4 – Ch. 4
                                    Spring break Spring break Spring break
 3/24-26      Experiments, biometrics          Ch. 4 cont.
 3/31-4/2     Review, Exam 2 4/2
 4/07-9       Survey, Measurement              Ch. 7, 11, 8 5 – Ch. 7,8,11      Twitter Vid Badge 4/9 9:30 a.m.
 4/14-16      Sampling                         Ch. 9-10     6 – Ch. 9,10
 4/21-23      Descriptive analysis, Diff tests Ch. 12, 13 7 – Ch. 12,13
 4/28-30      Association tests                Ch. 14       8 – Ch. 14
 5/5-7        Reports, review, Exam 3 5/7 Ch. 16            9 – Ch. 16          Quant Assign 5/5 9:30 a.m.
Note: Review days are also “catch up” days for lecture
Optional Final Saturday, May 16, 9:00 am
Quizzes are always due by class time on date due.
All exams are in our classroom and are taken with scantrons and paper.
