                                              Sports and Social Media
                                     ADV 378s-11 (06570),PR 378s-11(07020)
                                                      Spring 2019
 Class Meets: MW 12:30-2:00 pm
  Instructor Steve Wille                                         Office: BMC 4.430
  Email: swille@austin.utexas.edu                                Office hours: W 9:45-10:45 and apt.
  TA: Kenzie Walker
                                                                 Office: BMC- TBD
                                                                 Office hours: TBD
  Email: kenziewalker@utexas.edu
                                               Course Description
 What will I learn?
 Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
• Students will understand the nature and importance of the huge shift in communication that has
occurred with the advent social media, enabling two-way communication, shifting media power
toward individuals, enabling instantaneous dissemination, feedback, criticism.
Students will understand the unique and powerful fit that sports and social media exhibit, based on an appreciation of fan
avidity and the emotional desire sports fans have to express themselves, be identified with and recognized by their chosen
teams, athletes. brands and sports organizations.
Students will understand the best practices, techniques tools and philosophies being used by sports organizations to drive
and measure fan engagement and content amplification.
Students will have realistic opportunities to emulate best practices through hands on exercises and projects.
Learning Outcomes
1. Students will be able to strategize a mix of topics, media, posting times, platforms, and other variables
to optimize the response social media efforts attracts from audiences
2. Students will get experience working as a social media team, working with each other to perform a social media audit,
and ultimately to post compelling content in an environment of irregular timing and unpredictable opportunities.
5. Students will able to use basic social planning techniques including “tent-pole” planning, evergreen content,
developing and using a content calendar, and assessing engagement results to drive future action.
                                                                1


How will I learn?
A combination of readings, discussions, lectures, assignments, projects and industry guests will be used to combine
theory and skill development in the social media space.
Pre-requisites for the course:
Upper-division standing and a University grade point average of at least 2.25.
How to succeed in this course:
Bring your passion for sports storytelling and curiosity about how we judge what is the best content to post. Keep up
with the readings, speak up in class and embrace the need to cultivate you inner graphic designer.
                                            Course Requirements
Required Materials: Most readings will be provided by the instructor in Canvas or be available within the
Hootsuite Academy Courseware
 1) Required Publication:
 The “Why” of Sports Design by Steve Wilson
 Available inexpensively as Kindle Ebook and through Amazon
 ISBN-13 9781987402476
 2) Free Arkaive Class Attendance App and Paid Attendance Tracking Feature
 3) Sign up to Hootsuite Academy (no charge)
 Instructions will be provided in the first two weeks of class.
 Required Devices
 Laptop and smartphone
Classroom expectations
Class attendance
 Attendance is required for all class meetings and contributes a potential of 4 points to your final grade. In class
 assignments will get a score of zero in the case of unexcused absences. For each unexcused absence after the second
 instance, a student will lose one of the available 4 attendance points. An excused absence is defined as a documented
 illness, documented University-related absence (sports team travel) and religious holidays (prior notification required).
 Excused absence for illness requires health provider documentation. Attendance will be taken using Arkaive, a phone
 app. Instructions will be posted on Canvas
Class participation
Class participation is essential and ranks at the top of factors students use to define a valuable course. Class
participation forms part of your grade in this class. Credit for the 6 participation points available will be based upon the
student turning in 3x5 index cards (which students should always carry a supply of) with their name, EID the topic they
contributed to and a description of the contribution. Two points will be awarded for each appropriately completed and
accepted card.
                                                                 2


  Behavior expectations Be polite and civil, of course. Don’t’ distract. Excessive non-class conversations or device use
  will be dealt with.
   Assignments:
   Class Prep Assignments
   Approximately 10 Class Prep Assignments will be given
   They will often deal with finding examples of, or creating certain kinds of posts or using particular posting
   tools. They may also consist of readings with a graded quiz or discussion questions. If a different number are
   given the available points will be divided by the number of assignments actually given
   Two Fairly Complex Projects will focus on:
   1) Auditing one or more sports team social media accounts and providing an analysis of their posting habits
   including generated metrics
   2) Working within a social media team to strategize and create posts to meet given objectives.
   Hootsuite Academy
   We have been able to gain access to Hootsuite Academy courseware. Normally there is a cost of
   $99 We have managed to get it for free. To receive the 10 points of credit I am awarding, students need to
   complete the designated modules, including the short tests after each by the due date. A number of our
   regular class readings are assigned from the Hootsuite course content.
   Grading for this Course
   The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to which
   you have done so.
    Graded Elements                                                 Points possible               Percent of Total Grade
        1.   10 Class Prep Assignments                            100                            10
        2.   Project 1: Social Audit                              200                            20
1.   3. Project 2: Social Media Team Posting                      200                            20
2. 4. Attendance                                                  40                             4
3. 5. Participation                                               60                             6
4. 6. Hootsuite Completion                                        100                            10
5. 7. Exam 1                                                      150                            15
6. 8. Exam 2                                                      150                            15
7. Total                                                          1000                           100
   Course Outline
        All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
        https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
                                                                 3


Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
note these changes when announced by email, in class or as a Canvas Announcement
                                                     4


                                                          Policies
 Classroom Policies
 Grading Policies
 Final grades are rounded up if decimal is .5 or higher, rounded down if the decimal is below .5
           Grade            Cutoff
           A                94%
           A-               90%
           B+               87%
           B                84%
           B-               80%
           C+               77%
           C                74%
           C-               70%
           D                65%
           F                <65%
Late work
All late work runs the risk of most likely earning none of the available points for the assignment. Exceptions will only be
made under extreme circumstances. If you turn work in late, do not expect to earn points on it.
Absences
Attendance is required for all class meetings. In class assignments will get a score of zero in the case of unexcused
absences. An excused absence is defined as a documented illness, documented University-related absence (sports team
travel) and religious holidays (prior notification required). Excused absence for illness requires health provider
documentation. See attendance grading above.
Student Responsibilities
     •   You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
         and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     •   You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your experience
         with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the
         quality of your peers’ experiences.
     •   You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
     •   You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
         and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
      Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
                                                                  5


     University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
     integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own
     (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism
     and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
     understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the
     following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
     which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
     are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
     Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
     there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
     possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are
     also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
     This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that
     make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
     me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
     committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs
     with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
     Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
     http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
     on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
     rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
     we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
     improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
     workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
     in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
     (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                                6


Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
      Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
      isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
      sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
      committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
      misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
               1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
               2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
                    involved in a Title IX investigation.
               3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
      which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
      Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
      Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
      they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an
      official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options
      and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
      exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
      given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
      Fire Prevention Services office.
 •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                 7
