                              BODYWORKS PED 106C YOGA
                                        Summer 2020
                                       Course syllabus
Instructor: Zoe Mantarakis
Pronouns: She/Her
Office: available via Zoom
Office Hours: By appointment
Classroom: Virtual Classroom
Email: zoe@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description:
This course will teach the principles and benefits of mind-body fitness through the lens
of Yoga and provide an understanding of the relationship between exercise, health, and
wellness. Students will learn a Yogic approach to cardio and strength training exercises
that will be demonstrated through hatha and vinyasa styles of Yoga, as well as mental
focus and breathing techniques. This course is designed to improve aerobic capacity,
muscular endurance, muscular strength, mental focus and overall flexibility and
wellness.
Goals/Objectives:
1. To have fun and find inner peace
2. To develop a basic understanding of Yoga and aerobic fitness that students can
apply in daily life and to individual workouts outside of class
3. To develop a sense of body-mind-breath awareness and learn techniques for mental
focus and breath control
4. To help students set and reach personal wellness goals
Class Format: Class is designated to meet M/T/W 12-2:30pm.
12-12:15 We will have a synchronous live-stream lecture in real time
12:15-1pm Live Stream Yoga Practice; yoga mat and props required
1-1:30pm Snack break (30min are usually designated for 15 min at beginning and end
of class for clothing changes and locker room; during virtual learning we will use this
time as a “snack break”)
1:30-2:30pm This hour is designated for self-paced at-home learning including: pre-
recorded lessons, meditation, journaling, yoga practice, weekly challenge, and online
quiz for content absorption
                                                                                         1
                                                                            Zoe Mantarakis


Attendance/Participation: Attendance is expected, and participation is mandatory. All
Live Streams will be recorded and available for viewing online. Attendance will be
assessed by presence during Live Streams, Completion of Weekly Challenges, and
weekly Canvas quizzes for content absorption.
Beginning of Semester Assignment: A Waiver must be completed and submitted
before the first day of class; the waiver will be available on Canvas.
Midterm:
Part 1: Submit a song to our Spotify class playlist
Part 2: Submit via Canvas a mid-semester survey including your overall feedback about
the class, questions you may have or topics you’d like covered, as well as answering a
few quiz questions about course content thus far.
Final Project: “What does YOGA mean to you?”
To be compiled throughout the semester and turned in during the last week of class.
Create a representation of the 8-limbs of Yoga as you understand them. This project
can be expressed in any format you like. Some examples are: a short 1-2 paragraph
essay; journal entries logged throughout class about each of the 8 limbs; an artistic
representation, drawing, graph, or illustration; or any other format that meets the listed
criteria.
Criteria for Final Project:
    ● Content: Includes information/representation of all 8-limbs of Yoga; is clear and
        concise
    ● Originality: Is a unique and creative expression from the student; no cut and copy
        of Wikipedia!
    ● Comprehension: demonstrates an understanding of the topic by the student
Course Grade          Point total
        A               100-90
        B                80-89
        C                70-79
        D                60-69
        F            Less than 60
                                                                                           2
                                                                            Zoe Mantarakis


Grading Policy:
Attendance/Participation         75
Mid Semester Check                10
Final Project                      15
___________________________
Total Points                     100
Dress Code: Wear appropriate clothing for exercise activity and expect to perform most
activities in this class barefoot.
Release and Indemnification Agreement: Students are not allowed to work out or
receive credit until they have filled out the release waiver! Please submit waiver on
Canvas before first day of class, and no later than June 8th.
Materials:
    ● Proper attire for freedom of movement; bare feet
    ● pencil and paper to take occasional notes on the 8-limbs of Yoga
    ● small towel and water bottle, optional
    ● Yoga mat, 2 yoga foam blocks, 1 yoga strap
    ● Wifi, Computer, Access to FaceBook, Spotify and Zoom free apps
                                                                                       3
                                                                          Zoe Mantarakis


Student Rights & Responsibilities:
    ● You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical
       wellness.
    ● You have a right to respect.
    ● You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    ● You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    ● You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    ● You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
       improve your learning environment.
    ● You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No
       student shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    ● You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
       communicating with the professor and with others if things start to feel out of
       control or overwhelming.
    ● You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always
       respectful to others.
    ● Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy
       that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’
       experiences.
    ● You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up
       when someone is excluded.
    ● You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding
       each other to these standards, and holding the professor accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals
and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation,
gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the professor
with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the
Gender and Sexuality Center. Please advise me of any changes early in the semester
so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
                                                                                              4
                                                                               Zoe Mantarakis


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/events/sjs_honorcode.php
Special Accommodations for Students with a Disability
         This Class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities and
abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities
difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need
special arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know.
I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can
only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions.
         If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need
accommodations please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). You may
refer to SSD’s website for contact and more
information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with
SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the
semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone) as
soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For
more information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Policy on Academic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services,
Office of the Dean of Students. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
                                                                                             5
                                                                               Zoe Mantarakis


Accommodations for Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day,
you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
CARE Counseling
        Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well,
exercising, hydrating, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking
some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
        All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There
are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is
always your best course of action.
        CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is
common to need support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond
your control. CARE Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may
serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of
Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building,
SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a
CARE appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and
contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2
PM. You will check-in at the College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and
they will let Danie know you’re waiting. All services are confidential. None of your
information will be shared without your written consent. Come by and see us, we are
here to listen.
 “The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
  leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
 expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
                                toward peers and community.”
                                                                                           6
                                                                             Zoe Mantarakis
