                ADV 475/483-5 ​       Portfolio 4
                                                 (Unique Numbers: 06505, 06605)
Who are you people?
Person 1: Ryan Romero
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com
Office: BMC 4.306
Hours: T/R @ 11-12:15, 2-3
         M/W @ 3:30 - 4:30
Person 2: Keke Zhang
Email: ​kz3793@utexas.edu
Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: TBD
All of this has happened before...
...and while you likey won’t take another portfolio class, all of what you do in here will happen
again, ad nauseam, for the rest of your career. Hopefully, that sounds awesome to you. You’re
on the hunt again for the absolute best of ideas, but this go-round we’re looking for a bit more.
We’re going to need the best, the most perfect, the flawless...oh, and all of it damn quickly.
Trading books for tiny statues
You aren’t required to get a book (yay!) but you’ll probably want to set aside a small pile of
money for entry fees to various award shows. The ADDY Awards, The Clios, Cannes...they’re
all out there and they all need to see you shine. Don’t cheap out here, those awards can be
mighty alluring to recruiters.
Stop talking and say something
You’ll be presenting. A lot. And you’ll be saying a lot in very short amounts of time. I’m going to
hold you to strict time limits and we’re going to crank thru everyone’s work each class. That
means there’s no time to screw around. Bring thought-thru ideas, all but executed (maybe
even a little executed) each class because we (and by “we” I mean “you”) don’t have time for
anything else. You may even think about doing a dry run or two with your partner before class
to make sure your timing is bang-on. Be sure to leave time for laughs and questions.
Ok, maybe not that much time for laughs.
Selfless acts


Well, only kind of. This semester you’re going to give back to Texas Creative a little bit. In
return, you’re going to have actually produced work/events you’re proud of that actually went
out into the real world. The better your ideas and executions are -> the more light is shone on
Texas Creative -> the more eyes that will see the work you did for Texas Creative and the rest
of your books -> the better job you’ll get -> the better Texas Creative’s reputation becomes ->
the better it looks that you went to Texas Creative... you see what I’m gunning for here? It’s a
mutually beneficial circle of creative life. Mufasa would be proud.
Selfish acts
Besides the work you do “for Texas Creative” you will be expected to tackle a minimum of 3
other projects using all digital, manual, bought, borrowed and stolen methods available. My
expectations aren’t just high, they’re real-world executable, award-winning, Creative Director
mind-blowingly high. In other words, don’t bring none of that weak ish up in here. You are
about to be held to a nearly impossible standard, but your books and your future careers will
thank me for it, whether or not you decide to do so your student evaluations. There will be a
minimum of 4 total campaigns/projects with a minimum of 18 pieces total.
         NOTE: The lightnin’ round
         I must see and approve all work prior to Critique Week (Critique Wique?). I reserve the
         right to remove work shown without my approval. If I remove work and you don’t meet
         the minimum requirements you may not be allowed to participate in the final portfolio
         review.
Push your pixel pushing skills. What passed for quality or even campaigns in previous portfolio
classes might not hack it for P4. You have to grow. Though it’s no longer mandatory, Lynda
classes and the like are highly encouraged. You are the top of the heap. If your stuff doesn’t
top the rest of the heap’s work then what are you doing here?
Remember, advertising is subjective. There are no right answers. Do better each time and play
nice with others. The ad biz is small and incestuous. Your friends here will be your colleagues,
competitions, and cohorts. Love them. Fear them. Respect them. You’re all in this together.
How we do
Simple. Direct. Efficient.
Some instructors require the niceties of email etiquette - “I hope this email finds you well. How
are you? Thank you for looking at this. Here’s my life story…” This has its place in the world,
but with me you’ll be efficient. Your emails should be short, and to the point. Not rude, just
direct - What do you need? What am I looking at? How can I help? Do not send, “thank you” or
“got it” emails. These serve only to clutter my email box. If you simply must say “thanks”
please wait and send me a thank you note at the end of the semester. We’re gonna work hard
together and we’re going to need every second we can spare. So let’s be streamlined.
Feedback


Google docs is your friend. Learn it. Live it. It’s the easiest and fastest way to share your work
with me to get comments and feedback. When you share a google doc make sure I have
access to comment. If I don’t, I will simply delete your email. ​I repeat, I will not ask for
access/permission to view your work.​ Don’t lose time because of your carelessness.
Additionally, please do not share the document via google docs with me AND send a separate
email explaining you shared a document with me. Let’s keep emails to a minimum.
Mid-term Book
Just before Spring Break you will owe me a PDF of your book as it stands at Mid-term. This will
consist of a minimum of 20 total pieces with 10 of those pieces new work done during this
semester. While this sounds daunting it does help you spread out the hard work that always
seems to pile up at the end of the semester. Additionally, it allows you to receive feedback on
the overall scope of your book with enough time to adjust. Some of the work might not be in its
final form but it should be 95% there or else it will suffer steep grade penalties.
Attendance
While I do not take roll every class there is an expectation that you are here and learning. Not
just for yourself but for your partners. Missing a class that moves as quickly as we will puts you
significantly behind. If you have a job interview or some other pressing emergency it’s up to
you to make the call. You are a professional and an adult and can decide which is more
important to attend. Just know that repeated absence or lack of participation in class could
influence your “participation and professionalism” grade. So, show up, do the job, be reliable,
grow, create, amaze. On a side note, you needn’t let me know you’re going to miss a class.
Mounting not required
I’m not sure I totally agree with this, but history dictates you don’t have to mount your final
work this time around. Honestly, I think it looks less professional. If you want to step up and do
it, I think it makes you shine, but I won’t require it.
That said, you still need:
                  ‣ A fresh X-Acto #1 knife + pack of extra blades (borrowable/shareable)
                  ‣ A metal straightedge ruler (borrowable/shareable)
                  ‣ ​TWO (2) ​black queen-size FLAT bed sheet (lowest thread count wins!)
Final Grades
60% = Final Portfolio (18 pieces minimum between 4 projects)
20% = Mid-term Book
20% = Participation and professionalism (peer evals, in class work, instructor
experience)
Yeah, that’s it. Three things. Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR
majors to have a minimum grade of C in all communication courses and all courses required
and electives for their major. I believe that grade is a B for graduate students. Grades are true
to form. You earn a C by being average. That means you showed up and checked all the
boxes. Impress me and get a B. If I think you could start a business with me tomorrow you
might just be gunning for an A.


How to succeed
‣ Treat this like it’s already your job. It basically is. In fact, it’s your job to get a job. Let’s do
this!
‣ Fail big! Make mistakes and own them. We all learn from them.
‣ Play nice. Be a good partner. Seriously. Do your end and then some.
‣ Spend at ​LEAST​ 10 hours outside of class for every one hour in class. But I think you all
know 10 hours isn’t going to cut it for a great book.
‣ Study award shows and latest work, seek out all kinds of existing and emerging creativity,
and develop your skills. Keep your eyes open. FAR more important than you think.
‣ Seek a balance. Absorb advertising and culture as much as possible but leave yourself time
for your own contributions. Remember, you’re a creative. Create.
Legal stuff. Read it anyway.
Attendance + Late Work
You are a budding professional in a deadline-driven industry. That means you are expected to
do all of the work all of the time. That means showing up ready to present in ​every​ class. If I
decide to call on you or your partner to show me what you’re up to, you better have something
to say. If the class, as a whole, does not have work enough prepared for class then class may
just be cancelled. And trust me, you need every bit of class time you can get each semester.
Cheating
The usual university rules apply to cheating and plagiarism. When it doubt, refer to Wheaton’s
law. If you are caught doing either, you will automatically fail this course. Please familiarize
yourself with the university’s policy on plagiarism​ ​here.
E-Mail and Canvas
In this course, email and Canvas will both be used to communicate. I’m very reachable on my
email. So you will be as well. Make sure your Canvas email is updated to a current, reachable
account. You will be responsible for checking it regularly for class work and announcements.
It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful than usual lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts,
feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for
support. Our CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is:
Abby Simpson, LCSW | CMA 4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is unavailable)
Need Immediate Help?
                      - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                          | 512-471- 3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
                      - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
                          cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact


the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.

But, when? WHEN?!​ ​(subject to change)
T, 1/22     Welcome: Syllabus, Introductions, etc. (you know, first day stuff)
T, 1/29     Project 1. Choose Project 2
T, 2/5      Project 1.
T, 2/12     Project 2
T, 2/19     Project 1
T, 2/26     Project 2
T, 3/5      Any Project
T, 3/12     Any Project. Choose Project 3 and 4
            Mid-Term Book due (10 NEW pieces min/20 pieces total)
            Provide Media Teams with Project 4
3/18 - 3/22 Spring Break
T, 3/26     Project 3
T, 4/2      Project 3. Receive Project 4 (Media Teams) Brief.
T, 4/9      Project 4 (Media Teams)
T, 4/16     Project 3
T, 4/23     Project 4 (Media Teams)
T, 4/30     Any Project
T, 5/7      Any Project
F, 5/17     Final Critique!
            Exact Schedule to be decided. Likely open 10am - 4pm.
