DESIGN AS CRITICISM STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                            1
	  
THE    UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT                      AUSTIN
O‘NEIL FORD CENTENNIAL CHAIR IN ARCHITECTURE
SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE                                       T 512.232.9312
BATTLE HALL,  ROOM 117                                       F 512.471.7033
AUSTIN, TEX AS 78712- 0222                                   E wilfried.wang@.utexas.edu
ADVANCED      URBAN    DESIGN, ARC 696
ADVANCED      ARCHITECTURAL        DESIGN, ARC 696/ ARC 560R
DESIGN          AS     CRITICISM:
REPLACING              SUBURBIA


DESIGN    AS  CRITICISM    STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                     2
	  
                                       Suburban development in Las Vegas, Cameron Davidson, © Getty Images
LITTLE BOXES
Malvina Reynolds (1900-1978): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2_2lGkEU4Xs
Little boxes on the hillside,                          And they all play on the golf course
Little boxes made of ticky tacky                       And drink their martinis dry
Little boxes on the hillside,                          And they all have pretty children
Little boxes all the same,                             And the children go to school,
There's a pink one and a green one                     And the children go to summer camp
And a blue one and a yellow one                        And then to the university
And they're all made out of ticky tacky                Where they are put in boxes
And they all look just the same.                       And they come out all the same.
And the people in the houses                           And the boys go into business
All went to the university                             And marry and raise a family
Where they were put in boxes                           In boxes made of ticky tacky
And they came out all the same                         And they all look just the same,
And there's doctors and lawyers                        There's a pink one and a green one
And business executives                                And a blue one and a yellow one
And they're all made out of ticky tacky                And they're all made out of ticky tacky
And they all look just the same.                       And they all look just the same.
© SCHRODER MUSIC CORPORATION, SCHRODER MUSIC COMPANY


DESIGN    AS  CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                     3
	  
                                                        Phoenix, AZ, 7 Nov 1989, © NASA Earth Observatory
THE      TASK
The limited time of less than a decade in which conventional unsustainable patterns of behavior
need to change, including those that determine settlement developments, requires radical
strategies for the replacement of suburbia, not gradual retrofitting steps. These strategies will
be conceived in consideration of expected patterns of climate change and forecast global
population growth.
Students opting for this studio will choose the site for which they would like to propose
replacement strategies: they can opt for the place where they grew up or they can choose a city
in Texas. Besides researching a series of preparatory topics, each student will be mapping the
growth of their chosen city over the past century in intervals of ten years. Based on the rate of
growth of the past decades, students will interpolate the growth of their chosen city for the
next three decades. In contrast to this expected growth pattern, students will propose their
alternatives. These alternatives will cover an area of 16 square miles: either 4 x 4 miles square or
2 x 8 miles long. Topics to be addressed in these strategies include hydrology, sealed/unsealed
surface ratio, density, landscape architecture, natural and passive shading, local food
production, live/work building typologies, modes of mobility, and public space design.


DESIGN    AS  CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                      4
	  
                                                        Phoenix, AZ, 29 Oct 2009, © NASA Earth Observatory
THE      CONTEXT
Much of suburban life style, of suburban culture, is unsustainable. The dispersal of functions and
social groups across a large territory puts a daily burden on people's mobility. The lower the
density of a settlement structure, of occupation and construction, the farther the distances
between these, the more difficult the establishment of an effective collective transport system.
In this context, the personal car has become the preferred mode of transport. Added to the
dispersal of functions and social groups, many suburban neighborhoods are laid out along
dendritic road systems (tree branch layouts) that prevent through traffic. In the pursuit of
maximizing privacy and thereby bringing about social segregation, suburban culture has also
maximized mobility times.
The autonomization of modes of life determines the growth of suburban culture. The privacy of
the nuclear family has been one ideal of modern civilization. The seemingly stable image of a
four-person household – that effectively only lasts for a couple of decades – has given rise to a
building typology of a single-family home whose inflexibility and spatial excess is rarely
examined in critical terms. From underused dining and living rooms to the inevitable once-in-a-
year occupation of the children's bedrooms at Thanksgiving, many single-family houses are
expressions of inefficient use. At best, they are private museums, gathering the memorabilia of
emigrated or departed family members. The single-family house enables each family to lead an


DESIGN    AS   CRITICISM    STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                 5
	  
                                                                   Monarch Gardens LLC, © Benjamin Vogt
autonomous life-style. Sufficiently spaced apart, each family, and in turn in the home's interiors,
each family member can create noise, use artificial light, potter around in the garden, cook
odorous food, keep any number of pets and cars without necessarily disturbing the neighbors.
The single-family house is the guarantor of the pursuit of individual, autonomous happiness and
thus an indispensable element of the constitution of the USA. Outside the USA too, young
families dream of leading a life surrounded by "nature", in which children can supposedly grow
up in safe and harmless circumstances – free of urban plight and morally questionable
temptations (a notion of insulation that is now undermined by the Internet). The extent of this
suburban landscape conception of "nature" is realized in the so-called English landscape design
tradition, in other words, an unproductive, picturesque landscape that is to be viewed and
understood as being natural in the hope that the seductive power of the image dispels any
lingering knowledge of it being entirely artificial. Few things are grown in the suburbs:
principally grass that is ritualistically mowed – nowadays – by an automower. Suburban
domestic life is the epitome of conspicuous "residing", a wide-spread


DESIGN     AS  CRITICISM  STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                       6
	  
                                                                           2019 Chevrolet Suburban interior
version of "conspicuous consumption" that Thorstein Veblen analyzed over a century ago as the
characteristics of the then upper class' deliberately wasteful life style. In this sense, the single-
family house has become an important motor of limitless consumption. By necessity, each
household requires a basic set of items from kitchen utensils to smart security systems, from
sofas to SUVs, from barbecue grills to swimming pools; but then the contemporary suburban
life style industry produces many unnecessary things, things that are "nice-to-have", things that
the neighbors just bought, and, of course, there can never, ever be enough closet space.
Lodged in the DNA of the single-family house is a spatial generosity that invites the purchase of
the latest fads. Single-family houses are the world's greatest accumulators, depositories, or in
fact, temporary waste sites.
In terms of the construction quality, most single-family houses consist of poor quality building
materials that are stretched to their maximum visual and spatial effect. Subsequent to the
occupation by their new owners, they become the vehicle for personal embellishments that are
deemed to increase the value of the property: Italian marble for the bathrooms, German
kitchens, solid oak floors, etc. Over the last half century, single-family houses, like many owner-
occupied properties, have become vehicles of financial speculation. The virtual increase in
property values gave both borrowers and lenders scope to enlarge their respective debt or
credit. Bundled subprime mortgages of differing creditworthiness, otherwise referred to as
"mortgage backed securities" combining highly "toxic" and normal risks, were sold to naïve


DESIGN    AS  CRITICISM    STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                       7
	  
                                                           General Motors Technical Center, Warren, MI, 1956
and greedy speculators in search of easy profits. A chain reaction of defaults led to the 2008
financial scandal with the collapse of Lehman Brothers setting off the steepest global economic
decline since the Wall Street Crash of 1929. One decade after one of the worst global economic
slumps that in part had its origins in the financing of suburban developments, there have neither
been significant changes in the financial nor in the development sector. The apparent bucolic
suburban landscape continuous to sedate onlookers.
Late 20th century settlement patterns, of which suburban layouts are a part, also dispel and
hide modes of production. Not only are factories often anonymous boxes set behind some
notional vegetation, they shroud their content. This applies equally to animal and vegetable
production facilities: battery chicken, pork, fish, milk, hydroponic cultures, peppers and
tomatoes, etc. are indoor products. Some living organisms never see natural light before they
are "processed". Such automated, autonomous, highly controlled and "reliable" methods
guarantee calculable standards and prices. Production processes are hidden behind the
abstracted factory walls, which in turn are set behind notional vegetation, which in turn pretend
to be natural; this dissemblance mirrors the contemporary line of production at whose end is a
well presented, packaged product of which the consumer is unsure as to its contents.
Advertising agencies then use nature as a backdrop for such artificially compounded objects,
whether they be free-range chicken or cross-country SUVs.
Given these abstracted production processes, it has become easy to "outsource" them to ever
lower paying regions of the world, which in turn has led to the concentration of both


DESIGN   AS    CRITICISM      STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                         8
	  
         Rolling Acres Mall, (1975-2017), Akron, OH, © Seph Lawless (pseudonym), from The Independent, 7 Jun 2016
wholesalers and distributors. Together with Internet retailing, these powers of market
concentration have undermined both the viability of traditional small retailers as well as
shopping mall developers/owners. Low energy costs have enabled the cheap transport of mass
products across the globe. In sum, retailing today consists of compounded products of dubious
contents packaged and marketed with allusion to nature sold via an image on a web site or in a
large box in suburbia surrounded by a sea of asphalt. All this is unsustainable; dying shopping
malls are merely a symptom of the end of the economic logic of this model.


DESIGN    AS   CRITICISM  STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                          9
	  
                                                                    Airport Freeway at Irving Mall, Dallas, TX
DESIGN          AS    CRITICISM: REPLACING                      SUBURBIA
The initial research of the semester will reveal that the bulk of the world's suburbs has been
built since the Second World War. However, the models for suburban developments have a
much longer history, reaching back to the anti-urbanist visions of Antiquity, revived by the
migrating Venetian nobility who had their villas designed by Palladio in the Veneto, widely
realized through the English anti-industrialist garden cities and countless modernist
interpretations of the free-standing single-family houses. The dream of life in the countryside is
an ancient one, that is deeply rooted in the imagination of civilization. It is time that people
holding to this dream are confronted with the reality of suburban culture and that sustainable
alternatives are developed in its stead. Designing such alternatives is a comprehensive task that
should address all central aspects of suburbia's failings. The alternative visions should also be
accompanied by an approach to territorial management (regional landscape planning), property
development, community and mobility infrastructure, and a view of what production of food


DESIGN    AS CRITICISM     STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                       10
	  
                                                       View of West Campus neighborhood, Austin, TX, ca. 2014
and objects of daily life will look like in the future. One current powerful alternative to suburbia
is under way in Austin's West Campus neighborhood. Here, changes in zoning has permitted
the replacement of low-density single-family houses by high-rise apartment buildings. While
there is much to be critical of the urban design and architecture, the changes brought to this
area have been radical and substantive. While the West Campus area has a specific set of users,
suburbia in general has a diverse and normal population mix, for which the proposed alternative
design strategies need to provide viable answers.
DESIGN         AS     CRITICISM
To design is to think. To design is to consciously reflect. To design is to choose from a range of
options. To design is to place in one's imagination the proposed solution into the larger global
context: would this design be appropriate and suitable in other contexts? How would a design
change the patterns of lives of its users, change energy flows and emissions and thereby
contribute in another way to a sustainable life style?
To design is to decide which is the right space and dimension, the appropriate profile and form,
the suitable material, the desired color and surface quality, and so forth, in relation to other
prevailing conditions.


DESIGN    AS  CRITICISM    STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                 11
	  
To design is to be both critical of one's own decisions as well as of the immediate physical as
well as the general socio-cultural context that is affected by one's design. To design is to
develop one's own critical faculties, one's own approach to the socio-cultural conditions, one's
own sensibilities for proportions, spaces, forms, materials, color, light, atmospheres.
The luxury of design is that any idea and each proposal can occur in one's mind, on paper or in
the computer prior to being realized. Each act of design is an act of free choice, an act of
liberation of the existing circumstances while at the same time responding to this reality.
To design is to bring another reality into being, to project an alternative world, to change the
world.
To design is to criticize in order to improve a given condition.
Architecture addresses all the senses and it involves all the facets of material reality. Architects
should possess the skill to bring these facets of material reality into a certain balance or
harmony. Every architect can define this balance in a specific, even personal way. The challenge
in this balancing act is to define the role that each part plays within the whole, the relative
importance that each element has within the overall design, the degree of distinction or
discretion that each figure possesses against each ground.
The purpose of the studio is to demonstrate the integrative power of architectural design.
There is no other discipline in either the realm of the arts or in the realm of engineering that is
able to bring all the material and abstract elements into a harmonious synthesis. Ultimately,
architects decide on the atmospheres that are to be embodied by their designs and with them
the existential aspirations that the atmospheres should communicate to the users and visitors of
their designed environments.


DESIGN   AS   CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                             12
	  
STRUCTURE OF SEMESTER
Design as criticism will only succeed if it can integrate the diverse challenges to society in
comprehensible visions. In preparation for the development of concepts for alternative
strategies to suburban culture, there will be presentations on key topics of change:
1       Production and retail
        What, how and where are things being produced?
        From food to clothes and other objects of daily use
2       Live/Work
        How are we going to live and how will this relate spatially to the future of work?
3       Mobility
        How are we going to move from one place to another?
        Self-driving vehicles? Collective transport systems?
4       Urban and building typologies
        How specific or adaptable should future typologies be?
Reflecting on these key topics, students will begin to develop concepts for the replacement of
suburbia. Reference will be made to the previous six studios on the future of Berlin to outline
the depth and breadth of considerations and design development. Sustainability topics such as
hydrology, urban heat island effects, sealed/unsealed surface ratios, density, regenerative
energy production, space syntax, social equity, etc. will of course also be part of the design
considerations.
To demonstrate the integrative power of design, there will be two foci throughout the
semester: urban design and architecture. Students from CRP and Landscape Architecture are
welcome. Depending on the disciplinary mix of the studio, there could be interdisciplinary
design teams.
The focus of the first part of the semester will be on the development of a concept, translated
into urban design and architecture. The focus of the second part of the semester will be on the
communication of the concept through both a narrative and a set of graphic and three-


DESIGN    AS  CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                                  13
	  
dimensional representations. Students should bear in mind the need to explain their approach
to the public by contrasting the current situation with their future vision. There will be no
restrictions on the extent of each intervention; students will state the reasons for their proposed
subtractions, corrections, alterations, transformations, adaptations, additions, superimpositions,
and so on; only the students' own critical faculties, sensibilities and sensitivities will determine
what replaces suburbia over the next ten years.


DESIGN  AS   CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                         14
	  
BIBLIOGRAPHY               AND     WEB SITES
I      General
1      Roger Auch, Janis Taylor, William Acevedo, "Urban Growth in American Cities",
       U.S. Geological Survey, Circular 1252, Jan 2004:
       https://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/2004/circ1252/
2      Fulong Wu, Nicholas A. Phelps: "From Suburbia to Post-Suburbia in China? Aspects of
       the Transformation of the Beijing and Shanghai Global City Regions", in Built
       Environment, vol. 34, no. 4, 7 Dec 2008, Alexandrine Press, Marcham, Oxon, 464-481:
       https://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/alex/benv/2008/00000034/00000004/
       art00006
3      Ellen Dunham-Jones, June Williamson: Retrofitting Suburbia: Urban Design
       Solutions for Redesigning Suburbs, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ 2009
4      Ellen Dunham-Jones: TED Talk:
       https://www.ted.com/talks/ellen_dunham_jones_retrofitting_suburbia
5      June Williamson: http://buildabetterburb.org/11-urban-design-tactics-for-
       suburban-retrofitting/
6      Leigh Gallagher, The End of the Suburbs, Or Where the American Dream is
       Moving, Portfolio Penguin, New York 2013: https://www.amazon.com/The-End-
       Suburbs-American-Moving/dp/1591845254
7      René Boer, Michiel van Iersel and Mark Minkjan, ed.: 2ha, No. 11, Dublin 2015:
       https://failedarchitecture.com/did-suburbia-fail/
8      Betsy Mason, "Four Million Commutes Reveal New U.S. "Megaregions"",
       National Geographic, 30 Nov 2016:
       https://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/11/us-commutes-reveal-new-
       economic-megaregions-map/
9      Nathan Lewis, "Letting go of Suburbia", 20 Jul 2016:
       https://www.strongtowns.org/journal/2016/7/18/suburbia-retrofit
10     Kristoffer Ruud Røgeberg: Densifying Suburbia, AHO, Oslo, 2017:
       https://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/handle/11250/2487195
11     Richard Florida: "Density's Next Frontier: The Suburbs":
       https://www.citylab.com/equity/2018/02/densitys-next-frontier-the-suburbs/552065/
12     Josh J. Schmidt: "Densifying Suburbia: http://joshjschmidt.com/?p=372
13     Josh J. Schmidt: "Densifying Suburbia 2: Zoning Comparison:
       http://joshjschmidt.com/?p=378
14     Michael Lewyn: "The Economic Defense of Sprawl (And What's Wrong With It)": 14 Apr
       2019: https://www.planetizen.com/node/103843?utm_source
       =newswire&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=news-
       04152019&mc_cid=586dd3abc5&mc_eid=09d1c99623
15     Robert Kunzig: "To build the city of the future, we must get out of our cars",
       National Geographic, 27 Mar 2019:https://www.nationalgeographic.com/
       magazine/2019/04/to-build-cities-of-the-future-stop-driving-cars/
16     David Merrill and Lauren Leatherby: "Here's How America Uses Its Land",
       Bloomberg, 31 Jul 2018: https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2018-us-land- use/
17     Allison Arieff, "The New "Dream Home" Should Be A Condo", New York Times,
       1 Mar 2019: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/03/01/opinion/dream-
       home-condocloverdale.html?action=click&module=Opinion&pgtype =Homepage


DESIGN  AS  CRITICISM    STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                          15
	  
II     History of Suburbia
1      Reyner Banham, Los Angeles: Architecture of Four Ecologies, University of
       California Press, Berkeley 1971:
       https://books.google.de/books/about/Los_Angeles.html?id=qXMwCbPE5mkC
       &redir_esc=y
2      Mike Davis, City of Quartz: Excavating the Future of Los Angeles, Vintage, New York
       1990
3      William S. Saunders, ed., Sprawl and Suburbia, University of Minnesota Press,
       Minneapolis 2005
4      Alan Berger, Drosscape: Wasting Land in Urban America, Princeton Architectural Press,
       New York 2006: https://www.amazon.fr/Drosscape-Wasting-
       Land-Urban-America/dp/1568987137
5      John Archer, Architecture and Suburbia: From English Villa to American Dream House,
       1690-2000, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis 2008
6      Paul Mees, Transport for Suburbia: Beyond the Automobile Age, Earthscan,
       London-Sterling VA:
       2010https://books.google.de/books?id=D3K0FMVhcjsC&pg=PA15&lpg=PA15
       &dq=Replacing+suburbia&source=bl&ots=g-ge9oMTFq&sig=ACfU3U1khYuIu-
       y16m8shi3-Z4NVL8tVyw&hl=de&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiiw-
       uT4tnhAhWGZVAKHZxTA7Y4ChDoATAMegQIBhAB#v=onepage&q=Replacing
       %20suburbia&f=false
6      Graeme Davison, "The Suburban Idea and Its Enemies", Journal of Urban History,
       1 Mar 2013:
       https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0096144213479307?papetoc=
7      Brian Henk, Suburbia: Strategy Primer, 24 Jan 2014:
       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3grXOpbmdb0
8      John Acher, Paul J. P. Sandul and Katherine Solomonson, eds., Making Suburbia:
       New Histories of Everyday America, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 2015
9      Kate Wagner, www.mcmansionhell.com, "A Pictorial History of Suburbia", 18 Dec 2016:
       https://mcmansionhell.com/post/154653904191/a-pictorial-history-of-suburbia
10     Adam Ruins Everything, season 1, episode 43, The Disturbing History of
       Suburbia, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ETR9qrVS17g
11     Becky Nicolaides, Andrew Wiese, "Suburbanization in the United States after 1945",
       American History, Apr 2017,
       http://oxfordre.com/americanhistory/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199329175.00
       1.0001/acrefore-9780199329175-e-64
12     Klaus Philipsen, "The Death of Suburbia?":
       http://archplanbaltimore.blogspot.com/2017/03/the-death-of-suburbs.html
13     Devon Zuegel, "Subsidizing Suburbia: A forgotten history of how the government
       created suburbia", 5 Sep 2017: http://marketurbanism.com/2017/09/05/subsidizing-
       suburbia-a-forgotten-history-of-how-the-government-created-suburbia/
14     Rick McGinnis, "The cultural impact of the suburbs", 14 May 2018:
       http://www.theinterim.com/features/the-cultural-impact-of-the-suburbs/


DESIGN  AS   CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                            16
	  
III    Urban Design Strategies
1      The Functionalist City: Charta of Athens:
1.1    Le Corbusier: The Radiant City: Elements of a Doctrine of Urbanism to be used as the
       Basis of Our Machine-Age Civilization, London 1933/1967.
1.2    Le Corbusier: The City of To-Morrow and its Planning, (1929) New York 1987.
2      Stadtlandschaft: Landscape Urbanism
2.1    Hans Scharoun: Speech on the occasion of the opening of the exhibition "Berlin
       plans: First Report" on 5 Sep 1946, "Scharoun on Berlin", in 9H, No. 1, London, 17-21.
2.2    Hans Scharoun: "Scharoun: Berlin Competition Entry", in 9H, No. 1, London, 22-23.
2.3    Dean Almy: Center 14: On Landscape Urbanism, Austin 2007
3      The Architecture of the City: Critical Reconstruction
3.1    Aldo Rossi: The Architecture of the City, New York 1982
3.2    Josef Paul Kleihues, Heinrich Klotz: International Building Exhibition 1987:
       Examples of New Architecture, New York 1986
4      New Urbanism
4.1    Leon Krier: Architecture Choice or Fate, London 1998
4.2    Rob Krier: Architectural Composition, London 1991
4.3    Andres Duany, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberg: New Civic Art: Elements of Town
       Planning, New York 2003
5      Alternative Approaches
5.1    Camillo Sitte: City Planning according to Artistic Principles, (1889) Engl. transl.
       by Geoge R. Collins and Christiane Crasemann Collins, 1986
5.2    Josef Frank's Accidentism in urban design, see: Christopher Long: Josef Frank:
       Life and Work, Chicago 2002, pp. 221-231.
6      Austin
6.1    Mark Walters, City of Austin Planning and Zoning Department, Overview of the
       University Neighborhood Overlay (ONU), 18 Dec 2018:
       http://www.austintexas.gov/edims/document.cfm?id=311899
IV     Sustainable Urban Design
1      Compact City/Interstitial densification/Urban Densification
       C. A. Brebbia, J. F. Martin-Duque, L. C. Wadhwa: The Sustainable City II: Urban
       Regeneration and Sustainability, Southampton 2002.
2      Douglas Farr: Sustainable Urbanism: Urban Design with Nature, New Jersey
       2008
3      Freiburg: http://www.freiburg.de/pb/,Len/623421.html
4      Berlin: http://www.stadtentwicklung.berlin.de/planen/foren_initiativen/nachhaltige-
       _stadtentwicklung/ (German only)
5      Aurora Fernández Per, Javier Mozas, Javier Arpa: This is Hybrid: An analysis of mixed-
       use buildings, Barcelona 2014.
6      Sung Hong Kim, Eungee Cinn, et al: The FAR Game: Constraints Sparking
       Creativity, Seoul 2016.
V      Mobility
1      Autonomous cars: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomous_car
2      Autonomous cars NPR: http://nprberlin.de/post/pulling-out-car-
       ownership#stream/0


DESIGN  AS  CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION              17
	  
3      Car sharing: http://www.spiegel.de/international/zeitgeist/car-sharing-
       increasingly-popular-in-german-cities-a-913891.html


DESIGN AS CRITICISM   STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION             18
	  
SEMESTER       SCHEDULE
30 Aug       Introduction, the challenge of sustainability, research topics
02 Sep       Presentation: the future of production and retail
04 Sep       Presentation: the future of live/work, pin-up of concepts
16 Sep       Pin-up research and concepts
18 Sep       Presentation: the future of mobility
20 Sep       Presentation: urban and building typologies
23 Sep       Desk crits
25 Sep       Pin-up typologies and desk crits
07 Oct       Pin-up concepts and typologies
09 Oct       Desk crits
11 Oct       Desk crits
14 Oct       Desk crits
16 Oct       Desk crits
18 Oct       Mid-term teview
04 Nov       Pin-up and desk crits
06 Nov       Desk crits
08 Nov       Desk crits
11 Nov       Pin-up typologies
13 Nov       Desk crits
15 Nov       Pin-up: hanging plan and final presentation outline
25 Nov       Pin-up and desk crits
27 Nov       Desk crits
29 Nov       Desk crits
02 Dec       Desk crits
04 Dec       Desk crits
12 Dec       Final Review


DESIGN   AS   CRITICISM    STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                           19
	  
GRADING           POLICY
There are four components to the grade:
1       Research and concept                               20%
2       Interim Review                                     20%
3       Final Review                                       30%
4       Attendance, participation and team work            30%
Grade Descriptions
A/A-: excellent work
        Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and
        visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
        concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class.
B+/B/B-: good work
        Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed.
        Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
        required projects. Demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C/C-: required work
        Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued
        with dedication or rigor. (Note: C- does not meet the minimum grade to be counted
        toward the student’s degree.)
D+/D/D-: poor work
        Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of
        presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required
        design skill and knowledge base.
F: unacceptable work
        Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade
        will be assigned with excessive unexcused absences.
X: excused incomplete
        Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete
        assignments are not a cause for assigning this grade. An incomplete is assigned after
        consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices. Incomplete coursework must be
        completed prior to the beginning of the following semester.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR UNEXCUSED ABSENCES, LATE WORK
AND LATE ARRIVALS.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused
absences may be dropped from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for
more than three unexcused absences is a full letter drop in your final grade for the course.
Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class.


DESIGN     AS CRITICISM    STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                               20
	  
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day
you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the
absence. You must notify each of your instructors as far in advance as possible prior to the
classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
By UT Austin policy, students must notify the instructor of any pending absence for reasons of
the observation of religious holidays at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day. If a student must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, the student will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. Students with disabilities requiring special
accommodations need to obtain a letter documenting their disabilities from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-
4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the
instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should
be discussed at that time. Five business days before an exam the student should remind the
instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed.
Academic Dishonesty
UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics) and an explanation or example of what constitutes
plagiarism (Link to University Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-
10/ch01/index.html)
Evacuation in Cases of Emergency on Campus
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
•    Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
     evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
     requires exiting and assembling outside.
•    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
     occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
     the building.
•    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
     first week of class.
•    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.


DESIGN    AS   CRITICISM  STUDIO 1/6, FALL 2019, COURSE DESCRIPTION                       21
	  
•    Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
     Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
     Services office.
•    Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
•    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
     be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
