HIS350L/AAS325/ANS361                                                                                 Spring 2019
Instructor: Madeline Hsu
                                                Chinese in Diaspora
In a self-proclaimed “nation of immigrants” such as the United States, our narratives of migration, race, and
ethnicity emphasize themes of acculturation and assimilation symbolized by the metaphor of the “melting
pot.” In this class, we will explore experiences of migration, adaptation, and settlement from the perspective
of an emigrant society--China--which has one of the longest and most diverse histories of sending merchants,
workers, artisans, diplomats, missionaries, and so forth, overseas. Over the last millennia, Chinese have
migrated around the world and made homes under a great range of adversity and opportunity, producing
many fascinating stories of encounters with difference, adaptation, and the building of common ground.
Drawing upon this rich set of narratives, we will consider some of the following topics: As ethnic Chinese
have moved and settled in so many places among such diverse societies, what is Chinese about the Chinese
diaspora? What kinds of skills and attributes have helped Chinese to become arguably one of the most
successful migrant groups? What do Chinese share in common with other migrant groups? What are varieties
of national policies toward multiculturalism, immigration, and citizenship? How do Chinese adapt their
identities and cultures under different circumstances? What can Chinese experiences of migration contribute
to contemporary debates and perceptions of migrants and different kinds of migration?
This course fulfils flag requirements for independent inquiry, global cultures, and writing.
Assignments and Grade Distribution:
20% Class participation and attendance
20% 4 page review of Wang This assignment will be peer reviewed and revised. The first draft is worth 15%,
revisions alone are worth 5% each.
20% 4 page book review
3% Peer reviews and discussion of Wang reviews
30% 8-9 page research report
7% 10-minute presentation of research reports, May 7 and 9
Required Texts [available for purchase, on reserve or electronically at PCL]: Readings must be
completed before the first class of each week assigned.
Madeline Hsu, Dreaming of Gold, Dreaming of Home: Transnationalism and Migration Between the United States and
         Southern China, 1882-1943 (Stanford 2000)
Philip Kuhn, Chinese Among Others: Migration in Modern Times (Rowman and Littlefield, 2009).
Vivian Louie, Compelled to Excel: Immigration, Education, and Opportunity among Chinese Americans (Stanford 2004)
Chan, Shelly. Diaspora’s Homeland: Modern China in the Age of Global Migration (Duke 2018)
JAG Roberts, China to Chinatown: Chinese Food in the West (Reaktion 2004) [UT Ebook]
Wang Gungwu, The Chinese Overseas: From Earthbound China to the Quest for Autonomy (Harvard 2000)
Course Schedule: (subject to change)
Week 1: Course Introduction and Main Themes: Migration and Identity
Week 2: Jan. 29 & 31: Between Diaspora and Ethnicity
Week 3: Feb. 5 & Feb. 7: Migration Concepts
Week 4: Feb. 12 & 14: Migration Flows: Southeast Asia and White Settler Frontiers
Week 5: Feb. 19 & 21: Racial Categories and Immigration Restriction
                                                        1


Week 6: Feb. 26 and 28: Living Transnationally
Week 7: March 5 & March 7: Living Transnationally Pt. II
Week 8: March 12 & 14: Chinese Diaspora (1)
                                    SPRING BREAK March 16-24
Week 9: March 26 & 28: Chinese Diaspora (2)
Week 10: April 2 & 4: Research Reports
Week 11: April 9 & 11: Food and Identity
Week 12: April 16 & 18: Ethnic Food as Business and as Labor
Week 13 April 23 & 25: Questioning the Model Minority
Week 14 May 2 & 4: Race or Demography?
Week 15 May 7 & 11: Presentation of research projects
Some guidelines:
Grading: All final grades will be assigned on a plus/minus scale.
Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the University Writing Center [http://uwc.utexas.edu/],
PCL Learning Commons, 471-6222: http://uwc.fac.utexas.edu/). The UWC offers free, individualized, expert
help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Any undergraduate
enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any writing project. They work with students
from every department on campus, for both academic and non-academic writing. Whether you are writing a
lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants will
be happy to work with you. Their services are not just for writing with “problems.” Getting feedback from an
informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help students develop
strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is intended to foster independence. Each
student determines how to use the consultant’s advice. The consultants are trained to help you work on your
writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your work.
Academic Honesty: It is your responsibility to be aware of what constitutes dishonesty. Each student is
expected to turn in work completed independently, except when assignments specifically authorize
collaborative effort. Plagiarism or any action that violates the letter and intent of the policy of academic
integrity is explained fully here. Any violation will be punished to the fullest extent possible, up to and
including failing the course and suspension from UT.
                                                 2
