LATINO URBANISM: DESIGN AND ENGAGEMENT IN
THE AMERICAN CITY
MAS 374, URB 354, ARC 327R
MWF 12:00-1:00pm
GAR 0.120
Edna Ledesma, Ph.D.
ednaledesma@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By Appointment
 OVERVIEW
This course will address Latino Urbanism in the American city as a new understanding of urban placemaking
and development. This course will explore the intersections of culture, place, and design to critically address
how the socioeconomic dynamics that underlie demographic shifts in the U.S. are influencing urban change in
the American landscape. The class will focus particularly on exploring the evolution and ways by which Latinos
shape the built environment, both at in the public realm and in the home.
 The class will address the Latino Urbanism through the lenses of history, architecture, and city planning. The
course will survey the history of urban development in the United States, while critically addressing the
challenges Latinos have faced in addressing inequality and social disparities. Students will examine the
complex relationships between urban poverty and larger structural forces such as planning policy and urban
design frameworks. Furthermore, the course will provide students an opportunity to participate, explore, and
diagnose bottom-up forms of public engagement that help shape a more equitable design of Latino city places.
OBJECTIVES
This course has the following objectives: to explore the role that design, planning, and public engagement have
in addressing the needs of Latino communities in the U.S.; to undertake a critical analysis of the socio-economic
conditions of Latinos in contemporary American society; and understand how diversity and culture can impact
regions, governments, economies for producing a just city.
COURSE STRUCTURE
The course is designed as a topics course; students are responsible for their course readings and for
participating fully and thoroughly in weekly discussions. Therefore, the course will consist of instructor lectures
and student led discussions.
ASSIGNMENTS


o Online Discussion Forum
   Canvas Discussion Board
   15% of Final Grade
o Case Study 1: Latino Urbanism and the Public Real
   Individual Report & PowerPoint
   15% of Final Grade
o Case Study 2: Latino Urbanism and the Home
o Individual Report & PowerPoint
   15% of Final Grade
o Public Engagement Case Study: Grassroots Community-based Panning/Design
   Group Report & PowerPoint
   45% of Final Grade
o Participation (16 weeks)
   Attending class and engaging in daily class discussion is required
   10% of Final Grade
                                 Tentative Class Schedule **
                                        (subject to changes)
     Week                                   In‐class                            Deadlines
 1
    Wednesday 29 ‐ Aug         Lecture‐1: Introduction to Latino Urbanism
       Friday 31 ‐ Aug          Lecture‐2: Intro to City Planning & Design
 2      Monday 3 - Sep                  Labor Day – NO CLASS
     Wednesday 5 ‐ Sep     Lecture 3: Historical Origins of the Mesoamerican
                                                    City
        Friday 7 ‐ Sep                                          th
                          Lecture 4: Redefining the Border: 19 and Early 20
                                                                             th
                                                 Century


3   Monday 10 - Sep     Lecture 5: Land use, Zoning, and Urbanization
  Wednesday 12 ‐ Sep  Lecture 6: Top Down vs. Bottom Up Approaches to
                                            Planning
    Friday 14 ‐ Sep    Lecture 7: Hazards and Environmental Planning
4   Monday 17 - Sep           Lecture 8: Urban Spatial Structures
  Wednesday 19 ‐ Sep Lecture 9: How the Built Environment Shapes Choice
    Friday 21 ‐ Sep        Online Discussion: Film “Urbanized”          Canvas Discussion:
                             ***Ledesma Out: APA Fall Leadership          DUE 11:59PM
5   Monday 24 - Sep         Lecture 10: Suburbanization of Poverty        Case Study 1:
                                                                          DUE 11:59PM
  Wednesday 26 ‐ Sep               Lecture 11: Gentrification
    Friday 28 ‐ Sep       Case Study 1: Student Presentations
6    Monday 1 - Oct               Lecture 12: Urban Housing
  Wednesday 3 ‐ Oct                Lecture 13: Rural Housing
     Friday 5 ‐ Oct           Guest Lecture: Anna Lake-Smith,           Canvas Discussion:
                                   Foundation Communities                 DUE 11:59PM
7    Monday 8 - Oct                Lecture 14: Latino Barrios
  Wednesday 10 ‐ Oct         Lecture 15: Building Identity in Place
    Friday 12 ‐ Oct               Online Discussion: Film               Canvas Discussion:
                          ***Ledesma Out: Guest Lecture at NC State       DUE 11:59PM
8   Monday 15 - Oct        Lecture 16: Privatization of Public Space
  Wednesday 17‐ Oct       Guest Lecture: Gabriel Diaz-Montemayor,
                        Landscape Architect, Design of Mexico’s Public
    Friday 19 ‐ Oct       Online Discussion: Space
                                                Lecture 17: Everyday    Canvas Discussion:
                        Urbanism ***Ledesma Out: Texas APA Awards         DUE 11:59PM
9   Monday 22 - Oct              Lecture 18: The Formal Sector


   Wednesday 24 ‐ Oct             Lecture 19: The Informal Sector
     Friday 26 ‐ Oct     Online Discussion: Lecture 20: Cultural and          Canvas Discussion:
                        Political Economy ***Ledesma Out: Presenting at ACSP    DUE 11:59PM
                                             Conference
10   Monday 29 - Oct        Lecture 21: Local Economic Development              Case Study 2:
                                                                                DUE 11:59PM
   Wednesday 31 ‐ Oct     Lecture 22: Profiling the U.S. Latino Economy
     Friday 2 ‐ Nov         Case Study 2: Student Presentations
11   Monday 5 - Nov      Lecture 23: Community Engagement Methods
   Wednesday 7‐ Nov             Lecture 24: Planning for Inclusion
     Friday 9 ‐ Nov            Guest Lecture: Matthew Ramirez,                Canvas Discussion:
                               City of Austin Housing Department                DUE 11:59PM
12  Monday 12 - Nov      Lecture 25: Early Rise of Resistance Grassroots
   Wednesday 14‐ Nov           Lecture 26: Grassroots of the 2000s
    Friday 16 ‐ Nov                    Online Discussion:                     Canvas Discussion:
                      ***Preparation for East Austin Walking Tour Nov17th       DUE 11:59PM
13  Monday 19 - Nov             Lecture 27: Art and Urban Identity
   Wednesday 21‐ Nov          Thanksgiving Holiday – NO CLASS
    Friday 23 ‐ Nov           Thanksgiving Holiday – NO CLASS
14  Monday 26 - Nov               Lecture 28: Latino Placemaking
   Wednesday 28‐ Nov              Lecture 29: Cultural Resilience
    Friday 30 ‐ Nov            Guest Lecture: Rodolfo Rodriguez,             Canvas Discussion:
                             Housing Authority of the City of Austin	       DUE 11:59PM
15   Monday 3 - Dec            Final Case Study Presentations


            Wednesday 5‐ Dec                Final Case Study Presentations
                Friday 7 ‐ Dec              Final Case Study Presentations
      16       Monday 10 - Dec           Lecture 30: Latino Urbanism: A Synthesis
                                                   ***Last Class Day
               Friday 14 ‐ Dec                  Official Final Exam Day                  Final Paper:
                                                                                         DUE 11:59PM
REQUIRED READING
***All required readings will be available digitally on Canvas
Chase, J., Crawford, M., & Kaliski, J. (1999). Everyday Urbanism. New York: Monacelli Press.
Dias, D. & Torres, R. (Eds.). (2012). Latino Urbanism: The Politics of Planning, Policy, and Redevelopment. N.Y.:
          New York University Press.
Dowling, J. (2014). Mexican Americans and the Question of Race. Texas: University of Texas Press.
González, E. (2017). Latino City: Urban Planning, Politics, and the Grassroots. New York: NY. : Routledge.
Hutton, T. A. (2008). The New Economy of the Inner City: Restructuring, Regeneration and Dislocation in the
          Twenty-First-Century Metropolis. London ; New York : Routledge.
Jacobs, J., (1961). The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Modern Library.
Kneebone, E., & Garr, E. (2010). The Suburbanization of Poverty: Trends in Metropolitan America, 2000 to 2008.
          Washington, DC: The Metropolitan Policy Program at Brookings.
Krabbendam, H., Roholl, M., & Vries, T. (2001). The American Metropolis: Image and Inspiration. Amsterdam:
          VU University Press, 2001.
Lara, J. (2018). Latino Placemaking and Planning: Cultural Resilience and Strategies for Reurbanization. Tucson,
          AZ : The University of Arizona Press.
Mukhija, V., & Loukaitou-Sideris, A. (Eds.). (2014). The Informal American City: From Taco Trucks to Day Labor.
          Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press.


Rios, M., Vazquez, L., & Miranda, L. (2012). Diálogos: Placemaking in Latino Communities. N.Y; Milton Park,
          Abingdon; Routledge.
Rael, R., & Cruz, T. (Eds.). (2017). Borderwall as Architecture: a Manifesto for the U.S.-Mexico Boundary. Oakland,
          CA: University of California Press.
Rothstein, R. (2017). The Color of Law: A Forgotten History of How Government Segregated America. New York,
          N.Y. : Liveright Publishing Corporation.
Tate, L. & Shannon, B. (Eds.). (2019). Planning for AuthentiCITIES. New York, N.Y. : Routledge.
Grading Policy
          A+ Exceptional (the university computer does not accept beyond an A, but I will notify anyone in this
          category)
          A Work is inventive, appropriate, shows verbal and visual ability, is conceptually vigorous, and
          insightful
          A- As above, but with scope for further development
          B+ Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued, and successfully
          completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and completes all
          work. Demonstrates potential for excellence.
          B Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.
          B- Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued. One or more assignments or
          projects requiring further development.
          C Assignments and/or projects are not pursued with dedication or vigor. Assignments or projects are
          incomplete in one or more areas.
          F Unacceptable work
          X Offered where there are clear personal circumstances indicating that it would be inappropriate to
          offer a final grade at that time.


ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences,
the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a
full letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only
excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to
determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused
absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students
must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not
acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly
enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and
procedures on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University
Code of Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct


CARE PROGRAM
The Counseling and Mental Health Center’s Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) program has placed
CARE counselors in 13 colleges and schools to provide accessible support for students who are struggling
emotionally and/or academically.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259
voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the
instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at
that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
BCAL
The Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) is a fast and simple way to report any issues or concerns you may have
with any member of the university community including students and teaching assistants. You can report your
concern any time online or by calling 512-232-5050.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
          when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
          outside.
     • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may
          occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
          of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
          Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
     • Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
          www.utexas.edu/emergency.
