                THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                    STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL
                                      W ORK
Course Number: SW n387R26                      Instructor: Alma Mena, LCSW
Unique Number: 88745                           Email: almamenamx@gmail.com
Semester: Summer 2019                          Phone: (512) 796-6233
Meeting Time: T/TH 8:30-11:00                  Office: SW 3.104A
Meeting Place: SSW2.112                        Office hours: Thursdays 11am - noon
                       SPANISH FOR SOCIAL WORKERS
I.     Course Description
       In preparation for field education and subsequent practice, this course builds on
       students' academic and/or native foundation in the Spanish language by providing
       specialized language education designed to increase cultural sensitivity with diverse
       Spanish speaking populations and their corresponding environments.
       The focus is on development of skills for ethical and effective communication with
       client systems in a manner which addresses the complexities of cultural and
       individual identity, religious and spiritual beliefs, as well as differences related to
       age, economic class, geographic and national origin, gender, sexual orientation, and
       levels of disability. An experiential component of this course involves the students
       in exploration of their own and other cultures in order to facilitate understanding,
       affirmation and respect for diversity.
       Prerequisites
       A minimum of two semesters of college level Spanish and basic conversational
       Spanish.
II.    Course Objectives
       Upon completion of this course students will demonstrate:
       1. Familiarity with the complexity of cultural and personal identities existing
       among and within Spanish-speaking populations and their corresponding
       language variations.
       2. Skill in application of values and professional ethics as they relate to
       effective communication with a variety of client systems, including
       differences related to economic class, geographic and national origin,
       levels of ability, gender, sexual orientation, religious and spiritual
       differences, and age across the life span.
       3. Skill in use of a systemic, strengths approach in data collection, assessment,
       intervention, and evaluation, with clients who have limited proficiency in
       English.
       4. Application of communication skills in interview that incorporate cultural
       nuances and empowerment goals for the promotion of social justice and human
       well-being among Spanish-speaking populations.


       5. Familiarity and beginning skills in application of terminology specific to
       different fields of practice.
      6. Skill in self-assessment and goal directed professional growth for cultural
      sensitivity in practice with Spanish-speaking client systems.
III. Teaching Methods
      This class will be taught using a variety of methods with an emphasis on
      experiential learning: i.e. lecture and instruction, drills and practice, role play, guest
      speakers, cultural immersion activity, audio and video taping, videos viewed in
      class, community-based activity, course assignments and readings. The assignments
      will provide the opportunity for "learning by doing." For success in this class you
      must be willing to participate, risk yourself, and attend class. You are encouraged
      to ask questions, give the instructor feedback , and meet with the instructor
      individually as needed.
IV.   Recommended Texts and Materials
      Materials will be provided by instructor.
V.   Course Requirements
      There are FIVE major assignments for all students in this class.
       1.     Class participation and mini assignments (25% of grade, 25 points total)
              The student's active participation in class which includes experiential
              activities is imperative for effective language development. An expectation
              of all students in this class includes evidence of and willingness to participate
              in class activities and exercises. Students are expected to express their
              thoughts and opinions and to ask questions and make comments relevant to
              the course material, speakers, videos, activities, role plays - in SPANISH as
              much as possible. Dialogue between both instructor and students, and among
              students, is encouraged. (10 points.) Professional accountability and
              responsibility implies consistent attendance and punctuality.
              Mini homework assignments will also count toward participation (5 points
              each.)
       2.       Cultural Immersion and Reflective Paper
               (15% of grade, 15 points) DUE June 20
                Students, individually or in pairs, will attend any local church which has
                a Spanish speaking religious or spiritual service (spiritual "limpias" or
                healings are fine). Students may also attend a Spanish speaking
                Alcoholics Anonymous, Al Anon or similar meeting in Spanish.
                Parenting classes, immigration workshops in Spanish are also offered
                throughout community. Students will then write a two page reflective
                paper in English or Spanish (Spanish will be graded for content, not
                grammar) summarizing the event and processing their own and their
                partner's (if a pair) reactions to the experience. Students will note any


               awareness of language variations, vocabulary/phrases, and cultural
               nuances in communication.
       3.     Meeting with a BILINGUAL social worker, mental health professional,
             social service provider, community activist/organizer, in the community
             and write Reflective Paper (20% of grade, 20 points) DUE July 11
              Students are required to meet with a bilingual service provider (as listed
             about) in the community. Instructor will assist students in locating one if
             needed. Students will interview them using class discussion points. One
             page reflective paper in Spanish and brief classroom presentation.
      4.       Written Translation Project and Client/Social Worker Role Play
               (20% of grade, 20 points) DUE July 16I July 18
               July 16: Students will work in pairs to translate from English to
               Spanish a basic assessment or initial interview that is provided by the
               instructor (there will be a variety of choices).
               July 18: Students will role play as client and social worker and
               simulate how an actual interview/assessment would occur. Students will
               include an intervention approach in the assessment (i.e. solution focused,
               strengths based, etc.). Translated assessments will be distributed to
               classmates to keep as tools.
      5.       Oral exit interview (20% of grade, 20 points)
               DUE July 30, Aug 1
             ·Using skills and tools learned in this course, students will use a cultural
               assessment as a guide to interview the instructor in a private one-on-one
               setting the last day of class. Student will act as a social worker/clinician
               and instructor as client.
Assignments, Due Dates, Points:
     Assignment                   Due date                           Points
  Class participation             On-going                            10 pts
Voicemail/Introduction/              6/11                              5 pts
      Directions
 Cultural immersion                  6/20                           15 points
        paper
 Current event share                 6/27                            5 points
          out


      Assignment                      Due date                            Points
   Interview Bilingual                   7/09                            20 points
      Social Worker
    Draft translations                   7/16
    Final translations/                  7/18                            20 points
        Role play
  Country of Interest                  7/23-25                            5 points
      Oral interview                  7/30 -8/1                          20 points
VI.    Grades
       94.0 and Above                 A
       90.0 to 93.999                 A-
       87.0 to 89.999                 B+
       84.0 to 86.999                 B
       80.0 to 83.999                 B-
       77.0 to 79.999                 C+
       74.0 to 76.999                 C
       70.0 to 73.999                 C-
       67.0 to 69.999                 D+
       64.0 to 66.999                 D
       60.0 to 63.999                 D-
       Below 60.0                     F
VI.    Class Policies
     ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION
     Attendance and participation for the full class period community learning projects is
     expected for all students. Repeated late arrivals to class may be considered as an
     absence. Classroom exercises, discussions, guest speakers and other class experiential
     activities are essential for the students’ learning, skill building and continued
     development of self awareness. This form of learning cannot be “made up” once missed.
     Students are to notify the instructor prior to class at the given office phone numbers or
     by email if they cannot attend class due to an illness or emergency.
     PAPERS
     Students are expected to produce high quality work in terms of appearance, writing style
     and content. Points will be deducted for errors, misspellings, poor organization,
     repetition of information, and inferior word processing. When using information from


other sources, references and bibliography should conform to the current APA style
citation. Students are encouraged to consult with the Undergraduate Writing Center at
http://uwc.utexas.edu 471-6222 for assistance with any writing assignments. Plagiarism
is a serious violation of university rules and will be dealt with according to university
policy.
TIME MANAGEMENT
Late assignments will be penalized 2 points per day that they are late. Contact the
instructors before the assignment is due if other arrangements need to be made due to an
emergency.
GRADES
   Grades will be posted on Canvas. Students should be able to track their progress
   throughout the course. Should you have questions about any assignment for this class,
   please consult with the professor in advance of the due date.
   Grades will be assigned as follows:
   94-100 points A
   90.0–93.999 points A-
   To receive an “A” in this course you must have excellent attendance and
   participation, and you must produce work that is of superior quality.
   87.0-89.999 points B+
   84.0 -86.999 points B
   80.0–83.999 points B-
   Work earning grades of B+ and B generally exceeds assignment/ performance
   expectations; demonstrates varying degrees of in-depth critical thinking and analysis
   that resulted in work additional to that laid out in the assignment directions (i.e.,
   coherence and integration of ideas).
   77.0-79.999 points C+
   74.0–76.999 points C
   70.0-73.999 points C -
   Work earning grades of C+, C and C- may substantially to minimally meet
   requirements, have minor to more significant gaps, and lack evidence of in depth
   thinking and analysis. MSSW Students must make a C or above to avoid having to
   repeat the coursework.
   67.0-69.999 points D+
   64.0-66.999 points D 60.0-63.999 points
   Grades in the D range reflect work that has important gaps in the assignment both in
   terms of not meeting the requirements and lacking critical thinking and analysis.
   Below 60.0 F
   *Instructor reserves the right to award differentially weighted grades on the group
   project. This will normally occur when a member of the group fails to actively


      participate in the group, consistently misses deadline for assigned tasks, or produces
      work that is below the quality standards expected for the project. In other words, if a
      student's individual performance is consistently below par so that it jeopardizes the
      grades of the other members of the group, I will down grade that student.
VII.    University Policies
      This class will operate under the guidelines of professional accountability in the
      classroom. The following policies will be observed:
     THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The
     University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
     opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
     these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
     community.
     PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The
     professor expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should
     arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show
     respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
     individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such
     factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs,
     national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each
     other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work also
     deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
     uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience
     that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In
     this environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we
     will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires
     that students engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
     UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or
     distressing reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so,
     students are encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and
     supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but
     students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If
     counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing,
     including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online
     at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
     POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL
     COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are not private. Even when open only
     to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist among
     the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such
     forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is
     said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed


and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective
careers.
Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other
forms of electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their
communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social
work students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be
considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this,
social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private
levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could
jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these
sites and are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social
networks. Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media,
including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or
compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically
evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional
relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social
Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of
Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social
work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work
program while in the classroom, the university community, and the broader area
communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules
on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student
may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/).
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but
not limited to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected
works. Any unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal
law and may result in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally,
the sharing of course materials without the specific, express approval of the professor
may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic
dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes,
among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services
for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community


Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the
semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student
should remind the professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business
days before an exam. For more information, visit http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor
of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day. If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or
project in order to observe a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments
of 1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning
environment that is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty,
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated
reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, or
sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University
resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or
the Title IX Deputy for the SSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff
may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to obtain information. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-
sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be
found here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by
accessing the Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies,
clients, and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics
on educational supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with
individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of
confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for
review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards
for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO
STUDENTS. Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence;
therefore, students are responsible for reading their email for university and course-
related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the
university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-
mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-sensitive.
Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.


    SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have
    assignments that involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such,
    these assignments may present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks
    inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to
    policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should
    notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
    BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about
    someone who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
    to discuss by phone their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
    provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the
    Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
    (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050
    or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
    EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT
    Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
    activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies
    regarding evacuation:
        •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building.
             Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
             entering the building.
        •    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the
             first week of class.
        •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
        •    Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
             Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
             office.
IX.           Course Schedule:
   Date                    Topic                          Reading                 Assignment Due
Th 6/6          Class overview and
                syllabus review
                Basics -Introductions,
                class goals, Spanish key
                phrases,
                communication, non-
                verbals.


   Date           Topic              Reading   Assignment Due
                                               Create your own
T 6/11  Family                                 voicemail,
                                               introductions,
        Feelings/Emotions                      directions to
                                               office, or agency
                                               description and
                                               bring in written
                                               copy to class
Th 6/13 Confidentiality and
        Client Rights.      Article (Check
        Code of Ethics      Canvas/Instructor)
        Basic Needs ,
        casemanagement
        Guest Speaker
        Laura Morrison
T 6/18  Health Care and the                    Cultural
        Medical Setting                        Immersion Paper
Th 6/20
        Domestic violence,
        Sexual Assault.
        Private practice.
        Guest Speaker: Ana
        Maria Cabezas, LPC


   Date             Topic                  Reading    Assignment Due
T 6/25                            Article (Check
        Cultural Formulation      Canvas/Instructor) Current Event
        Interview                                    Share Out
        Mental Health, DSM V
Th 6/27 Religion and Spirituality
        Guest Speaker
        Leonor Vargas, LMSW
T 7/2   Schools & education       Article/ Handout
                                  (check canvas)
T 7/9   Advocacy, community,
        macro work                                   Reflective paper on
                                                     interview with
        Guest Speaker.                               bilingual sw
Th 7/11 Legal Realm
        Law & law enforcement
                                  Article (Check
        Guest speaker             Canvas/Instructor)
        Assessment tools and
        Initial interviews
        -----
T 7/16  Engaging the client                           Group draft
                                                      translations of
        Individual, family, group                     assessment tools
        therapy                                       for instructor and
                                                      per review


      Date                 Topic                       Reading          Assignment Due
  Th 7/18        Oral presentations of                                  Client/social
                 translated assessments                                 worker
                 with peer feedback                                     simulations with
                                                                        translated
                                                                        assessments
  T 7/23         Spanish speaking             Article (Check            Students to share
                 countries and their          Canvas/Instructor)        country of interest
                 cultures. Key facts and                                Project
                 more.
  Th 7/25        Peer preparation for oral
                 interviews
  T 7/30, 8/1    Individual oral interviews                             Oral interviews
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gonzalez, Juliana. “HUD: Yes, Latinos Still Experience Housing Discrimination.”
Latino Policy Forum, 5 Aug. 2013, www.lationpolicyforum.org/blog/hud-lations-
housing-discrimination
Chacon, Arturo. “77% De Los Casos De Violencia Domestica En La Comunidad Latina
No Se Denuncian,” Chicagotribune.com, 16 June 2017,
www.chicagotribune.com/hoy/ct-hoy-804212-77-de-los-casos-de-violencia-
domestica-en-la-comunidad-latina-no-se-denucian-story.html
Arellano, Perla, “Disparidad En La Educacion de Latinos.” Statesman.com, Associated
Press, 8 Nov. 2017, https://www.statesman.com/news/disparidad-educacion-
latinos/6DuazIOo7rvg99zC9NAC8K/
USC Anneberg. “Enfermedades Mentales, Un Estigma Entre Latinos.” Center for
Health Journalism, www.centerforhealthjournalism.org/content/enfermedades-
mentales-un-estigma-entre-latinos.
