ARC 318L
World Architecture: Industrial Revolution to Present
FALL 2019
Instructor: Betsy Frederick-Rothwell
Office hours: W 11:00-12:00, Th 1:00-2:00, and by appointment
Office: WMB 3.112B
email: betsyfr@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants
 Lauren Bock                lauren3@utexas.edu
 Jessica Brown              jessica.brown145@utexas.edu
 Irina Rivero               riveroirina@gmail.com
 Ulli Unterweger            unterweger@utexas.edu
 Anthony Vannette           anthony.vannette@utexas.edu
Lectures
T/Th 9:30-10:50, HRH 2.104 (Jessen Auditorium) ***Note Temporary Relocation***
     Thursday, 29 August only: MRH 2.106
     Tuesday, 3 September to ???: MRH 3.638 (Bates Auditorium)
Discussion Sections
 00635     Monday           10-11           PAR 210           Jessica
 00640     Wednesday        10-11           PAR 210           Anthony
 00645     Tuesday          11-12           UTC 4.120         Anthony
 00650     Thursday         11-12           UTC 4.120         Lauren
 00655     Tuesday          12-1            SZB 284           Irina
 00660     Tuesday          12:30-1:30      SUT 2.110         Jessica
 00665     Tuesday          1-2             SZB 284           Irina
 00670     Monday           2-3             CAL 323           Ulli
 00675     Wednesday        2-3             WMB 4.118         Ulli
 00680     Thursday         2-3             WMB 3.116         Lauren
Texts & Readings
 Barry Bergdoll, European Architecture, 1750-1890 (Oxford University Press, 2000)
 William J. R. Curtis, Modern Architecture since 1900 (Prentice-Hall, 1996)
 All other reading assignments will be posted on the course Canvas site
Course materials on Canvas
The syllabus, pdfs of the lectures, and other class materials will be available in folders on the
course Canvas site in addition to required course readings.


                                                                                                    2
DESCRIPTION
This is the second course in the School of Architecture’s two-part introduction to the history of
architecture. It offers a global perspective of buildings, their settings, and the dissemination of
ideas about architecture from the eighteenth century to the present. Particular attention is given
to the relationships among architectural expression, meaning, and building technology and to
issues arising when architectural traditions of one culture are imposed upon or otherwise adapted
by another.
The course may be taken for partial fulfillment of the following University core curriculum
requirements:
 Global Cultures Flag
 Writing Flag
 Visual and Performing Arts Core Component Area
Educational Objectives
 Establish chronological and thematic frameworks for the study of architectural history
 Understand the broader cultural factors that frame the design of the built environment
 Understand how notions of modernity and modernism apply to architecture
 Develop skills of description and formal analysis
 Be able to critically respond to primary and secondary texts on nineteenth- and twentieth-
    century architecture
 Be able to conduct research using secondary sources
CIDA Objectives (Interior Design)
 Understand the social, political, and physical influences affecting historical changes in the
    design of the built environment in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
 Identify movements and traditions in nineteenth- and twentieth-century architecture
Core Curriculum Notes
Global Cultures. This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Writing. This course carries the Writing flag. Writing flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and to read and discuss your peers' work. A substantial portion of your grade
will come from your written work.
Visual and Performing Arts. This course may be used to fulfill the visual and performing arts
component of the University core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical
thinking skills, teamwork, and social responsibility.


                                                                                                     3
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS
Services for Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(ddce.utexas.edu/disability/) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations. We will do our best to work with you.
Counseling & Mental Health Center (CMHC)
The CMHC offers resources for general health and well-being, time management, stress
management, test anxiety and other personal concerns. The Center is located on the 5th floor of
the Student Services Building. The telephone number is (512) 471-3515. http://cmhc.utexas.edu
Behavior Concerns Advice Line
If you have concerns about the behavior of someone, the Behavior Concerns Advice Line offers
assistance 24/7: (512) 232-5050.
University Writing Center
The University Writing Center located in the UT Learning Commons area at Perry-Castañeda
Library provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing for UT undergraduates
on a drop-in basis or by appointment. The Center’s staff can help you with any writing
assignment at any stage of development. uwc.utexas.edu
Office of Campus Safety and Security: www.utexas.edu/safety: Emergency: 911
GROUND RULES
This is a large class in a large room, and we must work together to create a good environment for
learning. Newspaper reading, posting photos of your weekend on Facebook, chatting with
friends, eating breakfast tacos, and snoring are disruptive to those around you, so catch up on
news, meals, and sleep before class. Please note that this is one of the finest auditoriums on
campus. Help keep it that way by not bringing food or drink into the hall.
Policy on attendance and due dates
Regular attendance is expected. Students with more than two unexcused absences from the
weekly discussion sections will be penalized by a reduction of the final letter grade.
All assignments and examinations must be submitted on the due dates. Late papers will be
penalized by a grade reduction. Incompletes (X grades) will be awarded only in instances of
medical or severe family emergencies. Documentation may be required.
Accommodation for religious holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify your teaching assistant or me of your pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day,
you will be given the opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.


                                                                                                  4
The Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
A Note on Plagiarism
Please heed your professional responsibilities regarding plagiarism. The work you present must
be your own unless you explicitly indicate otherwise. Be attentive to your use of sources. If you
copy or closely paraphrase language from a source (print or internet), you must provide a
citation. If you are unsure about what constitutes plagiarism or are unfamiliar with the mechanics
of citations (it also is important to know when not to footnote) please ask us for assistance.
Please note that we may use the Turnitin assessment tool when evaluating work posted in
Canvas.
EVALUATION
Grades will be based on mid-term and final examinations, reader response statements, a building
description essay, and a research project, which includes a presentation at an evening poster
session and a final paper. Evaluations will be represented by a cumulative point system with
letter grades determined as a percentage of a given score. Thus, a score of 40 on the 50-point
building description assignment is 80%, a B-; a semester total of 435 out of the 500 possible
points is 87%, a B+.
My standards regarding grades are as follows: A represents exemplary work in which the student
has successfully realized his or her stated objectives in terms of content and style; B has a
broader compass in which the intentions of the assignment are met adequately but with some
weakness of content or style or reticence in approach; C recognizes effort but acknowledges
serious problems in content or style; D and F reflect a lack of effort. I award incompletes only in
cases of illness or other personal emergencies.
Reader Response Essays                  20 points each (except for #1); 100 total points
Due in section (note: late reader responses will not be accepted except in cases of documented
illness or family emergency)
#1 Week of 2 September (ungraded, prepare the prompts for discussion)
#2 Week of 9 September (graded)
#3 Week of 16 September (graded)
#4 Week of 30 September (graded)
#5 Week of 28 October (graded)
#6 Week of 25 November (graded)
Building Description                             50 points
Due in section week of 23 September, revised paper due in section week of 7 October
Midterm Examination                             100 points
Tuesday, 15 October


                                                                                                      5
Research Project                                150 total points
        Scholarly Journal Exercise                5 points
        Due in section, week of 14 October
        Proposal                                  5 points
        Due Thursday, 24 October, 5:00pm
        Outline                                   10 points
        Due in section, week of 4 November
        Poster Session                            30 points
        Thursday afternoon, 14 November
        Final Paper                              100 points
        Due Monday, 9 December, 5:00 p.m.
Final Examination                                100 points
Currently scheduled for Saturday 14 December, 7:00 – 10:00pm
WRITING ASSIGNMENTS
Please note the terms description and analysis in the assignments. Description refers to the
systematic accounting of an object or situation. It aspires to objectivity and the assertion of fact.
Analysis refers to an investigation of the described object or situation (the fact) with the intent of
understanding how it came to be, how it is put together, or how it works. Analysis of an object,
for example, might reveal its compositional structure (proportion, patterning). Analysis of a
situation, on the other hand, might place it in a historical context and assess its impact. Analysis
requires independent thinking and creativity, because it draws on the application of information
and method that lie outside the object, such as the application of geometry to analyze the
composition of a façade or the use of models of individual or social behavior to account for
human deeds. It requires you to have an opinion that you can support by demonstration. The
paper assignments and the research project are intended to help you develop your ability to
conduct historical analysis.
Late papers will not be accepted except in cases of documented illness or family emergency.
Reader Response Essays
The reader response essays are intended to sharpen your ability to read critically and to provide a
basis for discussion in the weekly section meetings. Each paper should be two pages long (about
500-600 words, double-spaced). It should include 1) a paragraph summarizing the principal
themes of the articles and how you think they relate to each other, and 2) a longer discussion of
an aspect that you find interesting. You may express support or disagreement with the authors’
positions, comment on the subject matter, or otherwise relate it to something you’ve encountered
elsewhere. The object of the exercise is to set out your thoughts clearly and concisely and to
offer a direction for further discussion. The criteria for evaluation are as follows: evidence of
your comprehension of the articles, expression of a personal point of view, clarity of expression.
Building Description Essay
The purpose of this assignment is to refine your ability to describe a building clearly and
concisely. Please select a building from the following list and describe its façade. Your paper


                                                                                                      6
should be about 700 words long. If possible, include a photograph (it can be one taken with your
phone).
This is an exercise of direct observation. While you may consult secondary sources, you should
not rely on them as the basis of your description. If you use secondary sources such as books,
articles, or websites, please cite them in a bibliography.
The challenge in writing architectural descriptions is to present the building in a way that allows
the reader to visualize it. One way to think about this is as if you are describing the building to a
friend over the telephone. An effective approach is to proceed from the general to the specific. In
so doing, organize your text around aspects you consider significant, such as massing, materials,
fenestration (windows and doors), and ornament.
The papers will be peer reviewed in discussion sections the week of 23 September, reviewed by
the teaching assistants, and returned the following week for revision. The final submission is due
in sections the week of 7 October. Criteria for evaluation: organization and approach, use of
appropriate architectural terminology, clarity of expression.
Building List (describe the principal façade only)
French Legation, 1840-41 (802 San Marcos St.)
Neill-Cochran House, Abner Cook, 1855 (2310 San Gabriel Street)
Nowotny Building (part of UT’s Little Campus), Abner Cook, 1857 (Red River & MLK)
Old General Land Office Building, Conrad C. Stremme, 1857 (East 11th & Brazos)
Johns-Hamilton Building (Barclay Building), 1870 (716 Congress)
St. Mary’s Cathedral, 1874-1884, Nicholas Clayton (203 East 10th Street)
Townsend-Thompson Building, 1875 (718 Congress Avenue)
Walter Tips Building, J. N. Preston, 1876 (710-712 Congress Avenue)
Hannig Building, J. N. Preston, 1876 (206 East 6th Street)
John Bremond, Jr. House, George Fiegel, 1886-87 (700 Guadalupe St)
Southwestern Telegraph & Telephone Building, 1886/stone façade 1898 (410 Congress)
Elisabet Ney Museum, begun 1892 (304 East 44th Street)
McKean-Eilers Buildings, Burt McDonald & J. Reily Gordon, 1897 (323 Congress)
Research Project
This project allows you to investigate a topic of your choice in some depth. It has two principal
components: presentation of research in the poster session and the final paper. Please note the
due dates. The timing is tight, and it is very important to plan ahead.
Scholarly Journal Exercise. The purpose of this simple exercise is to introduce you to a critical
selection of scholarly journals focused on the built environment. From the list of journals
provided on Canvas, select one journal and follow the instructions to locate its full-text access
through the UT Library website. Browse no more than two to three issues published in the last
fifteen years of your chosen journal and select a single article from one of those issues. You do
not need to read this article in detail, but you should read the abstract (if present) and skim the
introduction and conclusion. Once you have selected your article, download it and provide the
following as your assignment:


                                                                                                    7
    1) Provide citation for this article, using a common citation format for the humanities
        (Chicago Style/Turabian, MLA, or other as discussed with TA). You may use citation
        software, but you must check it for accuracy.
    2) Write one brief paragraph describing why you chose this particular journal and this
        particular article.
Project proposal
Prepare a statement of about 1-2 pages (double-spaced) that 1) identifies your topic (including
names, dates, and places, as appropriate), 2) states what you find interesting about it, 3) indicates
your intended focus, and 4) describes the status of your research. Append a preliminary
bibliography indicating what you’ve looked at and what is on your “to do” list. The bibliography
must include print sources (books or journal articles, which may include online copies of print
sources) in addition to any survey texts or websites you might use. Remember that if you use a
website such as Wikipedia, you must corroborate the information by consulting scholarly
sources.
Project outline
Prepare an outline showing the scope and organization of your final paper. It should begin with a
sentence or two that concisely describes the scope of your project. For the sections for which you
have completed substantial research, use an expanded format including topic sentences for key
parts. Include a bibliography annotating the sources you have consulted to indicate their
importance to your project.
Poster session
Professional meetings of architectural historians frequently include poster sessions, which
resemble a science fair without the dry-ice volcanoes. Scholars summarize their work on a poster
displaying graphics and text that allow audience members to quickly grasp the key issues. The
author then responds to questions. We will adapt this system to provide an opportunity for others
to learn from your research and for you to receive constructive feedback from your colleagues.
        The poster. Use poster board or plotter paper measuring around 22” x 28.” It should be
        easily readable from a distance of several feet. It should have a title at the top (format
        may be horizontal or vertical) and your name. The layout of text and graphic information
        should allow viewers to easily grasp the scope of your project, your approach, and key
        findings. All photographs or diagrams copied from published sources must include a
        credit line. Note to the graphically challenged: this isn’t a test of artistic skill. The
        objective is to present ideas effectively.
        Abstract and bibliography. Your poster must be accompanied by an abstract of about
        300 words (1-2 pages, double spaced), plus your bibliography. What is an abstract? It is a
        highly-condensed summary presenting the particular focus and findings of your research.
        It must show how you have made the topic your own.
        Oral presentation. We will divide the class into groups capable of fitting comfortably in
        the Sutton Hall 4th-floor corridor. Each large group will be divided into small groups of
        four students who will share their work with each other. Each student will have ten
        minutes to present his or her poster and respond to questions.


                                                                                                     8
        Evaluation. The criteria for evaluation will be based on the following: (1) clear definition
        and development of the topic; (2) command of the subject – has the author personalized
        it? (3) presentation – appearance of the poster, ability of the author to explain the project.
        Note: the challenge in this project is in demonstrating your intellectual engagement with
        your subject. A series of general views of a building will not accomplish this unless the
        basis for their selection is made clear by your layout and accompanying text.
Final paper
After receiving feedback from your colleagues and the teaching assistants at the poster session,
please expand the findings outlined in your poster and abstract into a paper with a text of about
2500 words (8-10 pages double-spaced) plus notes, bibliography, and illustrations. This should
require little, if any, additional research. Focus your attention on developing your points as
clearly as possible. Evaluation will consider the thoroughness of your research, your ability to
define and develop a topic within the constraints of the exercise (time, space limitations), and the
clarity of your writing.
MIDTERM AND FINAL EXAMINATIONS
The midterm (Tuesday, 15 October) and final examination (Saturday, 14 December) will have
similar formats: identification of ten buildings (location, name, date, architect) discussed in the
lectures and noted on the lecture notes posted on Canvas; three essays selected from a set of
study questions.


                                                                                           9
                               SCHEDULE OF CLASSES
WEEK 1
Thursday, 29 August: Introduction
Discussion Sections do not meet this week
WEEK 2
Monday, 2 September: Labor Day Holiday – No classes
Tuesday, 3 September: Cities and Landscapes in the Age of the Enlightenment
Thursday, 5 September: Rule, Sensibility, and Character in Architecture
Bergdoll, Chaps. 1, 2, 3
Discussion Section Topic: Modernity, Production, Consumption
Reader response #1 due: follow the instructions on Canvas
 Hilde Heynen, “Concepts of Modernity,” in Architecture and Modernity: A Critique
   (Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press, 1999), 8-14.
 Adrian Forty, “The First Industrial Designers” in Objects of Desire: Design and Society
   Since 1750 (London: Thames & Hudson, 1986), 29-41
 Mark Girouard, “The Uses of Pleasure,” in Cities and People (New Haven: Yale University
   Press, 1985), 181-210.
WEEK 3
Tuesday, 10 September: Historicism and the Gothic Revival
Bergdoll, Chaps. 5-6
Thursday, 12 September: Historicism and Nationalism in 19th-Century American
Architecture
Curtis, Chap. 2
Discussion Section Topic: John Ruskin and Eugène Viollet-le-Duc
Reader response #2 due
    John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture (1849) (New York: Noonday Press,
        1961): Chap. 2, “The Lamp of Truth,” 34-59
    Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, Discourses on Architecture, Benjamin Bucknall,
        trans. (1875) (New York: Grove Press, 1959): Lecture X, 446-455, 473-487.
WEEK 4
Tuesday, 17 September: Colonialism and Identity in British India
Thursday, 19 September: Meiji Japan and Japonisme
Discussion Section Topic: East Meets West
Reader response #3 due
    Thomas R. Metcalf, “Architecture and the Representation of Empire: India, 1860-1910,”


                                                                                               10
        Representations, no. 6 (Spring 1984), 37-65
       Cherie Wendelken, “The Tectonics of Japanese Style: Architect and Carpenter in the Late
        Meiji Period,” Art Journal 55/3 (Autumn, 1996), 28-37
       Toshio Watanabe, “Josiah Conder’s Rokumeikan: Architecture and National
        Representation in Meiji Japan,” Art Journal 55/3 (Autumn, 1996), 21-27.
WEEK 5
Tuesday, 24 September: Building with Iron, Steel, and Reinforced Concrete
Bergdoll, pp. 179-184, Chap. 7; Curtis, Chap. 4
Thursday, 26 September: Railroads and Skyscrapers
For more on the design and engineering of early skyscrapers, see Thomas Leslie, Chicago
Skyscrapers, 1871-1934, available on reserve in the Architecture & Planning Library.
Discussion Section Topic: Building Description Peer Review
Building description essay due
WEEK 6
Tuesday, 1 October: Cities in the Age of Industrialization
Bergdoll, Chap. 8
Renee Y. Chow, “In a Field of Party Walls: Drawing Shanghai’s Lilong,” Journal of the Society
of Architectural Historians, 73/1 (March 2014), 16-27; Luis E. Carranza and Fernando Luiz
Lara, “Francisco Pereira Passos Begins a Project to ‘Civilize’ Rio de Janeiro by Applying Baron
Haussmann’s Ideas as an Answer to the Tropical (Lack of) Urbanism,” in Modern Architecture
in Latin America: Art, Technology, and Utopia (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2014), 7-9.
Thursday, 3 October: The House Beautiful at the Turn of the 20th Century
Curtis, Chaps. 5, 7
Discussion Section Topic: Frank Lloyd Wright & Adolf Loos
Reader response #4 due
     Frank Lloyd Wright, “In the Cause of Architecture,” (1908); reprinted in Bruce Brooks
        Pfeiffer, ed., Frank Lloyd Wright: Collected Writings, vol. 1 (New York: Rizzoli and the
        Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, 1992), 84-100;
     Adolf Loos, “Ornament and Crime” (1910, published 1912), in Ulrich Conrads, ed.,
        Programs and Manifestoes on 20th-Century Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
        1975), 19-24.
WEEK 7
Tuesday, 8 October: Leaf and Crystal, Visions for a New Architecture
Bergdoll, Chap. 9; Curtis, Chap. 3
Thursday, 10 October: The German Werkbund; Futurism
Curtis, Chaps. 6, 9, 12
Discussion Section Topic: Manifestos of Modernism & Midterm Review
Revised Building Descriptions due
     Hermann Muthesius, Henry van de Velde, “Werkbund Theses and Antitheses” (1914)


                                                                                                 11
       Antonio Sant’Elia and Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, “Futurist Architecture” (1914)
WEEK 8
Tuesday, 15 October: MID-TERM EXAM
Thursday, 17 October: De Stijl; the Soviet Avant-Garde
Theo van Doesburg, “Towards a Plastic Architecture” (1924),
Mieczysław Szczuka and Teresa Zarnower, “What is Constructivism?” (1924)
Discussion Section Topic: Research Project topic selection
Scholarly Journal Exercise due
WEEK 9
Tuesday 22 October: The Modernist Villa
Curtis, Chaps. 16, 18, 19
Thursday, 24 October: Modernism and Social Housing
Curtis, Chaps. 14, 24
Discussion Section Topic: Le Corbusier vs the Neue Sachlichkeit
Research project proposal due 5:00pm, Thurs, 24 Oct
    Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture (1923/1925), reprinted 1931 (New York:
        Dover, 1986), 85-148
    Hannes Meyer, “Building” (Bauhaus: Zeitschrift für Gestaltung, 1928), reprinted in
        Ulrich Conrads, ed., Programs and Manifestoes, 117-19.
WEEK 10
Tuesday, 29 October: Architectural Education
Curtis, Chap. 11
Walter Gropius, “Programme of the Staatliches Bauhaus in Weimar” (1919), in Conrads,
Programs and Manifestoes, 49-53
Thursday, 31 October: The Modernist Canon and Other Expressions
Curtis, Chaps. 15, 17
Discussion Section Topic: Who Gets to Be an Architect?
Reader Response #5 due
    Gwendolyn Wright, “On the Fringe of the Profession: Women in American
        Architecture,” in Spiro Kostof, ed., The Architect (New York: Oxford University Press,
        1977), 280-308
    Whitney M. Young, Jr., “Unedited Transcript of the Speech Made to the American
        Institute of Architects in 1968,” in Linda Kisk, ed., 20 on 20/20 Vision: Perspectives on
        Diversity and Design (Boston: Boston Society of Architects and the AIA Diversity
        Committee, 2003), 9-22
WEEK 11
Tuesday, 5 November: Light and Air


                                                                                               12
Thursday, 7 November: Architecture and the Automobile
Curtis, Chaps. 22, 26
Discussion Section Topic: The Well-Tempered and Not So Well-Tempered Home
Research project outline due
     Reyner Banham, “The Well-Tempered Home,” in The Architecture of the Well-Tempered
        Environment (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969), 93-121.
     Adam Rome, “From the Solar House to the All-Electric Home: The Postwar Debates
        over Heating and Cooling,” in Bulldozer in the Countryside: Suburban Sprawl and the
        Rise of American Environmentalism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), 45-
        86.
WEEK 12
Tuesday, 12 November: Architects’ Romance with Technology
Thursday, 14 November: Postmodernism v Modernism
Curtis, Chaps. 30, 32, 33
Reader: Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York: Museum of
Modern Art, 1966), 22-45; Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American Cities (New
York: Vintage Books, 1961), 3-25, 55-62.
Thursday late afternoon/evening: Poster Session
Discussion Section Topic: Research Projects, Poster Workshop
WEEK 13
Tuesday, 19 November: Modernism and National Identity in Brazil and Mexico
Curtis, Chap. 27; Keith Eggener, “Contrasting Images of Identify in the Post-War Mexican
Architecture of Luis Barragan and Juan O’Gorman,” Journal of Latin American Cultural Studies
9/1 (2000), 27-45.
Wednesday, 21 November – Saturday, 24 November: Thanksgiving Holiday!
No discussion sections this week
WEEK 14
Tuesday, 26 November: Modernity and National Identity in Japan and China
Thursday, 28 November: Modernity and National Identity in Nigeria, the Indian
Subcontinent, and the Middle East
Curtis, Chap. 31
Discussion Section Topic: Modernism in the Middle East, Africa, and China
Reader Response #6 due
     Nezar Alsayyad, “From Modernism to Globalization: The Middle East in Context,” in
        Sandy Isenstadt and Kishwar Rizvi, eds., Modernism and the Middle East: Architecture
        and Politics in the Twentieth Century (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2008),
        255-266
     Cary Y. Liu, “Encountering the Dilemma of Change in the Architectural and Urban
        History of Shanghai,” Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, 73/1 (March
        2014), 118-136


                                                                                  13
       Hannah Le Roux, “Modern Architecture in Post-Colonial Ghana and Nigeria,”
        Architectural History 47 (2004), 361-392.
WEEK 15
Tuesday, 3 December: Architectural Themes of the 21st Century
Curtis, Chaps. 34, 35, Conclusion
Thursday, 5 December: No class (Final reviews in School of Architecture)
Discussion Section Topic: Wrapping Up
WEEK 16
Monday, 9 December: Last Class Day (UT)
Final research paper due by 5:00 p.m. as directed by teaching assistants
Monday discussion section meets as directed by teaching assistant
No other class meeting
Final Examination: Currently scheduled for Saturday 14 December, 7:00 – 10:00pm
