                                              Texas Applied Arts
                                    DIGITAL FABRICATION – SPRING 2020
                   TD 354T (unique #26040) – AET 329J (unique #20875) – TD 388L (unique #26225)
INSTRUCTOR          J.E. JOHNSON
:
E-MAIL:             jjohnson@texasperformingarts.org
OFFICE HOURS:       Thursdays 9:00-11:00am
CLASS:              Monday and Wednesday 9:30 – 11:00 am
LOCATION:           Hatchery PAC 3.2045A and other locations as specified
WEBSITE:            http://sites.utexas.edu/appliedarts/
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Digital Fabrication will focus on specific skills and habits of mind associated with the craft of making physical
objects by way of computer aided design (CAD) and computer numeric controlled (CNC) machines. Though digital
fabrication is a very broad field we will cover only: fused filament fabrication (FFF) 3D printing, laser cutting, CNC
routing, and vinyl cutting. We will use these tools in a rapid and iterative process to create, evaluate, and improve
upon functional objects. Though previous experience in any handicraft or computer design application will be
beneficial, the course is designed for each student to grow from their existing strengths and interests.
This course will work with small teams from AET Design Studio taught by Michael Baker and Kyle Evans. Using
knowledge and skills from the first half of the semester, we will develop fabrication solutions for interactive
experiences.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Within the context of Digital Fabrication as described above, students will be evaluated their growth in the
following areas of learning.
     1. Demonstrate methods to acquire and adapt existing 3D designs.
     2. Identify processes, materials, and joining techniques to create durable objects.
     3. Choose appropriate surface treatments for cardboard, plastics, and wood.
     4. Discriminate between digital design applications and fabrication processes to develop workflows specific to
        needs of desired outcomes.
     5. Design fabrication solutions with an intentional, iterative process.
     6. Develop effective collaborative relationships with peers and instructors to build and install a public exhibit.


TEXTBOOKS, SUPPLIES, AND MATERIALS
Textbook - REQUIRED
Making Things Move: DIY Mechanisms for Inventors, Hobbyists, and Artists. by Dustyn Roberts.
Supplies - Every student should own these items
     § Computer capable of running Fusion 360
     § SD Card – 8 GB to 32GB more. BIGGER IS NOT BETTER! Needed to transfer files to the 3D printers in The
         Hatchery. ($10 or less)
     § USB Flash Drive – 8 GB or more. Needed to transfer files to equipment in The Foundry. ($10 or less)
     § 3-button mouse with scroll wheel – efficient use of software will require functionality of scroll wheel and
         right clicks. ($10 - $50)
     § 6 inch digital calipers – Need to take precise measurements of materials and troubleshoot fit issues. Also
         convenient way to convert inches to millimeters. ($10 - $20)
Project materials
There will be a selection of no-cost materials available to students including
     § various wood and metal stock
     § plastics, paper, and plywood suitable for laser cutting
     § 3D printing filament
     § hardware, electronics, etc. found in Hatchery or Automation Lab
Final project materials
After student teams are assigned each team will have access to a budget to purchase materials. Amount TBA.
Materials requests must be made in writing on team Trello board. If a student chooses to purchase out of pocket
no reimbursement can be made.
Completed final projects will remain the property of the University of Texas and may be used for future exhibition.
With instructor consent, components owned by the student that can reasonably be removed from the project
(e.g. micro controllers, servos, etc.) may be returned to the student after the final day of class. Students use these
items at their own risk. Damaged or lost items cannot not be replaced.
SOFTWARE
Digital Fabrication is not 3D modeling course nor does it require previous experience in 3D modelling. However,
we are going to use a few different 3D modeling tools to manipulate and modify existing models. To do this, all
students should install some software on your computer. All required software is free to students and the system
requirements are modest.
Required
Autodesk Fusion 360 – We will be using Fusion 360 to create and edit our designs.
Slicer for Fusion 360
Meshmixer – Prepare 3D prints
Cura – Software required to operate 3D printer
RetinaEngrave v3.0 – Full Spectrum Laser design and control software
Optional
Adobe Illustrator, Vectorworks, AutoCAD, Pepakura, others with instructor consent
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                       2


CLASS SCHEDULE
As the course progresses we may choose to modify schedule to better facilitate student learning. Schedule
modifications will be communicated to class via Canvas.
Week      Date   Monday                          Date  Wednesday                    Assignment       Assignment
                                                                                    Given            Due
  1       1/20     Martin Luther King Jr Holiday 1/22  ONBOARDING                    – Roctopus on
                                                        – Craft                        Lulzbot Mini
                                                        – Additive / subtractive     – OH500
                                                        – Materials – 3D Sketch
                                                        – Software
                                                        – Safety
                                                        – Final project overview
                                                        – Learning resources
  2       1/27   DISCUSSION: Maker Culture       1/29  DISCUSSION: Design Cycle     – File Exports    – Rocktopus
                 TOPIC: Filetypes and Workflows        TOPIC: Small and rapid         (STL, DXF, and    on Lulzbot
                 PRACTICE: Orthographic                PRACTICE: Fusion 360           PDF)              Mini
                 sketches                                                           – File Imports
                                                                                      (STL)
                                                       Roberts xi-xviii, 256-278
                 Leah Buechley Who makes?              LinkedIn Learning Fusion 360
                 Lynda Drawing Systems Ch 3            Ch 1 -3
  3        2/3   DISCUSSION: Cardboard!          2/5   TOPIC: Tolerances and Slicer Laser joinery    – File Exports
                 TOPIC: Laser cutting, nets,           PRACTICE: Laser                                 (STL, DXF,
                 joints                                                                                and PDF)
                                                                                                     – File Imports
                                                                                                       (STL)
                                                                                                     – Foundry 3D
                 Roberts 34-38, 43-47                                                                  printer cert
                 Surprisingly Awesome:                 LinkedIn Learning Fusion 360
                 Cardboard                             Ch 4 -5
  4       2/10   DISCUSSION: Plastics and        2/12  TOPIC: FFF supports          3D print         Laser joinery
                    sustainability                     PRACTICE: Cura               problem
                 TOPIC: FFF challenges                 PRESENTATION: Laser joinery
                                                       assignments
                 Lynda Meshmixer Intro - Ch 1
                 PLA Filament video                    LinkedIn Learning Fusion 360
                                                       Ch 6-7
  5       2/17   DISCUSSION: Plywood             2/19  DISCUSSION: Craft            Low Poly Paper   3D print
                                                       TOPIC: Combined processes                     problem
                                                         and assembly
                 History of plywood in ten             Instructables: Bulbasaur
                 objects                               Bert Simons Website
                 Plywood being made video
                                                       Pye 17-29
  6       2/24   TOPIC: Joints and Connections   2/26  TOPIC: CNC Router Operation  Paper Popup      Low Poly Paper
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                     3


                  Roberts 52-71
  7        3/2    TOPIC: CNC Router Operation   3/4        TOPIC: Foldable Nets        CNC Joints         Paper Popup
                                                           GUEST: Tim Ziegler
                  Lynda: Fusion 360 Multibody -
                  all                                      Instructables: Bulbasaur
                                                           Bert Simons Website
  8        3/9    TOPIC: RFPs from AET Studio   3/11       Project Planning                               CNC Joints
                                                           Vinyl Cutter UT Foundry
          3/16    SPRING BREAK                  3/18       SPRING BREAK
  9       3/23    Group focused work            3/25       Group focused work
  10      3/30    Group focused work            4/1        Group focused work
  11       4/6    Group focused work:           4/8        Group focused work
                  REVISIONS                                WORKING PROTOTYPE
  12      4/13    Group focused work            4/15       Group focused work
  13      4/20    Group focused work: FINAL     4/22       Group focused work
  14      4/27    Group focused work            4/29       Group focused work
  15       5/4    Tidy up                       5/6        Final documentation
COURSE FORMAT
Class time
Sprint Meetings are critical to the success of projects. They are a time to assess progress, set specific sprint goals
for the next week and address any new constraints.
Lab use – PAC Safety and Stewardship
Machine time on 3D printers, laser cutter, and CNC router will be reserved in two hour blocks on Canvas. CNC
router will be available only during business hours Monday through Friday, 8am to 5pm
Proximity card access to the Texas Performing Arts building and the Scenic Art Studio door 6am to 10pm daily. No
one may work in the Hatchery, Automation Lab, or Scenic Art Studio alone outside standard working hours,
Monday through Friday 8am to 5pm. Plan accordingly. The Loading Dock and Scenic Art Studio doors are armed at
6:00pm. If the doors are left propped open, they will trigger a silent alarm, UT PD will arrive, and we will be fined.
Security will be present on Bass Concert Hall event days. Please stay contained to the Hatchery or Automation Lab
during these events. Failure to adhere to security policies may lead to expulsion from the course.
Safety
Students must wear the following safety equipment when working with the CNC Router:
         • Safety Glasses or Goggles
         • Dust Mask or Respirator
         • Hearing Protection
         • Closed Toe Shoes
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                        4


         Additionally, students must be cautious of any jewelry, loose fitting clothing, and long hair around all
         machines. Students are not permitted to wear gloves while using machines. Students should not use
         equipment with which they are unfamiliar. If you have a question, please ask. Do not use equipment if
         you are under the influence of drugs or alcohol, hung over, sick, tired, or otherwise unfocused. Unsafe
         behavior will not be tolerated and may result in expulsion from the class. Keeping the labs clean, putting
         away tools and properly storing materials are important aspects of class safety. Proper shop maintenance
         will be monitored and evaluated.
Online Platforms
Each member of the class has the responsibility to become proficient in the following online tools.
• Canvas: This course management platform will be used to upload assignments and blog posts for peer
   assessment.
• Social Media: Students will be encouraged to post to social media to promote their work and network with
   other makers using when appropriate. Course instructors will also promote student work on the Applied Arts
   accounts. If you do not wish to have images of your face or project posted publicly please notify an instructor.
              – YouTube https://www.youtube.com/c/TexasAppliedArts
              – Facebook https://www.facebook.com/texasappliedarts
              – Twitter https://twitter.com/utappliedarts
              – Instagram https://www.instagram.com/utappliedarts/
• UT Box: This is the UT supported cloud storage service. Any file necessary for the design, planning, or
   production of raptor projects must be saved in the Raptor Class Share folder. Please maintain good filename
   and folder hygiene and version control. https://utexas.box.com/v/digfab20-class-share
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                     5


ASSESSMENT AND LATE POLICY
Only instructors of record will issue final grades. However, instructors will make judgments based on data
gathered from self, peer, and professional performance appraisals to provide relevant feedback and scores.
Final assignment points will be reduced 20% for every day late.
Dependability and Readiness—80 points
After teams are assigned, collaborators should arrive to meetings on time and ready to present a progress report
with visuals and/or prototypes. Students attendance in class is not only for their own benefit. All teams will benefit
from engaged respondents.
Onboarding—15 points (satisfactory/no credit)
     § 5 points: Safety Training
     § 5 points: 30 second introduction video
     § 5 points: Pre-course survey
Clean up and Stewardship of workspace—15 points
Attendance—50 points (56 possible)
     § The class will depend on engagement from all members of the class.
     § To incentivize attendance a single question quiz will be given. Quizzes count for 2 points each
          (satisfactory/no credit).
Assignments—80 points
Skill builders—10 points each x 8 weeks (satisfactory/no credit)
Engagement, Performance, and Growth—80 points
Evaluation criteria will include key competencies including: goal setting, decision making and critical thinking,
effective communication, problem solving, relationship management, analytical thinking, accuracy and attention
to detail, producing results, flexibility and adaptability, teamwork, quality of failure, and followership.
     § 40 points: (5 points midterm + 35 points final) Self Evaluations
     § 40 points: (5 points midterm + 35 points final) Instructor Evaluation
Final Project—80 points
     § 20 points: execution
     § 20 points: participation
     § 20 points: peer evaluation
     § 20 points: documentation
  Grading            This course is project based. There will be no exams.
                     Grading breakdown:
                     Each assignment will be graded according the following rubric:
                     Final grades will be determined using the following grade distribution. Please note: to ensure
                     fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus, a B-
                     will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
                     grade of A+.
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                       6


                  A = 94-100             B+ = 87-89          C+ = 77-79          D+ = 67-69           F = 0-60
                  A- = 90-93             B = 84-86           C = 74-76           D = 64-66
                                         B- = 80-83          C- = 70-73          D- = 60-63
  Professionalism Professionalism is expected of all students and includes attending class during scheduled
                  meeting times, communicating clearly, respecting peers, and taking the class seriously.
                  However, if you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please contact
                  BOTH the instructor and TA, and attach any class work as needed.
  UT Electronic   Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
  Mail            students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to
  Notification    stay current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
  Policy          communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
                  minimum, twice per week.
                  It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of
                  changes in his or her official e-mail address (do so at
                  https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned
                  to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication.
                  Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be
                  considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
                  (see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
  Use of Class    The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
  Materials       assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is
                  a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the
                  student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of
                  the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of
                  academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among
                  other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials
                  with other current or future students.
                  (from https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
  Religious       Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from
  Holidays        attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
                  religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
                  this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
                  examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
                  time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at
                  least fourteen days prior to the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a
                  religious holy day.
                  (from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)
  Copyright and Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to
  Fair Use        designers. Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be
                  covered by the doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own
                  and other copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and
                  others’ works. We will discuss these issues during the semester as needed, but when you have
                  questions about whether or when you can appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                      7


                is Georgia K. Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
  Services for  The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
  Students with accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
  Disabilities  Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu,
  (SSD)         http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
                documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make the
                necessary accommodations promptly.
  Student       There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
  Support       include (but are not limited to) the following:
  Services      Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
                of services and resources to support students and alumni.
                The Undergraduate Writing Center
                (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
                their courses.
                The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
                time-management, and note-taking courses.
                University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and
                health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
                officially enrolled in certain University programs.
                The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students
                with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
  Emergency     Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide
  Procedures    students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and
                security of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students,
                faculty, and staff of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency
                officials also have the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to
                the cell phones of users subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
                https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/.
                (adapted from
                http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf)
  Campus Carry As permitted by Texas state law, the concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is
                generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as buildings and spaces that are accessible to the
                public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms. It is the responsibility of concealed-
                carry license holders to carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on
                campus. “About” the person means that a license holder may carry a holstered handgun in a
                backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license
                holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the
                trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled. A license holder may
                not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university
                driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
                The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried
                gun on campus should immediately call 911. (from https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                    8


Risk Statement
*Caution: Students participating in Department of Theatre & Dance classes do so at their own risk. As with any physical activity, there is
always the chance of personal injury occurring during the normal conduct of Production Lab and Advanced Production Lab. The instructor is
not responsible for student injuries or accidents, which may occur during the normal conduct of classes.
Title IX:
The University encourages affected individuals to promptly report incidents of sex and gender discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence, and stalking as provided in this policy. The University also encourages individuals who
may have witnessed instances of prohibited conduct to report such information as outlined in this policy.
Responsible employees of the University are required to promptly report incidents of prohibited conduct. The University will respond to all
reports made under this policy. The University will conduct a prompt, fair, and impartial investigation and resolution for complaints and,
where appropriate, issue remedial measures and/or sanctions.
Please be advised that I am considered a “responsible employee” at UT. As such, I am required to report any incidents of sexual
harassment or assault to the UT Title IX Coordinator. If you would like to have a confidential conversation about sexual misconduct, please
contact the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center at (512) 471-3515 to schedule an appointment. The CMHC crisis line is (512) 471-CALL
(2255) . You may also call Austin SafePlace 24/7 at (512) 267-SAFE (7233).
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Q drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As stated in
Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate
student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Changes:
This syllabus is subject to change upon the discretion of the instructors.
1/20/20 9:00 AM                                                                                                                             9
