                          PRIMATE SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
             ANTHROPOLOGY 346L [31200], WGS 323 [44759]
                                           FALL 2019
INSTRUCTOR:           Becca Lewis
                      Department of Anthropology
                      Office: SAC 5.152
                      Phone: 232-5386
                      e-mail: rjlewis@austin.utexas.edu
                      Office hours: Wednesdays 3 – 4:30 pm
LOCATION:             SAC 5.172
MEETING TIMES:        11:00 AM-11:50 AM
MEETING DAYS:         Monday, Wednesday, Friday
TEXTBOOKS:            Required (2):
                      Alcock Animal Behavior, 10th edition print or etext
                      Mitani et al. (2012) The Evolution of Primate Societies
                      Additional readings will be available on Canvas.
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVE:
      This course focuses on the study of primate behavior and why primates do what they do. It
      is essentially a course on animal behavior with a focus on primates. Thus, this class will
      explore the basic theoretical principles that guide primatologists and other zoologists. As
      we examine some of the models used to explain primate behavior, we will explore the
      behavior of the four radiations of primates in detail. The objective of this course is for
      students to understand the major theoretical concepts of primate behavior.
COURSE FORMAT AND REQUIREMENTS:
      Prerequisite: ANT 301
      This class will generally follow a lecture format. There will be projects assigned for outside
      of the classroom to be “presented” either on Canvas or in the classroom. Project
      assignments presented/posted after the deadline will not be accepted. Discussion will be
      encouraged during lectures and we will be discussing the outside projects in class. It is
      difficult to participate if you are not present in class and so attendance is highly
      recommended. Plus, the majority (but not all) of the test questions will come from lectures.
      Grades will also be based upon 3 in-class exams (no comprehensive final exam). Exams
      may include multiple-choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer questions.
      Assignments                             %Grade                 Date
      Exam I                                  30%                    Oct 9
      Exam II                                 30%                    Nov 8
      Exam III                                30%                    Dec 6
      4 Assignments                           10%                    TBA
                                                                                                   1


        (3 projects during the semester: 2 pts each; final assignment due in class Dec. 9: 4 pts)
Final grade calculation = (Exam I *0.3) + (Exam II *0.3) + (Exam III *0.3) + Total # project points
RE-GRADING POLICY:
        Grade disputes must be turned in to the instructor in writing within 1 week of when the
        exam is returned. The student must include a 1 page explanation per question of why (s)he
        thinks that his/her answer is correct. Simple errors in addition can be corrected
        immediately. Students wishing to appeal a grade for one of the writing assignments have
        1 week to appeal their grade with the professor by turning in a 1 page explanation of why
        (s)he thinks that his/her paper should be re-graded.
CREDIT/NO-CREDIT:
        For those of you enrolled on a Pass/Fail basis, a requirement for receiving a passing grade
        in this course is to show up and take the exams. You may choose not to study and fail the
        exams, but you must physically turn in the exams and pass to receive credit.
        The following guidelines are used to assign final grades:
        A        90-100
        B        80-89
        C        70-79
        D        60-69
        F        59 or less
        Plus and minus will be assigned, for example:
        B+       86.5-89.4
        B        83.5-86.4
        B-       79.5-83.4
CHEATING POLICY:
        During exams, students will not be permitted to wear hats or use electronic devices of any
        kind (including, but not limited to, cell phones and smart watches).
        Be advised that on exam days, students will only be allowed to take a pen/pencil to their
        seat. All backpacks, book bags, purses, phones, etc. must be left at the front of the
        classroom.
        Students are welcome to participate in online forums for discussion and study (e.g., a
        Facebook page for this course). However, Dr. Lewis must be invited and permitted to
        join any such forum in order to monitor content. Please note that sharing information
        about an exam with a student who has not yet taken an exam will be considered cheating,
        regardless of the means by which the information is shared (e.g., verbally, on a web page,
        via email, via text message, etc.). Students who observe cheating via electronic media are
        encouraged to inform Dr. Lewis.
                                                                                                    2


      Without exception, any student found cheating on an exam will receive a grade of zero
      for the exam and will be referred to the dean's office for further disciplinary action. Note
      that any attempt to alter a graded, returned exam in order to improve the score will be
      considered cheating and will result in a grade of zero for the exam.
RESPECT FOR DIVERSITY:
      I aim for students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives to be well served by this
      course, that students’ learning needs be addressed both in and out of class, and that the
      diversity that students bring to this class be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit. I
      aim to present materials and activities that are respectful of diversity: gender, sexuality,
      disability, age, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, race, and culture. If any of our class
      meetings conflict with your religious events, please let me know so that we can make
      arrangements for you.
ETC.
               While I cannot legally ban concealed guns from my classroom, I can exercise my
      first amendment right to let you know that I would strongly prefer that you NOT bring
      them into my classroom. I CAN legally ban concealed guns from my faculty office. Thus,
      this (and my reading of this statement aloud in class) is my official notification that
      you may not bring any concealed guns into my faculty office.
      Be sure to regularly check Blackboard for class materials and information. Power Point
      slides will not be made available on Canvas. Class handouts will be available on Canvas.
      Please turn your cell phones off while in class. No cell phone use during class will be
      tolerated – this includes texting.
      Hats with rims are not permitted to be worn during exams.
      Feel free to take notes on a computer. However, no one is permitted to make audio or video
      recordings of lectures under any circumstances.
      I do not give assignments for extra credit, so please be sure to pay close attention to dates
      of exams and assignments.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
      If you are caught plagiarizing, I will be following the university guidelines for disciplinary
      actions:        (deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html),         see       also
      (www.academicintegrity.org/).
      Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University Code of Academic
      Integrity (see below). Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit
      will be the student’s own work. You are encouraged to study together and discuss
      information and concepts covered in lecture. You can give “consulting” help to or receive
      “consulting” help from such students. However, this permissible cooperation should never
      involve one student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by someone
                                                                                                   3


       else, in the form of email, email attachment file, disk, or hard copy. Should copying occur,
       both the student who copied from another student and the student who gave material to be
       copied will both be automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation
       of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
       disciplinary action.
       During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted
       during the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in
       any way. Any collaborative behavior during the exams will result in failure of the exam,
       and may result in failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:
       In compliance with the UT Austin policy and equal access laws, I am available to discuss
       appropriate academic accommodations that may be required for students with disabilities.
       Requests for academic accommodations are to be made during the 1st 3 weeks of the
       semester, except for unusual circumstances, so arrangements can be made. Students are
       encouraged to register with Student Disability Services to verify their eligibility for
       appropriate accommodations (see below).
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE (subject to change – please check Canvas):
     Dates                 Topic                             Work to do at home
                                                   Readings to be completed before class
 Aug 30-9          Intro to Primate        Part 1 in The Evolution of Primate Societies
                   Behavior & Primate (pp.5-142)
                   Diversity
 Sept 2            No class
 Sept 11-13        Evolutionary Theory Alcock Ch 1, 10
                                           Strier Ch 4 (p.80-98)
                                           Strier KB (2011) Primate Behavioral Ecology, 4th edition.
                                           Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
                                           Lewis (2017) Sociobiology. International Encyclopedia of
                                           Primatology.
                                           Lindshield (2017) Behavioral Flexibility. International
                                           Encyclopedia of Primatology.
                                           Sinha & Rizvi (2017) Phenotypic Plasticity. International
                                           Encyclopedia of Primatology.
 Sept 16           Methods                 Lewis (2017) Behavioral Sampling. International
                                           Encyclopedia of Primatology.
 Sept 18           Group Living            Dunbar Ch 7
                                           Dunbar RIM (1988) Primate Social Systems. Ithaca, NY:
                                           Cornell University.
                                                                                                     4


Sept 20-25    Social & Mating    Alcock Ch 8
              Systems
                                 Fuentes 2007 Primates in Perspective
                                 Schultz 2017 Phylogeny and Social Organization.
                                 International Encyclopedia of Primatology.
Sept 27-Oct 4 Sexual Selection   Lewis 2017 Sexual Selection. International Encyclopedia of
                                 Primatology.
                                 Lewis 2017 Mate Choice. International Encyclopedia of
                                 Primatology.
                                 Alcock Ch 7
                                 Palombit 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                 Meredith 2017 Gender. International Encyclopedia of
                                 Primatology.
                                 Vasey 2017 Homosexual Behavior. International
                                 Encyclopedia of Primatology.
Oct 7         Ethograms &
              Review for Exam I
Oct 9         Exam I
Oct 11-16     Sex & Reproduction Alcock Ch 13 (pp.411-420)
                                 Dixson Ch 4
                                 Anestis 2010 Hormones and Social Behavior in Primates
                                 Evolutionary Anthropology 19(2):66-78
Oct 18-21     Development, &     Alcock Ch 9
              Life History
                                 van Schaik & Isler 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies  
Oct 23-30     Cooperation        Alcock Ch 2-3
                                 Gilby 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                 Langergraber 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
Nov 1-6       Competition        Schülke & Ostner 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                 Lewis RJ (2002) Beyond dominance: the importance of
                                 leverage. Quarterly Review of Biology 77:149-164.
                                 Loundon 2017 Social System. International Encyclopedia
                                 of Primatology.
                                 Scarry 2017 Intergroup Encounters. International
                                 Encyclopedia of Primatology.
                                                                                          5


  Nov 8            Exam II
  Nov 11-18        Intelligence           Call & Santos 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                          Seyfarth & Cheney 2012 The Evolution of Primate
                                          Societies
  Nov 20-25        Communication,         Alcock Ch 4
                   Language & Culture
                                          Zuberbuler 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                          Cheney DL & Seyfarth RM (2010) Primate
                                          Communication and Human Language: Continuities and
                                          Discontinuities. Kappeler PM & Silk JB (eds) Mind the
                                          Gap: Tracing the Origins of Human Universals. Berlin:
                                          Springer pp283-298.
                                          Schuppli et al. 2017 Cultural Behavior. International
                                          Encyclopedia of Primatology.  
  Nov 27-29        no class
  Dec 2-4          Human Behavior         Alcock Ch 14
                                          Hermann & Tomasello 2012 The Evolution of Primate
                                          Societies
  Dec 6            Exam III
  Dec 9            In class Assignment
                              STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSIBILITIES
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
your learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
others.
• Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring
to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone
is excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                                                                                   6


                      PERSONAL PRONOUN USE (SHE / HE / THEY / ZE / ETC)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official
roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any
changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
                             UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes students of all
backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let
me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can
only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this
semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking
some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit
from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know
experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we
strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center: All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal: BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns
have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the
power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to
build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
                                                                                                    7


Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. The
following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
     1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2.   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
          have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu . For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                                        UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
                                                                                                    8


Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at
the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                                                                  9
