                          PUBLIC COMMUNICATION OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
                                                   ADV/PR 323
                                             Unique #s: 05935, 06470
                                                   Spring 2020
                                                      Online
Professor: Anthony Dudo, Ph.D.                                 Teaching Assistant: Patrick Jamar & Eunjoo
Office: Belo 4.364                                             Jin
Office hours: M 1:30-2:30p & W 11-11:50a                       Cubicle: Belo TBD Office hours: TBD
TECHNOLOGY REQUIREMENTS AND USE
     1. You must have a computer that can play videos.
     2. You must have access to reliable Internet access. You must check the class web site regularly.
         Inability to get online is not an acceptable excuse for missing an important announcement,
         assignment, test or update. If your home-based Internet connection is down, then visit a library,
         coffee shop, or friend’s house.
     3. Pay attention to Announcements in Canvas. We rely primarily on announcements sent through
         Canvas to communicate course information, updates, clarifications, etc. with you.
     4. Use canvas for all e-mail communication about class.
REQUIRED MATERIALS
The majority of the materials will be posted to our class Canvas website (http://courses.utexas.edu).
Required materials will be labelled as such; optional materials will also be provided for students who want to
delve deeper.
Your eleven quizzes and two exams you will be required to use an online proctoring service called
Proctorio. It is a Chrome extension that uses your computer’s camera to record any instances of academic
integrity violations. No one will be actively watching you take the exam via your computer but everything
during the exam is recorded for future reference. Please take note of this and plan accordingly. There will be
further instruction on how to use this service in Canvas.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Science has always played an essential role in the development of the human condition. Presently,
however, the growth of technological and scientific innovation is increasing at what feels like an exponential
rate. Emerging fields like genetic engineering, artificial intelligence, and nanotechnology are poised to alter
the very definition of what it means to be “human.” Concurrently, issues like climate change are changing
the condition of our planet and how our species relates to it. Media have traditionally provided the
information link between the public and the experts working on the cutting edge of science and technology.
But scientists themselves are key communication sources for information about their research, and their
efforts to communicate shape how non-scientists (for example, average citizens, policy makers, business
leaders, etc.) think about and behave relative to science and its role in society.
This course will introduce students to the complicated intersection of science, media, and society. Our
exploration will be driven by three overarching questions and the interplay among them: (1) How do
individuals come to understand and perceive science? (2) How do media and communication tools influence
the spread of information about science? and (3) How do scientists themselves contribute to the process of
communicating science? We will consider the foundations of the field of “science communication” and how
communication and media influence debates and science and technology. We will also spend time grappling
with the scientist communicators themselves; reflecting on how they communicate and what drives them to
do so. Along the way we’ll consider some examples of science in popular culture (including television, films,
podcasts, etc.) as well as some specific scientist celebrities. We’ll also explore a handful of case studies to
connect our work to current scientific issues.


LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Overall, this course strives to provide students with a foundational understanding of modern science
communication and seeks one core learning objective:
    •    students will acquire the integrated knowledge, attitudes, and skills necessary to critically assess
         the complicated interplay between science, media, and society including the implications for
         strategic communication, public engagement, personal decisions, and career choices.
As related knowledge objectives, students will understand that:
    •    the traditional ecosystem for science communication is changing rapidly experts play a growing role
         in the communication of their research and scientific issues, which presents benefits and risks
         individuals’ understanding, perceptions, and actions relative to science are complex functions of
         background, circumstances, values, interests, needs, and experiences
As related attitude objectives, student will understand the value of:
    •    connecting concepts/theories from social science to the topic of communicating science
    •    applying insights from communication research and public relations to science communication
         opportunities and challenges
    •    monitoring developments in STEM to inform and empower their personal decision making
As related skill-based objectives, students will improve their ability to:
    •    think effectively about complex situations and choices associated with scientific issues
    •    critically assess their own core values, cultural assumptions, and biases related to science;
         understand diverse philosophical and cultural viewpoints related to science
    •    weigh the complex ethical implications associated with scientific innovation and policy-making
Students will also improve these core competencies:
    •    understand and synthesize content that cuts across different media
    •    write evidence-based responses on exams
    •    communicate clearly, concisely, and effectively in online environments
    •    improve time and deadline management
    •    work in teams
MY EXPECTATIONS OF YOU
    •    Speak up: If you have a question or need something explained, then let me or a TA know. We are
         both available via e-mail and Skype (if scheduled).
    •    Be prepared: Do the readings and work through the modules at a steady pace. Don’t leave things
         until the last minute.
    •    Check the course Web site regularly: You must log on to the class web site regularly to
         participate in class.
    •    Check your e-mail regularly: Failure to do so is not an acceptable excuse for missing an important
         announcement, assignment or update. If your home-based Internet connection is down, then check
         your e-mail at the library or at a friend’s house.
    •    Please let me or a TA know immediately if you have any problem that is preventing you from
         performing satisfactorily in this class. If you approach us at the end of the semester, it will likely be
         too late to do anything.
    •    Be aware that all times are Central Daylight Time (CDT). If you are in another time zone, you are
         responsible for adjusting the time so that you adhere to the correct CDT time. Missing a meeting or
         deadline as a result of confusion about time zones does not count as an acceptable excuse.


ASSESSMENT
Your assessment breakdown is as follows:
   •   Quizzes: This assignment is designed to test your acquisition of factual knowledge contained within
       the course content (assigned readings, podcasts, videos, etc.).
           o Each quiz will consist of 5 multiple choice and T/F questions worth ½ point each.
           o There is a quiz associated with 11 weeks of the course. Each quiz is based on that week’s
                assigned content. Your lowest quiz grade will be dropped. Weeks with quizzes are labelled
                in the course schedule included in this syllabus.
           o Each quiz will unlock after you have interacted with all the content in that week’s modules.
           o Each quiz will be timed and you will only have 7 minutes to complete it once it is launched.
                You must finish it in one sitting, meaning you cannot start the quiz, log off for a while and
                come back to resume taking the quiz.
   •   Individual Paper #1 & #2: The details of these assignments will be posted to Canvas by 2/1/20.
   •   Online Discussion Engagement: The details of this assignment will be posted to by 2/1/20
   •   Midterm and Final Exams: These assignments are designed to let you demonstrate your expertise
       that cuts across all of the course’s learning goals.
           o Each exam will consist of 8 multiple choice and T/F questions worth 1 point each, and 3
                short-answer questions worth 4 points each.
           o Each exam will be timed and you will only have 50 minutes to complete it. You must finish it
                in one sitting, meaning you cannot start the test, log off for a while and come back to
                resume taking the test.
           o Each exam will only be available for you to take during a 12-hour window of time: the mid-
                term exam will be available from 8a-8p Friday, March 6; the final exam will be available
                from 8a-8p Friday, May 8. You will not be allowed to take either test outside of these 12-
                hour time windows. You must start and finish both exams within their corresponding time
                windows.
           o Exam scores will not be adjusted in any way.
           o Exams are not cumulative. The midterm exam will cover content from weeks 2 through 7.
                The final exam will cover content from weeks 8 through 15.


GRADING
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s provost office
(http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/) and described below:
What the letter grades mean:
A, A–              Earned by work of excellent quality indicating full mastery of the subject; in the case of an A,
                   it indicates extraordinary distinction.
B+, B, B–          Earned by work that indicates commendable comprehension of the course material and the
                   student’s full engagement with the course requirements and activities.
C+, C, C–          Earned by work that indicates average and satisfactory comprehension of the
                   course material and the student has met the basic requirements for completing assigned
                   work and participating in class activities.
D+, D, D–          Earned by work that is unsatisfactory but that indicates some minimal command of the
                   course materials and some minimal participation in class activities that is worthy of course
                   credit toward the degree.
F                  Earned by work that is unsatisfactory.
Other key information about grading:
     •   Because your lowest quiz score is dropped, there will be no make-ups or opportunities to re-do any
         assignments. Upload assignments early if you have a conflict with a deadline.
     •   No extra credit is offered and no research participation credits will be offered.
     •   There are no excused “absences” or missed assignments/tests. I do not differentiate between
         excused and unexcused absences or justified and unjustified reasons for not meeting deadlines. It’s
         not my place to decide which excuses are more legitimate or more worthy than others.
     •   I will not “round up” grades. So, if you earn an 89.6% that translates into a B+ and will not be
         rounded up to 90% (an A-). Note that Canvas often rounds up so your grade on Canvas might not
         be accurate. Always add up your total points to determine your grade.
     •   Any questions or concerns about a grade must be presented in writing (i.e. via email) within two
         days (i.e., 48 hours) after the grade is announced or posted. Grades will not be discussed after this
         two-day period.
     •   When we grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the
         work and the accuracy, appropriateness, and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100
         points and then lose them based on mistakes you might make. Your final points represent the total
         points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
     •   Grades will be posted to the Canvas grade book continually throughout class. The TA and I will
         attempt to upload grades within a reasonable time after their submission. Assignment feedback
         (where appropriate) will be returned via Canvas.


COURSE PROGRESSION
This course is entirely web-based and consists of weekly topic modules that contain a combination of online
mini-lectures, content (required readings, podcasts, videos, etc.), assignments, and quizzes/tests. Most of
the class is asynchronous, meaning that you have some flexibility within each week as to when you do your
readings and when you work on your assignments. During the course, you will proceed through a series of
weekly topic modules. The modules are structured sequentially, meaning you must finish one before moving
on to the next. Keep in mind, however, that the assignment deadlines are set— you can complete
assignments early (e.g., take you weekly quiz on a Wednesday), but you cannot complete an assignment
after the deadline. You also cannot progress to the next week’s modules unless you’ve completed the
current week’s modules.
Again, it is essential that you understand that you can only progress through the weekly topic modules
sequentially. Canvas will lock a module (it will be invisible to you in Canvas) until the previous modules
have been viewed. For example, you will not be able to access the week 4 module until you have gone
through all the components from the week 3 module. To complete a module, you will have to view all the
videos, download all the files, and click on any included links.
Here’s my suggestion for how you should manage your progression through the course each week:
Here’s the course schedule:
                                       “Get to know your syllabus.”
   Week 1         Jan 21                Ready. Set. Go!
                                        “Welcome to science communication.”
   Week 2         Jan 27                                                                    Quiz
                                        Context and Definitions
                                        "Duh ... of course the sun revolves around the
                                         Earth!"
   Week 3         Feb 3                                                                     Quiz
                                         Science Literacy and Public Understanding
                                         of Science
                                        “I love science ... as long as it’s consistent with
   Week 4         Feb 10                my worldviews.”                                     Quiz
                                        Public Attitudes and Trust Toward Science
                                        “Trust me. I’m a science journalist.”
   Week 5         Feb 17                Traditional Sources of Information about            Quiz
                                        Science
                                        #science
   Week 6         Feb 24                                                                    Quiz
                                         Science Information in the Digital Age
                                        “We are all star stuff!”
   Week 7         Mar 2                  Science and Scientists in Entertainment            Midterm Exam
                                         Media
                                        “More Neil deGrasse Tyson memes? ... Yes,
   Week 8         Mar 9                 please.”                                            Quiz
                                        Popularizers and Scientist Celebrities
   Week 9         Spring Break          No course material


                                       “Get out of your lab and communicate!”
   Week 10        Mar 23                The Growth of Public Engagement with                  Quiz
                                        Science
                                       “Because I like it, I’m good at it, and it's the right
   Week 11        Mar 30               thing to do.”                                          Quiz
                                       Why Scientists Communicate
                                       “OK, but what’s your goal?!”
   Week 12        Apr 6                                                                       Quiz
                                        Scientists as Public Relations Practitioners
                                       “Have fun but be nice.”
   Week 13        Apr 13                                                                      Quiz
                                        Communication Styles for Scientists
   Week 14        Apr 20               Case Study: Communicating Climate Change               Quiz
   Week 15        Apr 27               Case Study: Communicating CRISPR
   Week 16        May 4                No course material                                     Final Exam
A NOTE ON WORKLOAD
To help you figure out how much time you can expect to spend on this class, consider the following.
For each 1 credit hour, the university estimates workload to include one hour in class and an additional two
to three hours studying outside of class for a total of 3 to 4 hours per week (per credit hour).
For a single, 3-credit course, workload would look like this:
          3 hours in class + 6 to 9 hours studying outside class per week = 9 to 12 hours per week
Over a 15-week semester, the total hours would be:
                       9 to 12 hours per week X 15 weeks = 135-180 hours per semester
Keep this time commitment in mind as you balance your other obligations, including work, internships, and
other classes.


SOME TECHNICAL LOGISTICS
You can access our directly through Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the
class website, you will need your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, you can
navigate your way to other areas. Some of the most important include:
     •   Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the technical requirements and
         test stream webpage, information regarding technical questions, as well as contact information for
         the instructors and teaching assistants. On the left-hand side of each page of the Canvas course
         site are navigation tabs to all parts of the website, including the Syllabus.
     •   Modules – Most of your activity in Canvas will take place here. The Modules page includes links to
         all assigned and optional course content, including readings, video clips, podcasts, mini- lectures,
         assignments, and other documents.
     •   Proctorio – During your eleven quizzes and two exams you will be required to use an online
         proctoring service called Proctorio. It is a Chrome extension that uses your computer’s camera to
         record any instances of academic integrity violations. No one will be actively watching you take the
         exam via your computer but everything during the exam is recorded for future reference. Please
         take note of this and plan accordingly. There will be further instruction on how to use this service in
         Canvas.
E-MAIL POLICY
The TA and I will be readily available through Canvas e-mail during the course, meaning that we will try to
return your Canvas email within 24 hours of receiving it on Monday through Friday (or by Monday evening if
we receive it on the weekend). Keep your emails formal and concise—we will not respond to unprofessional
emails. The TA and I can also communicate with you via the Canvas conference function during our virtual
office hours. The TA is your first point of contact—email them first and they will get me involved
when appropriate.
TECHNICAL QUESTIONS
If you have any technical troubles at all using our Canvas website, you can view tutorials and contact live
support via this webpage: http://canvas.utexas.edu
You can also receive technical support by emailing: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu
The TA and I will do our best to help you with your technical questions, but we are not Canvas experts and
ask that you try to use the resources available to you on their website before asking for our help. Having
“technical problems” will not excuse you from late or missing assignments, so do not wait until the last
minute to upload assignments; be pro-active and ensure that you understand how to use the system well
before your assignments are due.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work
submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student's own work. I encourage you
to collaborate with your fellow students by studying together and discussing information and concepts
covered in lecture, but all tests, quizzes and assignments must be done independently.
Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave
material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this
Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the
examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative


behavior during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course and
University disciplinary action.
Understand that the online course format allows for multiple methods of identity verification, collusion,
collaboration and plagiarism monitoring and detection. A violation of the course policy may include (but is
not limited to) the following:
     •   Providing your UT EID to any other person
     •   Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the material on any activity,
         assessment or assignment, before, during and/or after any activity, assessment or assignment
     •   Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format
     •   The public (such that it can be viewed by more than one person) posting of any form of a test bank
         or group of questions from any assignment
OTHER UNIVERSITY POLICIES
     1. Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
         All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It
         is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail
         address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
         current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be
         time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
         complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
         http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
     2. Documented Disability Statement
         Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
         Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
         phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
         letter from SSD.
         •    Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
              (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper
              alternative text conversion, etc.).
         •    Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
              phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information.
     3. Religious Holy Days
         By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
         date of observance of a religious holy day.
     4. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
         If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
         Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
         provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
         Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
         Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
         Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts
         and share your concerns.
     5. Q Drop Policy
         The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
         to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
              “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
              permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any
              course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless
              the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
     6. Emergency Evacuation Policy


    Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside
    when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following
    policies regarding evacuation:
    •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
         nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
    •    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
    •    In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
   Do not re-enter a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or
   the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions to do so.
7. Counseling and Mental Health Services
    Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
    test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are
    options available for support.
    For immediate support:
         •    Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor |
              512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
         •    CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication
         •    Abby Simpson, LCSW | M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message*
              if she is unavailable)
    FREE Services at CMHC
         •    Brief assessments and referral services
         •    Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
         •    MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
         •    Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
8. Title IX Reporting
    Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender discrimination, sexual harassment,
    sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
    educational institutions. UT-Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
    free from discrimination in all of its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in out community, the
    university can:
    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
         become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
    Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” and
    “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title
    IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents
    that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or
    staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a Responsible
    Employee. If you want to speak with someone for support of remedies without an official report to
    the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu . For more information about reporting options
    and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu .


9. Contacts
      •   Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of
          sexual misconduct and discrimination.
              o    File a report of discrimination via online form
              o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
      •   Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
          The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for
          enforcing federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that
          receive federal financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex
          discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
      •   Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
          The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing
          federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the
          basis of a protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal
          Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
