ADV/PR INTERNSHIP
ADV 350, PR 350, ADV 350s, ADV 151, PR 151, ADV 395, ADV 650, PR 650
Internship Supervisor                                               Internship Coordinator
Dr. Isabella Cunningham                                             Samantha Wilson
Isabella.Cunningham@austin.utexas.edu                               srs.internship@gmail.com
Office Hours: By appointment &                                      Office Hours: By appointment &
M 2:00-5:00PM (BMC 4.330)
                                                                                     T 2:00-5:00PM (BMC 4.340A)
COURSE OVERVIEW
     1.   Have an approved internship
          https://advertising.utexas.edu/internships/undergraduate-internship-information
     2.   Make sure you are registered for the course
     3.   Check your email and Canvas frequently
     4.   Attend a mandatory orientation and complete a quiz on Canvas
     5.   Complete all 7 course assignments, 2 evaluations (mid-term and final) and 1 final report *
     6.   Attend at least 5 out of 7 speaker events and complete a quiz by the end of each lecture
     7.   Remind your supervisors to submit both the midterm and the final evaluation by deadlines
     8.   Have an above 70% score on both of mid-term and final supervisor evaluations
* Please note that failure to meet deadlines and successfully complete all course requirements will result in a failing
grade/NC/Incomplete for the class.
REQUIRED READING MATERIAL
(Apply to PR 350/PR 350s/ADV 350/ADV 350s/ADV 151/PR 151/ADV 395/ADV 650)
      1.   Killing the Cover Letter: How to Get a Job in Advertising & Public Relations in a Changed World
Author: Gene Kincaid, Publisher: Hale Fred Press, ISBN-13: 978-0615255408
*Textbook can be purchased at UT Co-op.
Note that students enrolled in ADV 151 and PR 151 are ONLY required to also complete (1) the Stan Talks, (2) the final paper,
and (3) the student/supervisor Midterm and final evaluations.
SPEAKERS REQUIRED ATTENDANCE:
The presentations by all speakers will be on Mondays from 5:30 to 7:00 pm in BMC 1.202. The speakers’ schedule and a short
bio for each speaker will be posted on CANVAS the week preceding each speaker presentation. There will also be a mandatory
orientation on February 10th from 5:30 to 7:00 pm in BMC 1.202 and every student is required to attend it.


IMPORTANT COURSE DATES
 Internship Application   Deadline for submitting application forms for internship    Friday, January 24,
                          approval                                                    by 12:00 pm
 (Auto-Drop)              Students who fail to obtain an approval on their            Wednesday,
                          internships by this deadline will not qualify to enroll and February 5,
                          will be automatically dropped from the course.              by 12:00 pm
 Mandatory Orientation    All students are required to attend a mandatory orientation Monday,
 (Physical class meeting) and complete an orientation quiz in order to complete this  February 10,
                          requirement.                                                5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                      (BMC 1.202)
 Course Assignment 1      Submit your up-to-date resume, cover letter and digital     Monday,
                          business card                                               February 17,
                                                                                      by 11:59 pm
 Course Assignment 2      Complete an assignment based on                             Monday,
                          Sections 1-4 of the required reading material, “Killing the February 24,
                          Cover Letter”                                               by 11:59 pm
 Speaker Event 1          TBA                                                         Monday,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                             February 24,
                                                                                      5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                      (BMC 1.202)
 Course Assignment 3      Complete an assignment based on the rest of the required    Monday, March 2,
                          reading material, “Killing the Cover Letter”                by 11:59 pm
 Speaker Event 2          TBA                                                         Monday, March 2,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                             5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                      (BMC 1.202)
 Speaker Event 3          TBA                                                         Monday, March 9,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                             5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                      (BMC 1.202)
 Midterm Evaluations      Both supervisors and students are required to submit a      Friday, March 13,
                          mid-term evaluation on students’ performance during their   by 11:59 pm
                          internship
 Course Assignment 4      Stan Talks: Stan Richards - Doing the Right Thing           Monday, March 23,
                          Watch the video and then answer the questions               by 11:59 pm
 Speaker Event 4          TBA                                                         Monday, March 30,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                             5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                      (BMC 1.202)


 Course Assignment 5            Stan Talks: Keith Reinhard - Advertising Today                  Monday, March 30,
                                Watch the video and then answer the questions                   by 11:59 pm
 Course Assignment 6            Stan Talks: Jamie Turner - Artificial Intelligence              Monday, April 6,
                                Watch the video and then answer the questions                   by 11:59 pm
 Speaker Event 5                TBA                                                             Monday, April 6,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                                       5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                                (BMC 1.202)
 Speaker Event 6                TBA                                                             Monday, April 13,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                                       5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                                (BMC 1.202)
 Course Assignment 7            Stan Talks: Laura Desmond - Media Career Success:               Monday, April 13,
                                Innovative Advice                                               by 11:59 pm
                                Watch the video and then answer the questions
 Speaker Event 7                TBA                                                             Monday, April 20,
 (Physical class meeting)                                                                       5:30 – 7:00 pm
                                                                                                (BMC 1.202)
 Final Evaluations              Both supervisors and students are required to submit a          Friday, May 8,
                                final evaluation on students’ performance during their          by 11:59 pm
                                internship
 Final Report                   Submit a final report of your internship (the report            Monday, May 11,
                                guidelines will be posted on Canvas).                           by 11:59pm
* Please note that the course does not require in-person attendance every week; physical meetings are highlighted,
and the date, time and venue of these lectures are subject to change. Please refer to the Internship Coordinator’s
Canvas announcement if necessary.
NOTE: If changes in the schedule become necessary, you will be notified of such changes
on CANVAS a week before the change.
COURSE REQURIEMENTS
    1.   INTERNSHIP APPROVAL
         All students must submit an application form for Dr. Cunningham’s review and approval by Friday,
         January 24th by 12:00 pm. Students who fail to secure an approved internship by the 12th class date of the
         semester will be automatically dropped from the course.
    2.   MANDATORY ORIENTATION


   All students are required to attend the mandatory orientation on Monday, February 10th, 5:30 – 7:00
   pm (BMC 1.202), and to complete a quiz by the end of the orientation. The orientation requires students’
   physical presence. Students who do not attend the orientation in person will not receive a “Complete” on
   the task. Exception: Students who are part of the UT LA program need to arrange a 1-to-1 meeting with the
   Internship Coordinator (by phone or by Skype) prior to the orientation date.
3. COURSE ASSIGNMETS
   In total, there are 7 written assignments for students to complete throughout the course. Students who fail
   to complete any one of these assignments on time will receive an “Incomplete” for the course. Exception:
   Students who are enrolled in ADV 395, PR 151 or ADV 151 are not required to complete assignments
   pertaining to the reading materials, i.e. Course Assignment 2 & 3.
   *All sections are required to complete the Stan Talks.
4. SPEAKER EVENTS
   Students are required to attend at least 5 out of 7 speaker events during the course. Please refer to the
   above chart of Important Course Dates for the date, time, and venue of each speaker events. By the end of
   each speaker event, students will be asked to complete a quiz regarding the lecture topic in class, which
   counts for the completion of each speaker event. Additionally, students who use electronic devices
   (including laptops and/or smartphones) during the lecture will be asked to leave the lecture hall and thus
   will not receive a complete grade on the task.
5. MIDTERM AND FINAL EVALUATIONS
   Both supervisors and students are required to complete a mid-term and a final evaluation on students’
   performance during the internship. The mid-term evaluation will be released on Friday, March 6th, a week
   early, and is due on Friday, March 13th, by 11:59 pm; the final evaluation will be released on Friday,
   May 1st and is due on Friday, May 8th, by 11:59 pm.
        a.    Student Evaluation: A link to students’ self-evaluations will be posted on Canvas.
        b. Supervisor Evaluations: Supervisors’ evaluations will be sent directly to them via email from the
              Internship Coordinator. Students will be asked to provide their supervisors’ email contacts during
              the mandatory orientation. If there is a change in supervisors’ means of contact, please inform the
              Internship Coordinator as early as possible. It is the student’s responsibility to confirm whether
              their supervisors have received the evaluation forms and remind their supervisors to complete the
              task by deadlines. In addition, students will be notified if they receive below 70% scores for
              their mid-term evaluations; and all students must receive above 80% scores in their final
              evaluations in order to pass the course.
6. FINAL REPORT
   The final report serves as your synopsis and final evaluation of the internship experience. It is important to
   be honest when it comes to evaluating your internship. Report Guidelines will be available in a separate


          document and will be posted to Canvas later in the semester. The final report is due on May 11th, by 11:59
          pm, and late submissions will not be accepted unless previously arranged with Dr. Cunningham.
GRADING POLICY
This is a Credit/No Credit course. As such, students will not receive credit for this class unless you complete
ALL course requirements by the specific deadlines set in the course syllabus.
In particular, your “grade” will be determined by the following criteria:
      1.  Did you complete all course assignments on time?
      2.  Did you attend at least 5 out of 7 speaker events and complete a quiz by the end of each lecture?
      3.  Did you show improvement between your midterm and your final supervisor evaluation?
          Your total supervisor evaluation (sum of mid-term and final evaluation) should be above 70%.
      4.  Did you submit a well-written, edited and honest final evaluation by the deadline?
      5.  Did you notify the Internship Coordinator if your internship duties changed significantly?
COURSE POLICIES
Academic Integrity and Standards
Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and integrity in all course activities and
assignments. It is expected that there shall be no deception regarding the representation made by the student of
his/her preparation, participation or performance.
Plagiarism is presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own and is a form of fraud. Plagiarism includes
(but is not limited to) the presentation of a sequence of words from another writer, utilized without proper
attribution. It is critical that students properly acknowledge the work of others and that the acknowledgement be
accurate and complete.
The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and plagiarism are subject to the standard
policies and procedures for all UT-Austin students as established by UT-Austin.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice)
or 232-2937 (video phone). Also, see http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Use of Canvas
In this class we will use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected access—to
distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to distribute assignments, and to
give students online quizzes and surveys.


Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading
your email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the
university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—
I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting in a disturbing manner, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050
or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize
yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the
one you used when you enter the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the
first week class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the
Fire Prevention Services Office.
Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that
number.” You can find advice, models, templates, and other resources for designing your course syllabus on the
DIIA website at http://www.utexas.edu/academic/diia/
