                              Hands-on-Science IV (84805)
                                NSC 306M – Summer 2019
                               MTWThF 10am-12pm, 12:30-1:30pm
Instructor:     Antonia Chimonidou
E-mail:         antonia.chimonidou@utexas.edu
Office:         RLM 9.206
Office Hrs:     Thursdays 1:30-2:30pm
Learning Assistants:           Javier Abrego (javier.abrego@utexas.edu)
                               Ben Heller (bdheller15@gmail.com)
Required Books: NSC 306M Course Packet available at the Co-op
Building upon the inquiry-based methodology and
content of previous Hands-on-Science courses (NSC
306J and NSC 306K are prerequisites), we will tackle
the fields of astronomy and Earth science this
semester. In this semester, we study several topics
including phenomena on Earth and beyond – how
distant objects interact and how we perceive them. We
consider light and how it behaves, as well as gravity.
We also address the appearance of things in the sky -
size and scale of objects in the universe and how their
distance affects how we see them, the movement of
the Sun and stars in the sky, and our perception of Moon phases. Closer to home, we talk about
our own observations of patterns such as the changing seasons, and differences between
weather and climate.
Grading: Course grades will be determined according to performance on homework, quizzes,
and the final exam. Attendance factors into final grades! This course will use the +/- system. We
do not curve grades, which means that we do not arbitrarily add or subtract points and everyone
has the possibility of achieving an “A” in the course. Extra credit is rarely offered, but if it is
offered to anyone in a course it will be offered to everyone in that course.
Semester grades are determined following this system: B- (from 80 – 82.9); B (from 83 – 86.9);
B+ (from 87 – 89.9). Splits for grades other than a B will occur at the same places (60, 63, 67,
70 for D; 70, 73, 77, 80 for C, and 90 and 93 for A). There is no A+ at the University of Texas.
Grade components:
         Homework: 20%
         Quizzes:       60%
         Final Exam: 20%
                                                                                                    1


Classroom and equipment: The classrooms and equipment are a shared resource, utilized by
over 350 students per week. It is imperative that the space is well maintained and functional for
everyone's use. Therefore, utmost care must be taken with the physical space including the
furnishings, computers and equipment. Equipment damaged during class period should be
reported to the instructors, because the next group to use the equipment needs functioning
equipment. At the end of each class period, you are expected to clean up your workspace and
erase your whiteboards.
Getting help for this class: We encourage you to visit us; we’re here to help! Office hours
listed above are guaranteed times that we have set aside to talk with students, but we also
encourage you to set up an appointment any time you need to meet with us. We are often
available before or after class, and we enjoy talking with you. Just talk to your instructor and you
will find that he/she is happy to make time for you when he/she has the time available. LA’s will
not have office hours or test reviews or any of those sorts of activities.
                        Announcements and communication: Announcements are made during
                        class and via the course Canvas. Most announcements are made using
                        only one of these outlets, and it is your responsibility to stay informed. You
                        can find the class Canvas site by going to your courses on your UT Direct
                        page or by going to http://courses.utexas.edu. Your official UT email
                        address is managed through your UT Direct page and can be modified by
                        logging into UT Direct, then going to PERSONAL INFORMATION Þ
                        CHANGE EMAIL. If you have questions or problems with Canvas, please
                        contact the ITS helpdesk at 475-9400.
Table rotation and roles: There are assigned seats and assigned group roles in this class. We
will move groups periodically during the semester, and your assigned roles will change with
each activity. We all get a lot of practice working with new colleagues - this mirrors real life!
Cell phone and computer use in this classroom: This course is based on the inquiry model
of learning: for it to work, you must be present and thinking about the class the whole time that
you are in the room. Talking to people outside the room during class times is a distraction that
pulls down you and your entire group. It is important that these distractions are avoided, and
one way to ensure that they are avoided is to keep devices that link us to the outside world
turned off and out of sight.
The policy for all Hands-on-Science courses is that cell phones and computers must be turned
off and kept out of sight at all times. If you have a particularly important issue that absolutely
cannot wait until the end of class, you may ask your instructor for permission to leave the
classroom to use your cell phone.
In all cases, any communication with people outside of the classroom must take place outside of
the classroom – this means if you need to talk on the phone or text message or Facebook or
email or otherwise communicate with someone outside of the class, you must take yourself and
your device outside of the classroom and into the hall.
If your instructor or TA sees you communicating with people outside of the room, you will be
considered to have an unexcused absence for that day and your device may be taken for the
remainder of the class. If you have two other absences of any sort during the semester, then
using your device will result in losing 2 points off your semester score (see Absences section
below). Just go outside the room if you absolutely must use your device!
                                                                                                      2


Quiz return and grading policy: Quizzes and other assessments are not returned to students
in the Hands-on-Science classes. Returning and reviewing the quizzes during class time takes
away from instructional time for inquiry and reflection of the results gathered during inquiry. The
act of going over the “correct” answers for a quiz is a real contradiction for the inquiry teaching
model. Reasoning, problem solving, and reaching independent conclusions based on evidence
collected during inquiry is the focus and main method of learning in the Hands-on-Science
curriculum. The best source for “correct” answers is your manual, in which you have collected
and analyzed data and summarized conclusions. The quality of the work and the thoughtfulness
with which you record your data and answer questions in your manual are the most important
and valuable study tools for this class.
Quizzes will be made available for review by your instructor. You may come to office hours or
make a separate appointment to see your quiz. You may look at your quizzes at any time during
the semester.
If you believe that there is a grading error or wish to contest your grade for any reason, that
must be accomplished within one week of receiving the grade. Grade changes are
accomplished in writing using a form that is available from your instructor. After one week, your
grade will not be changed for any reason.
Absences: The basic policy is this: we expect you to come to every class meeting. Details of
how this idea is implemented are below, but fundamentally we want you to come to every single
class meeting. It is good for you and it is good for your group.
We understand that sometimes things happen, and we think that things happen to the average
person about two times each semester. Things like getting sick, getting stuck in traffic, having
the car not start are what we imagine happening. As a result, no matter the reason, two
absences each semester are ignored. Not the first two, not the two unexcused absences, not
two absences in addition to being sick - just any two absences.
Some students misunderstand this policy to mean that if you get sick and then later miss two
classes for a wedding or something, that the two “ignored” absences are for the wedding and
the third is excused. This is not the case! The way it is calculated is that at the end of the
semester you will have three absences. (There is only one very rare exception when having
multiple absences does not incur a penalty, and that is when all of your absences are excused.
An example of this might be spending two weeks in the hospital.)
Each absence beyond two results in a grade reduction of 2 points. When it comes time to
calculate grade reductions due to absences, what we do is take the total number of absences,
subtract two, and then multiply the number of remaining absences by two points each. This
many points are then subtracted from your semester score. The equation below represents the
calculation that is made, and the table below shows sample combinations of absences and the
resulting grade penalties:
                                                                                                    3


                     Grade Reduction = (Total # of absences – 2) ´ 2% points
                    Absences                                        Penalty
            3 absences: all unexcused               2 points subtracted from semester score
      3 absences: 2 excused, 1 unexcused            2 points subtracted from semester score
      4 absences: 3 excused, 1 unexcused            2 points subtracted from semester score
      4 absences: 2 excused, 2 unexcused            4 points subtracted from semester score
            4 absences: all unexcused               4 points subtracted from semester score
              4 absences: all excused                              No penalty
              2 absences of any kind                               No penalty
There are no make-up classes because that is just not possible. Group activities depend upon
the active participation of the entire group. No late assignments are accepted and there are no
make-up quizzes (see below, your lowest 100-pt quiz score is dropped). Students will receive a
grade of zero for any work that is missed or not turned in on time.
Late policy: Students who arrive more than 5 minutes late will be penalized one-half of an
unexcused absence (which amounts to 1 point off your final grade!). Arriving late to class puts
your entire group behind. Groups that have members arriving late are typically the last to be
ready for summarizing questions, which holds back the entire class. We know that occasionally
you will get trapped at your previous class or have to walk the long way in the rain to get to
RLM, and we believe that five minutes of leeway is sufficient.
Excused absences: An excused absence includes a verifiable medical emergency or a death
in the immediate family. In most cases an excused absence is unpleasant and we hope that no
one suffers an excused absence of this nature! Sanctioned University activities may qualify as
excused absences, but will only be considered if discussed with the instructor well in advance of
the absence. If you have an excused absence and have a total of two or fewer absences during
the semester, then there is no reason to provide documentation of your excused absence to
your instructor (you should probably keep it just in case, though). When you reach three or more
absences, you should talk to your instructor about any absence that might have been an
excused absence in the past and then at that time (not before) you should provide
documentation of those absences. Again, this only matters if you have three or more excused
absences.
Academic dishonesty: We believe that the University of Texas has the right to expect your
honest behavior. This is the only fair way to treat yourself and your classmates. We believe that
you will behave honestly at all times. The UT Office of the Dean of Students states: “At a
minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with
the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
     • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
     • complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
         assistance in preparing them;
     • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
         academic discipline; and
     • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
         student.”1
1
  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                                                                4


While we encourage group work in class, quizzes and other assessments are not group-based
activities! Quizzes must reflect your individual work and understanding. Some homework and
project assignments are also to be completed independently, and projects will require you to
correctly and fairly reference your resources (giving credit where credit is due). If you ever have
a question about this, or are concerned about what counts as plagiarism, please ask your
instructor to clarify.
Academic dishonesty (cheating or plagiarism) of any form will not be tolerated. All cases of
suspected cheating will be referred to Student Judicial Services for disposition. We typically
recommend that any student caught cheating on any assignment receive a grade of F for the
semester. We have found that most students agree with this policy, as it keeps things fair for
everyone. If you have ANY concerns about academic dishonesty, please talk to your instructor!
                                Your grade will be based upon…
Homework: Homework will be assigned throughout the semester. Some assignments will be
checked at the beginning of class and others will be online and have deadlines. If you have
trouble with your homework, we strongly encourage you to ask questions.
Quizzes: Quizzes will be given periodically. If you fail to come to class on an assessment day,
you will receive a zero on that quiz. Your lowest score on a 100-point quiz will be dropped at the
end of the semester and will not be used in the calculation of your semester score.
Final exam: The cumulative final exam will be given during exam period after the end of
classes and the time and date will be determined by the Registrar. All students must take the
final exam at the time and place announced by the Registrar for your unique number.
The final exam will be as much of a practical final as possible – we will ask you to repeat
variants of the experiments conducted over the course of the semester. You will be graded
based on your ability to use the data to develop an explanation of various phenomena, and your
mastery of conducting experiments (including use of materials and equipment). This is the same
thing that you will be doing once you get your own classrooms!
Course schedule: The last page of this syllabus gives an approximate schedule of the activities
that we will complete on a given day. We will move through the class manual from beginning to
end, doing one activity each day. It is possible that activities may be moved during the
semester, typically this happens if a day is cancelled due to weather or other disruption. If you
are not in class, you may miss important information that directly affects your grade!
                                                                                                   5


Students with disabilities: Students with disabilities who require special accommodations
need to get a letter that documents the disability from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users
who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course
at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
Five business days before an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing
accommodations that will be needed. See following website for more information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Religious Holy days: It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that the student must
notify the instructor at least fourteen days prior to a scheduled class day that he/she will be
absent to observe a religious holy day. For religious holidays that fall within the first two weeks
of the semester, the notice should be given on the first day of the semester. For the purposes of
grading in this course, such days will qualify as excused absences.
Drop dates: The following applies to dropping courses in the College of Natural Sciences:
    •    Friday, June 7: Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in
         registration may require the approval of the department chair and usually the student’s
         dean. (See General Information, Academic Policies and Procedures, for details.)
    •    Tuesday, June 11: Fourth class day; this is the date the official enrollment count is
         taken. Last day an undergraduate student may add a first-term nine-week, or whole-
         session class except for rare and extenuating circumstances. Payment for added
         classes (add bill) due by 5:00 pm. Last day to drop a first-term, nine-week, or whole-
         session class for a possible refund. (See General Information, Academic Policies and
         Procedures, for details.)
    •    Wednesday, June 26: Last day a student may change registration to or from the
         pass/fail or credit/no credit basis.
    •    Thursday, July 11: Last day to drop a class, with required approvals.
    •    Nonacademic Q-drop: After the last day for academic Q-drop, students with
         substantiated nonacademic reasons (as determined by the Dean’s Office) may be
         allowed to drop a course. Faculty will be asked to provide information on student
         performance up to the time of the nonacademic Q-drop request but are not responsible
         for making the decision about assigning a grade of Q. Students who experience
         significant nonacademic problems such as extended health-related problems or family
         emergencies should contact the Dean’s Office.
    •    One-time Drop Policy: Students have the option once in their undergraduate degree to
         drop a class or drop out of all classes in a semester right up until the last class day. This
         new policy was proposed and approved by UT Faculty Council on May 9, 2011, and
         more information is available at http://www.utexas.edu/faculty/council/2010-
         2011/legislation/EPC_OTE.html. According to the policy as approved by the Provost, a
         student who has completed at least two long semesters here at UT can drop a class only
         if he or she has an average grade of D+ or below in the class at the time of the request
         and if there are no pending investigations of scholastic dishonesty for the course in
         question.
                                                                                                      6


Emergency Procedures: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation
from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
  • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
     evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
     requires exiting and assembling outside.
  • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
     Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
     building.
  • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
     first week of class.
  • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
  • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
     The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
  • Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
  • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
     be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                    7


                                    Tentative Schedule
                                                                  HW
Date Day             In class activities
         Ch1 Act1 – How Mirrors Work                   Ch1 Act1 HW1, HW2 & HW3
 6/6 TH  Ch1 Act2 – Images
         Ch1 Act2 – Images                                   Ch1 Act2 HW
 6/7  F  Ch1 Act3 – Pinhole Camera                       Moon Observations HW
         Ch1 Act4 – Light Rays Bend
6/10  M  Ch1 Act5 – Lenses                                   Ch2 Act1 (HW)
6/11  T             Quiz 1 – Chapter 1
         Ch2 Act1 (HW) & Ch2 Act1 – Gravity on Earth
6/12  W  Ch2 Act2 – Gravity Beyond Earth                 Ch2 Act2 HW1 & HW2
         Ch2 Act2 – Gravity Beyond Earth
6/13 Th  Ch2 Act3 – Falling into Orbit                       Ch2 Act3 HW
         Ch2 Act4 – Jupiter’s Moons
6/14  F  Ch3 Act1 – Measuring Size
6/17  M             Quiz 2 – Chapter 2
         Ch3 Act1 – Measuring Size                           Ch3 Act1 HW
6/18  T  Ch3 Act2 – The Solar System                         Ch3 Act2 HW
         Ch3 Act3 – The Planets
6/19  W  Ch3 Act4 – The Universe
6/20 Th             Quiz 3 – Chapter 3
         Ch4 Act1 – The Daytime Sky                          Ch4 Act1 HW
6/21  F  Ch4 Act2 – Mt. Nose Revisited
6/24  M  Ch4 Act3 – From Space to Earth
6/25  T             Quiz 4 – Chapter 4
         Ch5 Act1 – Our Earth as a Spinning Top
6/26  W  Ch5 Act1 HW – Earth’s Orbit and Seasons
         Ch5 Act2 – Sunlight and the Tilt of the Earth       Ch5 Act2 HW
6/27 Th  Ch5 Act3 – The Length of Days and Nights
6/28  F                Quiz 5 – Chapter 5               Ch7 Act1 (Weather Obs.)
         Ch6 Act1 – Observing the Moon
 7/1  M  Ch6 Act2 – Modeling the Moon’s Motions              Ch6 Act2 HW
         Ch6 Act3 – The Moon and Time
 7/2  T  Ch6 Act4 – Explaining Eclipses
 7/3  W             Quiz 6 – Chapter 6
 7/4 Th        Independence Day Holiday
         Ch7 Act1 – Watching the Weather
 7/5  F  Ch7 Act2 – What Affects Climate?
         Ch7 Act3 – Layers of the Atmosphere
 7/8  M  Ch7 Act4 – Fronts and Atmospheric Circulation
         Ch7 Act4 – Fronts and Atmospheric Circulation
 7/9  T  Ch7 Act5 – Climate Change
7/10  W  Review
7/11 Th                  Final Exam
                                                                              8
