ARC 381D / ARI 381D / LAR 381D
ARCHITECTURAL DRAWING
School of Architecture
The University of Texas at Austin
Fall 2019
Tuesdays/Thursdays 6 – 9 PM
PROFESSORS
                            John Blood
                            Office: GOL 3.106
                            Hours: by appointment
                            Phone: 512-773-5207
                            Email: john@danzeblood.com
                            Igor Siddiqui
                            Office: GOL 3.110
                            Hours: by appointment
                            Email: igor.siddiqui@utexas.edu
TEACHING ASSISTANTS
                            Nicole Vice
                            Email: nvice@utexas.edu
                                    Hours: by appointment
                            Fatima Betts
                            Email: fatimabetts@gmail.com
                            Hours: by appointment
COURSE CONTENT
Architectural Drawing is a graduate-level course offered to first-year architecture and interior design students in
the School of Architecture with no or limited academic background in the field.
The course covers major issues related to drawing, including primary drawing types and conventions such as
orthographic projection, paraline projection and perspective. Both freehand and constructed drawings will be
utilized in the course. Drawing is approached as a form of thinking, and the course as such provides
foundational skills that are needed to effectively generate, explore, visualize, and communicate ideas through
design.
All assigned exercises reinforce three-dimensional visualization and feature a design component that requires
in-depth exploration within given parameters. Digital and hybridized drawing techniques will be discussed
during the course of the semester. Students are expected to maintain a daily sketchbook and take notes during
lectures. Weekly projects will be given related to course material presented in class. Students are expected to
prepare these exercises outside of class time. Teaching assistants will work closely with the students and
provide guidance with the weekly assignments.
GRADING
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic
areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant
portion of each grade is derived from more nuanced qualitative criteria.


Grading for the course is broken into three components:
           1/3 grasp          understanding of the ideas investigated in the project at hand, combined with an
                              appropriate process of inquiry
           1/3 effort         verbal contribution made during class reviews and meeting times as well as risk and
                              development shown in the projects, also attendance
           1/3 resolution     the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through representation
The course grade is based on weekly design assignments as well as the maintenance of a sketchbook. Each
weekly assignment is weighted equally. The assignments constitute 95% of the overall course grade. The
sketchbook, which is to be kept throughout the semester and may include sketches and notes from both this
course and outside of it, counts for 5% of the overall course grade. Grades may be adjusted as per the
attendance policy (please see below).
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A- : excellent work
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual
rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is
discussed in class.
B+/B/B- : good work
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed. Student pursues ideas and
suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Demonstrates potential for
excellence.
C+/C/C- : required work
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor.
(Note: C- does not meet the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree.)
D+/D/D- : poor work
Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.
F : unacceptable work
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned with
excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments are not a cause for
assigning this grade. An incomplete is assigned after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices. Incomplete
coursework must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. The minimum penalty for more than two unexcused absences
is a full letter drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be
late or miss class.
A student who misses classes or other required activities for the observance of a religious holy day should inform
the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an
assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the time
allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
DISABILITIES
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical need. You will
be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate
accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for
Students with Disabilities, also found via the web at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC HONESTY


Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Refer to
the Student Judicial Services website for official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
Please refer to The Role of Faculty in Confronting Scholastic Dishonesty brochure published by Student Judicial
Services for information on confronting students who violate scholastic honesty.
