SYLLABUS
ARC|ARI 310K: DESIGN 1 | SUMMER 2020
MTWThF 9am-12pm
ONLINE USING ZOOM
INSTRUCTOR
Joyce Rosner                                jrosner@austin.utexas.edu
Appointments for office hours should be setup by emailing instructor(s).
TEACHING ASSISTANT
Stefan Brits                                sbrits@utexas.edu
APPROACH
The projects and exercises explored during the course of this term are intended to provide the student with a
foundation in the perceptual, conceptual and technique-based skills necessary for subsequent design work in
architecture / interior design. Sequentially linked projects will begin by introducing a question, tested through a
series of variables and end with a possible design response. Projects have been devised to encourage many
avenues of inquiry with students taking responsibility in framing their own investigations, as well as taking
responsibility for their overall progress leading to their final design resolution.
While most of your work will be done digitally, you will be required to keep a sketchbook in order to develop
freehand drawing skills. You will also be encouraged to make rough physical models occasionally. All work will be
submitted on a daily basis for review through UT Box.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     •    To guide students in forming a foundation on which their own values will be developed
     •    To provide students with a basis through which to view, assimilate, evaluate, and implement design ideas
     •    To introduce students to design in the realm of the senses
     •    To encourage an understanding of form as a dependent variable or as a consequence of multiple
          considerations
Self-motivation is necessary to succeed in this class and subsequent design studios. As a creative endeavor, the
process of design is one of exploration rather than explication; as such, it is defined by questions, not answers.
Class time will take place online using Zoom through Canvas. You will be expected to be present at those meeting
during which we will discuss any new assignments, answer questions, and talk about specific projects. Class time is
intended for the exchange of ideas and approaches. You will also be given time during class to work and for us to
review work individually.
Because learning from each other is such an important part of the design studio, you will be asked to upload
current work to a box folder to which we will invite you. This will allow all of you to view all of the work that is
being produced.


Design studio is a significant time commitment! There mayl be both group and individual work. Likewise, work will
be discussed in groups and individually and project evaluations will be subject to both faculty review as well as
peer review.
Always look for ways to bring something extra to your studio work. In addition to pursuing the paths laid out by
your instructor you should constantly seek additional inputs to your design process. That means anything from
bringing in related material to finding a video from which the class might benefit.
Our school has developed a Studio Culture Policy: http://soa.utexas.edu/architecture/culture
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning encourages dialogue,
collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio, whether in person or virtually, offers an
environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and
discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive
one-on-one instruction from faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her
critical thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education,
where project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the
school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in
service of architecture's fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
Even though we won’t all be meeting together in the same location, it is still important that you communicate with
each other about your projects. You will have some time during class to “talk” to each other and should continue
that practice outside of class as well. You will also be able to schedule your own Zoom meetings with each other by
going to utexas.zoom.us and signing in with your uteid and password.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is
derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to
deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
      Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
           •   The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of
               inquiry
           •   The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
               models, etc.) in the development of the design
           •   Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is
               asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
      Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in
      companion courses.


          •   A strong and clearly stated design objective
          •   Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements –
              and sectional development
          •   Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through
              creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and
              environmental system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in
              support of the design objective
          •   Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and
              assembly
     Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final
     design presentation.
          •   Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
              displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
     Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and
     reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of
Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-            Excellent
                Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
                conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
                above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-         Above Average
                Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
                pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
                Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C            Average
                Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
                dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-      Poor
                Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
                level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F               Fail
                Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
                this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X               Excused Incomplete


                  Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
                  on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
                  consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date.
                  Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is
                  enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
                  Incomplete coursework must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester. ALL
                  GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full
letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused
with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing
work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused
absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students
must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not
acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this
subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the
Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic
integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
HONOR CODE
"As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
academic integrity."


UNIVERSITY CODE OF CONDUCT
"The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect towards peers and community."
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
     •   In-house CARE counselor (see below)
     •   For immediate support
              o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                   M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
              o CMHC Crisis Line:
                   24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     •   Free services at CMHC:
              o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
              o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
              o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
              o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-
4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each
course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
STUDIO SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to
the needs of everyone. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of everyone.
Please see your instructor if problems that you are unable to resolve on your own arise Security is a necessary
component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave
your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio mates
accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce
material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with
white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate materials and take what they
need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA
Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the
Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be
reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If
something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.


EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
     •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may
         occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
         class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
         The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Be courteous. Be smart.
