SPRING 2020                                                                                                                             Instructor: Rasa Navasaityte
ARCH 327R/ARC 386                                                                                                                       rasa.navasaityte@utexas.edu
                                                                                                                                        Office Hours: by Appointment
Composition and Architecture
Departing from the compositional principals of the Bauhaus and its bottom-up strategies, we ask what
composition can do for architecture today. In this course, we will reflect on advances in computation, eco-
logical thinking, shared technologies, and the opportunities they compositionally open to us for architecture.
Architecture is here researched by design; not by words, not by numbers but by composition only.
This year, we will advance from Augmented to Mixed Realities: when digital objects are no longer implied
onto a physical reality but are themselves equally real. What kind of opportunities evolve at an architectural
scale when compositions are neither virtual nor real but mixed realities?
 Individual or joined as team, participants will compose an architectural chunk using AR and Mixed Reality
technology. The seminar will begin with an introduction to Unity3D and continues with a series of design
experiments; from simple to complex; from research to design.
Conceptual model / Team Archifilade City: Zhaoyue Zhang, Mengshi Fu, Chenyi Yao, Ren Wang / Research Cluster 17 - Large City Architecture / B-Pro Urban Design, The Bartlett School of
Architecture, UCL, London, 2018-2019.
UTSOA / 2020 / spring semester / Composition and Architecture


SEMESTER SCHEDULE
Week 00                                      Week 06                                  Week 10
        Fri        introduction lecture                Fri     Unity workshop                 Fri  main project
                                             Week 07                                  			                    (group work)
Week 01
                                                       Fri     Midterm Presentation   Week 11
        Fri        composition 1             			(13 March)                                    Fri  main project
Week 02                                      Assignment 2                             			                    (group work)
        Fri        composition 2                                                      Week 12
Week 03                                                                                       Fri  main project
                                                                                      			                    (group work)
        Fri        composition 3             Week 08
                                                                                      Week 13
                                             Spring Break March 16-20
Assignment 1                                                                                  Fri  main project
                                             Week 09                                  			                    (group work)
                                                       Fri      main project          Week 14
Week 04                                      			                         (group work)         Fri  Final Presentation
        Fri        Unity workshop                                                     		
Week 05
                                                                                      Assignment 3
        Fri        Unity workshop
Assignment 1 / Learning technical skills
following the seminar’s tutorials, develop six compositional studies, submitted as jpeg, individual work:
1. Point 2. Line 3. Surface
4.–6. Compositional Groups
Assignment 2 / Figure Figuration
develop design ideas based on compositional thinking, according to individual feedback, group work:
three jpeg files expressing spatial complexity.
Assignment 3 / Mixed Spaces
Build a figurative, spatial experience in mixed reality, exploring the implications for architectural assembly.
Submission: Video; recordings of the building process and spatial experience.
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade
is derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to
deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
•       The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of inquiry
•       The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
        models, etc.) in the development of the design
UTSOA / 2020 / spring semester / Composition and Architecture


•       Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is 		
        asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in com-
panion courses.
•       A strong and clearly stated design objective
•       Spatial complexity
•       Synthetic thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through creative 		
        engagement with issues of structure, construction, and assembly,
•       Material sensitivity as demonstrated in spatial assembly
Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the
final design presentation.
•       Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of
        skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and
reviews.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A- Excellent Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual lan-
guage, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above
and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- Above Average Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully complet-
ed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required pro-
jects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C Average Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation
are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F Fail Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this
grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X Excused Incomplete Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work
must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, accord-
ing to the School of Architecture policy.
UTSOA / 2020 / spring semester / Composition and Architecture
