University of Texas at Austin                                                                        KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                    Summer 2019
           KIN 312M: Management of Physical Activity and Sport Programs
Instructor: Dr. Matt Bowers
Email: mattbowers@austin.utexas.edu
Phone: 512.232.2120
Office: BEL 605E
Office Hours: Tu/W/Th 9:30-10:00, 12:30-1:00, or by appointment
CLASS MEETING
Tu/W/Th from 10:00-12:30 in ECJ 1.308
REQUIRED TEXTS
Sport Management: An Exploration of the Field and its Value
          by Matthew T. Bowers and Marlene A. Dixon
          Hard copy available at Co-Op
          Ebook available at http://www.sagamorepub.com/products/sport-management-ebook
Think like a Freak: The Authors of Freakonomics Offer to Retrain Your Brain
          by Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner
          Hard copy available at Co-Op or anywhere books are sold
          Ebook available anywhere ebooks are sold (Amazon, iBooks, etc.)
COURSE RATIONALE
This course offers students an approachable-yet-substantive introduction to why sport - and, therefore,
the management of sport - holds an essential place in society. Unlike many introductory sport
management courses that are structured to provide brief overviews of the functional areas of sport
management, this course emphasizes introducing students to the various legitimations for sport’s role
in society and then uses that understanding as a mechanism to discuss related management
implications. Additionally, this course endeavors to help train higher-order managerial thinking that will
enable students to begin developing the transferable cognitive skills to be successful wherever their
career path may lead them.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
The primary aim of this course is to generate student knowledge that will enable them to understand
and articulate the critical role that sports play in not only our economic sector, but in our shared social,
cultural, and political existence, and through that lens to introduce how we approach the management
of sport. The course is intended to cover the basic legitimations for sport, including health, socialization,
economic development, community development, national pride, and social politics.
The secondary aim of this course is to help students understand how to take a more critical, well-
reasoned, and managerial perspective in not only how they think about managing sport organizations,
but how they live their daily lives as well. As students prepare themselves for a future in a management
position, this course will introduce them to a number of simple-yet-elegant approaches to improve their
thinking. Throughout the course, students will engage in a number of real-world case studies and
scenarios designed to encourage them to apply course content. In addition to learning how to think
more managerially, in each assignment there will be an explicit emphasis on the development of
transferable skills related to decision-making, creativity, communication, and presentation. The hope is
that students will leave this course feeling more comfortable in their abilities to reason, problem-solve,
                                                                                                             1


University of Texas at Austin                                                                        KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                    Summer 2019
and convey their thinking – whether they enter the field of sport management or any other field of
interest.
After successfully completing the course, students will be able to:
    • Define sport management and articulate its value to society;
    • Understand the history of sport management and how that has shaped its trajectory;
    • Appreciate the legitimations for sport and how these legitimations impact the way we manage
          sport organizations;
    • Apply various managerial frameworks to assist in understanding many of the key functional
          areas within sport management;
    • Recognize and mitigate the effects of various types of cognitive biases that often cloud
          managerial thinking;
    • Demonstrate an appreciation of ethical considerations and the value of diversity through the use
          of unbiased language and an inclusive attitude;
    • Understand what is required to become a contributing member of the profession
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Be early to class. Be engaged. Be excellent to each other. Students often have the impression that they
are hidden or anonymous, but this is not the case: I can often see and hear everything you do, so
please refrain from being distracted/ing or disruptive. Please also come to class each day having read
any assigned readings for that day. Also, please make every effort to bring a laptop or tablet to be able
to participate in class activities. You are required to take an active role in shaping the experience for
you and your classmates.
CLASS FORMAT
    • Lectures                                               • Case Studies
    • Discussions                                            • Games
    • Small group work                                       • Exams
COURSE EVALUATION
                  Qty                    ASSIGNMENT                       % OF GRADE
                    2                    Midterm Exams                   60% (30% each)
                    1              NFL Expansion Bid Project                   30%
                    1         Resume + Career Path Assignment                  10%
DESIGN OF ASSIGNMENTS
Assignments are designed to provide you with dynamic and engaging opportunities to apply concepts
and methods from the text, lectures, and class activities. In virtually every assignment or activity, there
is a managerial decision to be made, as well as a process of reasoning to be followed.
GRADING OF ASSIGNMENTS
In general, assignments will be assessed using the following criteria:
          • Quality of writing and presentation
          • Application of methods and concepts from the text, lectures, and class activities
          • Synthesis and integration of ideas and insights
          • Clarity and logic
In any instance where a student would like to discuss his/her grade - either on a specific assignment or
in terms of the final overall grade in this course - the student must have a face-to-face meeting with the
instructor and outline the specific issues in question. Emails in which students ask for points on
                                                                                                             2


University of Texas at Austin                                                                          KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                      Summer 2019
assignments or ask that final grades be bumped up at the end of the semester will be disregarded; the
professor will not discuss changes to grades in anything but a face-to-face meeting.
In the event that a student wishes to challenge his/her grade on any specific assignment they must
adhere to the following procedure. Requests for a meeting to discuss the assignment must be made
within one week from receipt of the assignment grade. The request should include a basic explanation
or justification for a re-grade on this particular assignment. Following a face-to-face meeting, the
instructor will review the student’s assignment and re-grade the assignment based on the student’s
rationale – assuming this rationale is deemed sufficient to re-assess the grade. The grade on the
assignment may then increase or decrease based on the instructor’s re-assessment of the student’s
work. The re-grade will be the final grade for the assignment.
SPECIFIC ASSIGNMENTS
Midterm Exams (60% of Final Grade): There will be two midterm exams (each worth 30% of the final
grade) throughout the course of the semester. The exams will take the form of multiple-choice and
true/false questions completed on a Scantron (to be provided by the professor). These exams are non-
cumulative and there is no final exam. See the course schedule at the end of this syllabus for exam
dates. More details will be provided before each exam.
NFL Expansion Bid Project (30% of Final Grade): In teams, students will align themselves into
hypothetical bid committees for NFL franchise host cities and will explore managerial thinking in sports
through the completion of an NFL expansion bid. The bid itself will be comprised of multiple
components that will each be prepared and assembled throughout the course of the semester. These
components will derive from the intersection of the textbooks and ask students to thoughtfully – and
persuasively – consider the legitimations for sport alongside – and through - the application of cognitive
skills introduced in Think Like A Freak. Although this project comprises 30% of the final grade, the
grade will be broken up in accordance with the various components outlined in the detailed instructions
to be provided in the second week of the semester. At the end of the semester, the bid committees will
prepare and deliver a bid pitch to Dr. Bowers (acting as the proxy NFL Commissioner) and possibly a
small panel of experts. The host committee that presents the “winning” bid will receive an automatic full
credit on the entire project. More details will be provided in class.
Resume and Career Path Assignment (10% of Final Grade): It is my hope that students will leave this
course with an enhanced level of thinking and a clearer understanding of their career path. Pursuant to
this desired outcome, students will be required to create (or update) a resume and conduct research
about the career path of an individual who holds a specific job position of interest to the student’s long-
term career goals. This dual assignment will be introduced early in the semester, but the final due date
will not be until the end of the semester. Students may complete this assignment anytime in between,
but if they would like specific feedback from Dr. Bowers, they must have turned in their assignment by
the early deadline identified in the course schedule and contacted Dr. Bowers to set up a meeting
during his office hours. More details will be provided in class.
GRADING
Grades for the course will be based on the aggregation of scores for all coursework. Final grades will
be assigned based on the following scale:
            A                           B                  C                   D                    F
A = 93.5% - 100%              B+ = 87.5% - 89.49% C+ = 77.5% - 79.49% D+ = 67.5% - 69.49% F = <59.49%
A- = 89.5% - 93.49%           B = 83.5% - 87.49%  C = 73.5% - 77.49%  D = 63.5% - 67.49%
                              B- = 79.5% - 83.49% C- = 69.5% - 73.49% D- = 59.5% - 63.49%
                                                                                                               3


University of Texas at Austin                                                                         KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                     Summer 2019
ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION
Attendance is a critical component of your success in this course. It is important for your exposure to,
and retention of, materials not covered in the readings. In addition, it provides you with the opportunity
to contribute to our class discussions and to help formulate ideas for assignments. Material covered in
class will be incorporated into assignments and included on the exams. It is expected that you will
attend and participate in all classes. The instructor will not repeat in-class material outside of class
hours. No makeup opportunities will be provided for unexcused absences.
POLICY FOR LATE OR MISSED WORK/EXAMS
Students are expected to have all assignments completed on the announced dates and times. All
assigned work must be submitted by the time specified by the professor. For every day an assignment
is late it drops a letter grade. Students excused for athletic events, travel, religious purposes, etc.
should make every effort to turn in their assigned work before leaving. If you are struggling with
uploading your assignment, you are urged to contact ITS at 475-9400 for assistance. We will not assist
you with technical issues, nor will we accept an assignment because you could not upload it. Give
yourself adequate time to submit your work in case you have technical difficulties.
Students will be given a one-week window from the posting of assignment grades during which they
may bring up any concerns about lost or missing work. If a student suspects that they did not receive
credit for something that they completed and turned in (mistakes on our end are always possible), they
must bring the potential mistake to our attention within this window. Attempts to receive credit for lost or
missing assignments beyond this window will not be permitted.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
Students are reminded that matters of academic dishonesty are treated seriously by the university and
may result in failure in the class and possible expulsion from the university. In particular, students
should use care on exams and in the writing of their papers. For instance, do not copy sentences and
passages verbatim from others without placing them in quotes and providing proper footnoting. Ideas
and theories must also be properly cited if you paraphrase from another person’s text. It goes without
saying that it is a breach of the academic code to purchase papers on the Internet or to turn in work
written by someone else. Bottom line: do your own work and properly cite any ideas or words that are
not your own.
COURSE COMMUNICATION
Outside of class, we will be communicating with you via email and Canvas postings. Please be sure
that the email address you have on file with the university is the email that you check regularly. You
must use the address on file as your primary university contact. Please check your email and Canvas
consistently to ensure you have not missed a communication from me.
You are also responsible for all in-class communication. It is your responsibility to listen carefully to all
instruction prior to leaving class. You are welcome to speak to me after class or at office hours if you
need clarification on any class communication.
COURSE ADMINISTRATION AND EXPECTATIONS
1. To be eligible to pass this course, students are required to complete all assignments and exams at
     the time they are due or scheduled. Students are also expected to contribute fully to their group’s
     assignment. Failure to complete any assignment or exam is grounds for failure in the course.
2. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
     including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
     dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
     scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, visit the Student Judicial
     Services web site at http://www.utexts.edu/depts/dos/sjs/
                                                                                                              4


University of Texas at Austin                                                                        KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                    Summer 2019
3. At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need academic accommodations
    should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared the Division of Diversity and Community
    Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
    http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
4. By UT Austin policy, students must notify me of any pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
    the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
    assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
    complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
5. Honor Code -- The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
    freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
    expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
    peers and community. (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/events/sjs_honorcode.php)
6. Full and detailed acknowledgment (i.e., citation and bibliographic reference) must be provided if
    contributions are drawn from literature in preparation of assignments. Your written work must
    properly cite and reference original work where appropriate or required. Citation and referencing
    must conform to the style specified in the Publication Manual of the American Psychological
    Association (6th ed.) – both in the body of your paper and its attached reference section.
7. All assignments must be word-processed in .doc or .docx format, and must be double-spaced
    throughout with 1-inch margins all around using font size 12.
8. The student should retain a copy of work that is submitted, and should retain graded assignments
    when they are returned. Students must be able to produce a copy of all work if so requested.
9. Submission deadlines will be strictly enforced. Extensions will only be granted on medical or
    compassionate grounds and will not be otherwise granted except in the most extreme
    circumstances. A request for extension must be made in writing (this can be done via email) to the
    instructor and must be approved by the instructor prior to the due date of the assignment or exam.
    An extension, if granted, will be provided to the student in writing only.
10. You will not receive credit for your assignment if you forget your name. It is your responsibility to
    check your assignments for name and accuracy.
11. Assignments must be submitted to Canvas at the beginning of class on the day in which they are
    due. They are considered late if turned in after the first 15 minutes of class. Points constituting 10%
    of the total will be deducted for each day an assignment is late without prior arrangement.
12. In addition to the opportunities described above, the instructor may award other “extra credit” points
    for satisfactory work done during a class exercise or for successful completion of out-of-class
    volunteer opportunities.
                                                                                                             5


University of Texas at Austin                                                               KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                           Summer 2019
                            TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE (Subject to Change)
Date                          Reading / Topic                            Assignment
 6/8              Syllabus Review; Expectations
(Th)          Bowers & Dixon Foreword/Introduction
6/11                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 1:
(Tu)            A Challenge to Why Sport Matters
6/12                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 2:                 Introduce Resume + Career Path
(W)              The History of Sport Management                         Assignment
6/13                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 3:
                                                            Introduce NFL Expansion Bid Project
(Th)                    Sport and Socialization
6/18
                                 Optional In-Class NFL Expansion Bid Preparation Day
(Tu)
6/19                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 4:
(W)                           Sport and Health
6/20                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 5:
(Th)            Sport and Economic Development
6/25                                                    Exam 1
(Tu)         (Bowers and Dixon Chapters 1-5; Extra Credit from Levitt & Dubner Chapters 1-5)
6/26                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 6:
(W)            Sport and Community Development
6/27                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 7:
                                                           NFL Expansion Bid Status Update Due
(Th)                  Sport and National Identity
 7/2                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 8:             Early Feedback Deadline for Resume +
(Tu)                    Sport and Social Politics                   Career Path Assignment
 7/3                     Bowers & Dixon Ch. 9:             NFL Expansion Bid Think Like a Freak
(W)              The Future of Sport Management                 Update Due; Expansion Auction
 7/4
                                               NO CLASS: Fourth of July
(Th)
 7/9                                                   Exam 2
(Tu)         (Bowers and Dixon Chapters 6-9; Extra Credit from Levitt & Dubner Chapters 6-9)
7/10
                                 Optional In-Class NFL Expansion Bid Preparation Day
(W)
7/11
                               NFL Expansion Bid Presentations / Written Proposal Due
(Th)
7/13
                          Resume + Career Path Assignment Final Deadline (by 11:59 PM)
(Sa)
                                                                                                    6
