Note: The information on this syllabus is available to students on the official Course Canvas Page in a more
mobile-friendly and reader-friendly format
Psychology of Advertising - Adv 319
Professor Lee Ann Kahlor, PhD.
Unique #05925
T in BMC 2.106 from 12:30 to 3 p.m.
BMC is located on the corner of Dean Keeton and Guadalupe. The lecture hall is at the top of the stairs.
PROFESSOR - LEE ANN KAHLOR, PH.D.
OFFICE HOURS: Th 12:30-1:30 p.m. and by appt.
OFFICE: BMC 4.370
512-791-5726 (this is my cell so call or text only 9 am -7 pm when you need immediate response, otherwise
email me at Kahlor@austin.utexas.edu
TEXTBOOK & INTERNET ACCESS
Burns, Veeck & Bush (2017). Marketing Research, 8th Ed. Pearson. Buy at the Coop or online, bound
Solomon, Michael R. (2017), Consumer Behavior: Buying, Having and Being (12th edition), New Jersey:
Pearson-Prentice Hall. This book is available as an ebook, value edition, global edition or as a bound
hardcover. You can find it at the Co-op, Amazon, Pearson Higher Ed, and other venues, but it is vital you buy
the correct edition as chapters and their contents map directly onto our weekly quizzes. GET THE BOOK
ASAP!
Also required – you must have a way to access Canvas and the Internet in class – a phone or laptop will work.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course is designed to help students understand the psychology of persuasion and consumer behavior. It
is an overview of key psychological concepts and theories as they relate to marketing, advertising and public
relations. The ultimate goal of this course is to provide an understanding of the psychology behind
advertising and public relations planning, execution, and impacts.
This course meets your 3-credit UT Core Requirement for Social and Behavioral Science (SB).
COURSE FORMAT
Lectures supplement and complement the readings by providing focus and additional insight on the major
topics. You will take weekly online quizzes via Canvas on the readings each week. Required coursework also
includes in-class polls (which will count for attendance), in- and out-of-class Canvas discussion posts,
earning 2 points for participation in research studies, and three in-class exams (see schedule for dates).
CANVAS: Students should keep up daily with their performance in the class, pick up lecture materials, check
for other course content and new assignments, participate in quizzes and discussions and check grades and
announcements on Canvas https://utexas.instructure.com.
DESCRIPTION OF COURSE REQUIREMENTS, POLICY
GRADING BREAKDOWN
In-class polls 15%
Discussion Posts 20%
Weekly online quizzes 13%
Exams 50%


Professionalism and research participation 2%
FINAL GRADES are NOT rounded up or down. For example, a B- is inclusive of all scores 80.000 through
83.999%. NOTE: You must have a minimum grade of C in this class.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
Note: I do not respond the way you hope when you email me at the end of the semester about your need for
an extra .2 point to get a certain grade. Cutoffs are listed so you can work from day 1 to ensure you are not on
the edge by the end.
ABSENCES
Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence. Lecture notes from previous days
are not available from the professor. You do not need to send doctors’ notes (or the like) to us when absent.
We have built into the course structure ways to either make up or drop work regardless of circumstance.
We drop 1 in-class "poll"
We drop 1 discussion post
We drop 1 quiz grade
We offer an optional final if an in-class exam is missed
We allow 1 assignment re-write (or make-up)
OPTIONAL FINAL
An optional comprehensive make-up examination will be offered at our designated final exam time; it is a
make-up option for anyone who has missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who wants to try to
improve her/his course grade. This exam will replace the lowest regular in-class examination only if it is
higher. Otherwise, it will not be counted. This is the only make-up opportunity if any test was missed for any
reason – this includes sick days, travel or emergencies. It is the same format and length as an in-class exam
and you will be given the same amount of time as you are given for in-class exams, so show up at the starting
time.
THE DATE IS Thursday, December 12, 2:00 pm
Location TBA
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
Notify us of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day, especially if
you must miss class, an exam, assignment, or project.
STUDENTS WITH ACCOMMODATIONS
The University provides academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).


If accommodations include extended testing time and control of distractions, please arrange to take your
exams in the SSD facility.
Remind me to send the exam there before the scheduled exam date, and have them email the exam back to
me for grading.
For other accommodations, please work with your TA and I to ensure your needs are met. If we are not
meeting your needs, please contact us so that we can do so. We want to help!
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
Core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness,
and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
Academic dishonesty is cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and
any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty includes, but
is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a
test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses
without the prior permission of the instructor. These are the course guidelines and you must adhere to them.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Please read at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php. (Links to an external site.)
Among the activities that fit with the above policies are: participating in an in-class poll while not in class
(unless you have prior written approval from the professor) and looking at peers exams during exam time.
THE MOODY COLLEGE WRITING SUPPORT PROGRAM
The program, located in BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students seeking to
improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have specialists in Journalism, RTF,
CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen core writing skills in each
field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-hour appointments on our
website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing process.
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting
IDENTITY, DISCRIMINATION, HARASSMENT, PERSONAL SAFETY
I am the Stan Richards School's Minority Liaison and I work extensively with minority and LGBTQI students.
Please lean on me as needed.
I have experience helping students navigating identity- and safety-related challenges, including racism,
sexual harassment and sexual assault.
To see some of the work we are doing in SRS, please visit https://advertising.utexas.edu/about/diversity-
commitment (Links to an external site.)
For other UT supports, visit:
Gender and sexuality support: https://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/ (Links to an external site.)
Facing Asian Stereotypes: https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/modelminority.html (Links to an external site.)
Where to report discrimination or harassment: https://equity.utexas.edu/investigations/faq/ (Links to an
external site.)
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html


COUNSELING, MENTAL HEALTH
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there is support!
For immediate support:
Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515
|cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642
(Please leave a message if she is unavailable
Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
RESEARCH PARTICIPATION
You must earn 2 research credits via studies that will become available throughout the semester at
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.). I do not honor research points
from other departments or schools. Do not take a study more than once (e.g., to meet another class’
requirements) or the credit will be voided. You will not receive extra credit in this class for participating in
more than 2 studies, although you may have additional research requirements in other classes.
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.)
 Dates               Topic                                             Reading              Quiz
 9/3                 Intro                                             Ch. 1
 9/10                Consumer & Well-being                             Ch. 2                Q1-Course info
 9/17                Perception                                        Ch. 3                Q2-Ch 3
 9/24                Learning & Memory                                 Ch. 4                Q3-Ch 4
 10/1                EXAM
 10/8                Motivation & Affect                               Ch. 5                Q4-Ch 5
 10/15               Self                                              Ch. 6                Q5-Ch 6
 10/22               Personality, lifestyles & values                  Ch. 7                Q6-Ch 7
 10/29               Attitudes, Dec Making                             Ch. 8, 9             Q7-Ch 8-9
 11/5                EXAM
 11/12               Buying, Groups & Social Media                     Ch. 10, 11           Q8-Ch 10-11
 11/19               Income & Class                                    Ch. 12               Q9-Ch 12
 11/26               Subcultures, Culture                              Ch. 13-14            Q10-Ch 13, 14
 12/3                EXAM
Optional Final: Saturday, December 14, 2 pm
