                         South Asian Migration to the United States
          AAS 325 (31540) / ANS 372 (31735) / HIS 365G (38440) / WGS 340 (44810)
Instructor: Dr. Aarti Bhalodia
Email: bhalodia@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description
This course examines the South Asian diaspora in the United States. We will cover migration of
people from India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh to the United States and other parts of the world.
While studying the history and culture of South Asian America, we will discuss globalization,
transnationalism, migration, assimilation, formation of a diaspora, discrimination, and gender
and sexuality. The course is arranged chronologically and thematically. We will start in the
nineteenth century following the journey of the first South Asian migrants to the U.S. We will
then move on to studying the formation of Bengali-African, Punjabi-Mexican and other
multiracial communities. We will study how American immigration laws have facilitated or
inhibited South Asian migration to the U.S. in the twentieth century. Topics covered include
economic and social reasons for migration, adaptation to American life, cultural and religious
assimilation, changing family structures, and discrimination and exclusion. We will end the
semester by discussing South Asian American life in the twenty-first century.
This course carries the Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag. The purpose of the Cultural
Diversity in the United States Flag is for students to explore in depth the shared practices and
beliefs of one or more underrepresented cultural groups subject to persistent marginalization. In
addition to learning about these diverse groups in relation to their specific contexts, students
should engage in an active process of critical reflection. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one underrepresented cultural group in the U.S.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about
Course Objectives
Through the semester we will study more than a century of South Asian American history. A
primary goal of this course is to highlight the diversity within South Asian America. We will
encounter a diaspora whose members belong to different religious, linguistic, economic and
social groups. We will also examine South Asian American interactions with other racial groups
in the fields of social activism and community development. Our class meetings will be a blend
                                                  1


of lectures and discussions. You are encouraged to participate in South Asian American life in
Austin. I will bring to your attention relevant films, lectures, art, music, and dance performances.
Reading Assignments
Book chapters and articles on Canvas. The course is listed as AAS 325 for all students.
The following books are available in a digital format (“electronic resource”) through the
UT libraries. You can download relevant chapters in PDF format. Use the following link to
do a title search.
http://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/search/t
Vivek Bald, Bengali Harlem and the Lost Histories of South Asian America (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 2013).
Vivek Bald, Miabi Chatterji, Sujani Reddy, and Manu Vimalassery edited, The Sun Never Sets:
South Asian Migrants in an Age of U.S. Power (New York: NYU Press, 2013).
Judith M. Brown, Global South Asians: Introducing the Modern Diaspora (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2006).
Knut A. Jacobsen and R. Pratap Kumar edited, South Asians in the Diaspora: Histories and
Religious Traditions (Boston: Brill, 2004).
Karen Leonard, Making Ethnic Choices: California’s Punjabi Mexican Americans (Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 1992).
Vijay Prashad, Uncle Swami: South Asians in America Today (New York: New Press, 2012).
Lavina Dhingra Shankar and Rajini Srikanth, A Part, Yet Apart (Philadelphia: Temple University
Press, 1998).
Assignments and Grading
Attendance and Class Participation: 5%
Written Assignments: 15%
Class Presentation: 15%
Quizzes: 15%
Exam 1: 25%
Exam 2: 25%
                                                   2


           Grade          Cutoff
           A              94%
           A-             90%
           B+             87%
           B              83%
           B-             80%
           C+             77%
           C              73%
           C-             70%
           D+             67%
           D              63%
           D-             60%
           F              <60%
Class participation: Attendance is mandatory. You are responsible for completing all the
assigned readings before each class meeting. Participation in class activities is crucial and a
component of your final grade. We will have regular class discussions based on required
readings in which you are expected to participate. If I am not satisfied with class participation I
will give a pop quiz.
Class etiquette: During lectures you should be listening attentively to the instructor and taking
notes. All PowerPoint slides will be posted on Canvas. During class discussions all students are
required to treat each other with respect. Students who are repeatedly disruptive will receive a
poor class participation grade. Disruptive behavior includes showing up to class late, leaving
early, talking to a neighbor while class is in session, talking/texting on a phone, checking
email/playing computer games and sleeping. I strongly encourage you to use pen/pencil and
paper to take notes and put away your electronic devices.
Written assignments: Take-home written assignments will be based on assigned reading and
other relevant course material.
Class presentation: This is the undergraduate version of “show and tell.” You will bring an object
to class related to any theme that we have discussed in the course. Besides material objects you
can also focus on famous South Asian Americans or characters from popular culture. Prepare an
oral presentation that is approximately 8 minutes in length. Individual class presentations will be
spread over multiple days. You need to present on the day you signed up for. If you are absent on
your chosen date, you will lose all the points for this assignment. Along with the class
presentation you will also submit a five page (double spaced) essay related to your presentation
topic. This assignment is worth 15% of the overall grade.
Quizzes: You are responsible for completing three quizzes, each worth 5%. Quizzes will consist
of multiple choice and short answer questions.
Exams: You are responsible for completing two non-cumulative exams, each worth 25% of the
overall grade. Both will be in-class exams consisting of short answer and short essay questions.
Bring an unused blue book and pen to class on the day of the scheduled exams.
                                                   3


Deadlines: Hardcopy of written assignments are due at the beginning of class on the due date.
For every day that your assignment is late you will lose one letter grade on that assignment.
If you are having trouble in class or are dissatisfied with your assignment grade/s come see me
promptly. Don’t wait until the end of the semester to seek my guidance on how to improve your
standing in the course.
Academic Integrity
As per University policy, those who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Refer to http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php for more
information on academic integrity, plagiarism, and consequences of academic dishonesty.
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
http://sites.utexas.edu/disability/
If you have a disability you need to notify me during the first two weeks of the semester and
provide appropriate documentation from SSD (Services for Students with Disabilities).
Emergency Situation
Please familiarize yourself with recommendations from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security (512-471-5767) on what to do in the event of an emergency.
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: utexas.edu/emergency.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-
concerns-advice-line
The instructor reserves the right to change the syllabus. All changes will be announced in
class and on Canvas.
                                          Class Schedule
Reading assigned for each day should be completed before class meeting on that day.
Background and Introduction to the Course
Aug 28 W         Introduction
                                                   4


Aug 30 F      Judith M. Brown, “Introduction,” in Global South Asians: Introducing the
              Modern Diaspora, p. 1-8. E-Book.
              Lavina Dhingra Shankar and Rajini Srikanth, “South Asian Identity in Asian
              America,” in A Part, Yet Apart, p. ix-xv. E-Book.
Migration and Diaspora
Sept 2 M      Labor Day – No Class
Sept 4 W      Brown, Global South Asians, p. 9-28. E-Book.
Sept 6 F      Brown, Global South Asians, p. 29-39. E- Book.
South Asians in the American South
Sept 9 M      Vivek Bald, “Selling the East in the American South: Bengali Muslim Peddlers
              in New Orleans and Beyond, 1880-1920,” in Asian Americans in Dixie, p. 33-53.
              Canvas.
Sept 11 W     Vivek Bald, Bengali Harlem, p. 49-64 and 81-93. E-Book.
South Asians in the American West
Sept 13 F     Quiz 1
Sept 16 M     Karen Leonard, Making Ethnic Choices: California’s Punjabi Mexican
              Americans, p. 62-78. E-Book.
Sept 18 W     Leonard, Making Ethnic Choices, p. 79-100. E-Book.
Sept 20 F     Roots in the Sand - Documentary Screening in Class.
              Leonard, Making Ethnic Choices, p. 123-43. E-Book.
Sept 23 M     Quiz 2
Multiracial Communities and Political Activism
Sept 25 W     Vivek Bald, "'Lost' in the City: Spaces and Stories of South Asian New York,
              1917-1965." South Asian Popular Culture 5, no. 1 (April 2007): 59-76. Canvas.
Sept 27 F     TBA
Sept 30 M      Exam review
Oct 2 W       Exam 1
                                                5


Second Phase of South Asian Immigration
Oct 4 F       Post WWII – No reading
Oct 7 M       Civil Rights and Cold War – No reading
Oct 9 W       Sujani Reddy, “The Hidden Hand”: Remapping Indian Nurse Immigration to the
              United States,” in The Sun Never Sets: South Asian Migrants in an Age of US
              Power, p. 103-124. E-Book.
Oct 11 F      Quiz 3
Oct 14 M      No Class
Oct 16 W      Anne Vallely, “The Jain Plate: The Semiotics of the Diaspora Diet,” in Knut A.
              Jacobsen and R. Pratap Kumar edited, South Asians in the Diaspora: Histories
              and Religious Traditions, p. 3-22. E-Book.
              Clara A.B. Joseph, “Rethinking Hybridity: The Syro-Malabar Church in North
              America,” in South Asians in the Diaspora, p. 220-42. E-Book.
Family and Identity
Oct 18 F      Sayantani Das Gupta and Shamita Das Gupta, “Sex, Lies, and Women’s Lives:
              An Intergenerational Dialogue,” in Shamita Das Gupta edited, A Patchwork
              Shawl: Chronicles of South Asian Women in America, p. 111-28. Canvas.
              Lubna Chaudhry, “We are Graceful Swans Who Can Also Be Crows: Hybrid
              Identities of Pakistani Muslim Women,” in A Patchwork Shawl, p. 46-61. Canvas.
Migration Stories assignment due in class on October 21.
Oct 21 M      Hearts Suspended – Documentary Screening in Class
Oct 23 W      Class Presentation – Group 1
Oct 25 F      Kirin Narayan, “Haunting Stories: Narrative Transmissions of South Asian
              Identities in Diaspora,” in South Asians in the Diaspora, p. 415-34. E-Book.
              Aminah Mohammad-Arif, “A Masala Identity: Young South Asian Muslims in
              the US,” p. 67-87. Canvas.
Oct 28 M      Class Presentation – Group 2
Oct 30 W      Geoffrey Burkhart, “Identity Dilemmas,” in Parvati Raghuram, Ajaya Kumar
              Sahoo, Brij Maharaj, and Dave Sangha edited, Tracing an Indian Diaspora:
              Contexts, Memories, Representations, p. 299-319. Canvas.
              Surina Khan, “Sexual Exiles,” in Das Gupta edited, A Patchwork Shawl, p. 62-71.
              Canvas.
                                                6


Nov 1 F      Sandip Roy, “Coming Out of the Almirah: South Asian Americans Struggle with
             Coming Out in a Gay America that Looks Nothing Like Them,” in Susan Kosby
             and R. Radhakrishnan edited, Transnational South Asians: The Making of a Neo-
             Diaspora, p. 244-70. Canvas.
South Asian American Experiences
Beyond Bollywood assignment due in class on November 4.
Nov 4 M      Nazli Kibria, “Bangladeshi American Dreams,” in Muslims in Motion: Islam and
             National Identity in the Bangladeshi Diaspora, p. 28-56. Canvas.
Nov 6 W      Class Presentation – Group 3
Nov 8 F      Nazli Kibria, “The Racial Gap: South Asian American Racial Identity and the
             Asian American Movement,” in A Part, Yet Apart, p. 69-78. E-Book.	  
             Sumantra Tito Sinha, “From Campus to Community Politics in Asian America,”
             in A Part, Yet Apart, p. 146-67. E-Book.
Nov 11 M     Class Presentation – Group 4
Nov 13 W     Vijay Prashad, “The Day our Probation Ended” in Uncle Swami: South Asians in
             America Today, p. 1-26. E-Book.
Nov 15 F     Whose Children are These? – Documentary Screening in Class
             Prashad, Uncle Swami, p. 27-47. E-Book.
Nov 18 M     Class Presentation – Group 5
South Asian Americans in Political Life assignment due in class on November 20.
Nov 20 W     South Asian Americans in Political Life – No reading.
Nov 22 F     Class Presentation – Group 6
Nov 25 – 29  Thanksgiving Holiday – No Class
Dec 2 M      Class Presentation – Group 7
Dec 4 W      Bhoomi Thakore, South Asians on the US Screen, p. 35-67. Canvas.
Dec 6 F      Exam review and evaluations
Dec 9 M      Exam 2
                                               7
