                                                         E 349S 5-TONI MORRISON
          Instructor: Woodard, H
          Unique #: 35530                                                  Areas: Single or Dual Author
          Semester: Spring 2020                                            Flags: Writing, Diversity
          Cross-lists: WGS 345 46, #45150                                  Restrictions:
           AFR 372E-1, #30655                                              Computer Instruction: none
Course description:
This course examines select novels by Nobel laureate and Pulitzer Prize-winning novelist, Toni Morrison. The novels thematize
womanism as theory in experiences uniquely shared by women across ethnic, class, and regional boundaries. Collectively,
Morrison's characters confront a wide range of challenging crises: infanticide, familial relationships and conflict, cultural survival,
etc. Morrison's novels are a gloss on the African-American literary tradition, deeply rooted in the American literary tradition.
Writing Flag:
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic
discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more
assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Diversity Flag:
This course carries the Flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of
your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization.
Texts for Required reading:
Toni Morrison, A Mercy.
Toni Morrison, Beloved.
Toni Morrison, Sula.
Toni Morrison, Song of Solomon.
Toni Morrison, The Bluest Eye.
Toni Morrison, God Help the Child.
Requirements & Grading:
.60 Two Critical essays TBA (5 pages each; typed, ds)
.20 Reading Notebook (weekly entries); 12-page minimum; typed, ds; see separate instruction sheet
.10 Critical citations / reading quizzes
.10 Class participation & attendance (reading discussants assigned)
Note: You will be given the opportunity to revise critical essay I (revision due on the final day of class.) (You will be given separate
handouts with instructions for the reading notebook, the critical citations, and essay revisions.)
Articles for required reading:
Gillespie, Diane and Missy Dehn Kubitschek. “Who Cares? Women-Centered Psychology in Sula,”
   Black American Literature Forum, 24.1 (Spring, 1990), 21-48.
Kuentz, Jane. “‘The Bluest Eye’: Notes on History, Community, and Black Female Subjectivity,”
   African American Review 27.3 (Fall 1993), 421-431.
Michaels, Walter Benn. “You Who Never Was There: Slavery and the New Historicism, Deconstruction
   and the Holocaust,” Narrative, 4.1 (January, 1996), 1-16.
Terry, Jennifer. “Breathing the Air of a World So New”: Rewriting the Landscape of America in
   “Toni Morrison’s A Mercy,” Journal of American Studies, 48.1, 127-145.
Wilentz, Gay. “Civilizations underneath: African Heritage as Cultural Discourse in Toni Morrison’s
   Song of Solomon, African American Review, 26.1 (Spring 1992), 61-77.
Wyatt, Jean. “Failed Messages, Maternal Loss, and Narrative Form,” Modern Fiction Studies, 58.1 (1912),
   128-151.


Attendance:
Regular attendance is required. More than four absences will be sufficient grounds for failure in the course. Penalties may range
from a reduction in overall course grade to failure of the course itself. I reserve the right to make decisions on a case-by-case basis.
The four allowed absences would include illness, deaths of relatives, and other emergencies. If you are more than five minutes late
or leave before class ends (without permission), you will be counted absent for that class. You are responsible for all work covered
in your absence. Read each novel completely by the first day of discussion for that book. No makeup for quizzes is permitted.
The course contains select novels from the Toni Morrison literary canon. The subject of each class meeting may be determined from
the assigned reading for the day (see course schedule). The instructor retains the right to vary this syllabus.
Course Policies:
Absolutely no make-up for reading quizzes. The lowest quiz grade will be dropped. Except under extreme emergencies, and then
only with the permission of the professor, late assignments will not be accepted. I reserve the right to make these decisions on a
case-by-case basis. Students are expected to turn in all required assignments on the agreed upon due date at the beginning of class.
Read all material assigned before class time. Participation in class discussion is required. Papers turned in during or after class on
the due day will be considered late. Use the MLA (Modern Language Association) Stylebook for all papers. Type papers on white,
8.5" x 11" paper, using one side only. Bind pages with a paper clip.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work. For
additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Special Accommodations for Students with a Disability:
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone), or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Policy on Religious Observance:
A student who is absent from a class or examinaation due to the observance of a religious holy day may complete the work missed
within a reasonable time after the absence if proper notice has been given. Notice must be given at least fourteen days prior to the
classes scheduled on dafes the student will be absent. For religious holy days that fall within the first two weeks of the semeser,
notice should be given on the first day of the semester.
Grading Scale:
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note that to ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute,
and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus, a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University
does not recognize the grade of A+.
A (94-100); A- (90-93); B+ (87-89); B (84-86); B- (80-83); C+ (77-79); C (74-76); C- (70-73); D+ (67-69); D (64-66); D- (60-63); F (0-59).
Plus/minus grades will be assigned for the final grade. This is a writing-intensive course. No final exam is given.
Other: additional policies, as desired (Q-drop, cell phone/computer, e-mail correspondence, BCAL, writing center).
Web Site: Canvas or another class website (if any).


                                       TENTATIVE COURSE READING SCHEDULE
                                   (Note: Syllabus is subject to announced changes)
TU  1/21 Introduction to course; policies, etc. Toni Morrison, bio-critical
         portrait of a Pulitzer winner and a Nobel Prize Laureate.
TH  1/23 Morrison, A Mercy (circa 1682-1690.)
         Read Jean Wyatt, “Failed Messages, Maternal Loss, and Narrative Form,” Modern
         Fiction Studies, 58.1 (1912), 128-151.
TU  1/28 Morrison, A Mercy, Lecture and discussion.
TH  1/30 Morrison, A Mercy, Lecture and discussion.
TU  2/4  Morrison, A Mercy, Lecture and discussion.
TH  2/6  Morrison, A Mercy.
TU  2/11  Morrison, Beloved, Lecture and discussion.
         One-page critical citation due for A Mercy.
         Out of class reading notebook entry on A Mercy.
TH  2/13  Morrison, Beloved (circa 1835-1875).
          Lecture and discussion.
         Critical essay I due (TBA).
TU  2/18 Morrison, Beloved, Lecture and discussion.
         Read the article by Walter Benn Michaels, “You Who Never Was There: Slavery
         and the New Historicism, Deconstruction and the Holocaust,”
         Narrative, 4.1 (January, 1996), 1-16.
         Out of class reading notebook entry on Beloved.
TH  2/20 Morrison, Beloved.
TU  2/25 Morrison, Beloved.
         One-page critical citation on Beloved due.
         Out of class reading notebook entry on Beloved.
TH  2/27 Morrison, Sula.
TU  3/5  Morrison, Sula.
TH  3/7  Morrison, Sula, Lecture and discussion.
TU  3/10 Morrison, Sula, Lecture and discussion.
         Read Diane Gillespie and Missy Dehn Kubitschek, “Who Cares? Women-Centered
         Psychology in Sula,” Black American Literature Forum, 24.1 (Spring, 1990), 21-48.
         Reading notebook entry on Sula.
TH 3/12  Morrison, Sula.
                                 MARCH 16 – MARCH 20, SPRING BREAK, NO CLASSES
TU  3/24 Toni Morrison, Song of Solomon, (circa 1931 – 1963).
         One-page critical citation due for Sula due.
         Out of class reading notebook entry on Sula


TH  3/26   Morrison, Song of Solomon, Lecture and discussion.
           Read the article by Gay Wilentz, “Civilizations underneath: African Heritage as Cultural
           Discourse in Toni Morrison’s Song of Solomon, African American Review, 26.1
           (Spring 1992), 61-77.
           Out of class notebook entry on Sula.
TU  3/31   Morrison, Song of Solomon, Lecture and discussion.
            Reading notebook entry on Song of Song of Solomon.
TH.  4/2   Morrison, Song of Solomon, Lecture and discussion.
TU. 4/7    Morrison, The Bluest Eye, Lecture and discussion.
           One-page critical citation for Song of Solomon due.
           Out of class reading notebook entry on Song of Solomon.
TH.  4/9   Morrison, The Bluest Eye Lecture and discussion.
TU.  4/14   Morrison, The Bluest Eye, (circa 1940s – 1960s)
            Out of class reading notebook entry on The Bluest Eye.
TH.  4 /16 Morrison, The Bluest Eye, Lecture and discussion.
           Read the article by Jane Kuentz, “‘The Bluest Eye’: Notes on History, Community,
           and Black Female Subjectivity,” African American Review 27.3 (Fall 1993), 421-431.
           Out of class reading notebook entry on Song of Solomon
TU   4/21  Toni Morrison, God Help the Child, Lecture and discussion.
           Critical citation for The Bluest Eye due.
           Critical essay due II due (TBA).
TH.  4/23  Morrison, God Help the Child, Lecture and discussion.
           Reading notebook entry on God Help the Child.
TU.  4/28  Morrison, God Help the Child. Lecture and discussion.
           Final reading notebooks due.
TH.  4/30   Morrison, God Help the Child.
TU  5/5    Course Surveys. Wrap up.
TH. 5/7    Revised essays due.
           LAST CLASS DAY.
