                         ANTHROPOLOGY 392J [31835]
     Introduction to Graduate Physical Anthropology Part 2:
       Behavioral Ecology, Genetics, and Biological Variation
                                         SPRING 2020
INSTRUCTOR:           Becca Lewis
                      Department of Anthropology
                      Office: WCP 5.152
                      Phone: 232-5386
                      e-mail: rjlewis@austin.utexas.edu
                      Office hours: Wednesdays 10-noon
                      Class: Tuesdays 9-noon WCP 5.124
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
      This course is Part 2 of a two semester core curriculum in physical anthropology. All
      physical anthropology graduate students are required to take parts 1 and 2. Part 2 was
      offered in Fall 2015. Topics covered will include grouping patterns, reproductive
      strategies and mating systems, socioecology, cooperation, sex differences in behavior,
      genomics, population genetics, and evolutionary genetic theory in relation to human
      and nonhuman primates. The course also explores biological variation in genetic,
      physical, and behavioral traits within and between populations of humans and
      nonhuman primates, exploring both microevolutionary and cultural processes that
      have shaped these traits. (Part 1 emphasizes the history of the field of physical
      anthropology, evolutionary theory, primate systematics, methods of phylogenetic
      reconstruction, primate diversity and anatomical adaptations, and the human and
      nonhuman primate fossil record). The course provides an overview of behavioral
      ecology, molecular anthropology, and biological variation in human and nonhuman
      primates. The goal of the course is to give you an overview of the field, while
      allowing you to identify areas of research you might want to pursue at the master’s
      and doctoral levels.
COURSE FORMAT:
      Part 2 will consist of a combination of lectures, discussions and student presentations,
      and will cover major topics in physical anthropology. This class will primarily follow
      a seminar format. The instructor will give an introductory lecture on a new topic to be
      followed by discussion of the assigned papers. Each discussion will have a designated
      discussion leader (to be chosen by a semi-random process on the day of the discussion).
      Thus, students are expected to be prepared to lead discussion every class period.
      Students are expected to be able to provide a summary of the readings AND a critical
      evaluation of the readings each class.
COURSE READINGS:
      This course assumes that you already have the basic textbook knowledge of primates
      and evolutionary theory. Students who believe that they need to refresh their memories
      are encouraged to examine one of the following books:
                      Evolution of Primate Societies edited by Mitani et al. (2012)
                      How Humans Evolved (6th Edition) Boyd & Silk (2011)
                                                                                            1


     Readings will be available on Canvas or online via the UT Library and are to be read
     BEFORE class. A stimulating class discussion depends on students having thoroughly
     and critically read the assigned papers.
     Be sure to regularly check Canvas for class materials and information. Class handouts
     and lectures will be available on Canvas.
COURSE EVALUATION:
     Grades will also be based upon class participation, quizzes, a paper, and an oral
     presentation on that paper. The paper/presentation will be a critical review of a problem
     in human or nonhuman primate behavioral ecology, molecular anthropology, or
     biological variation.
                                            %Grade                  Date
     Participation                             30%
     Weekly synthesis of readings              15%
     Presentation                              25%                  May 5
     Paper                                     30%                  May 8 (by noon)
     (Draft of paper)                                               Mar 24
     Participation: Each student is expected (1) to ask meaningful questions during any
     lectures, (2) to be able to summarize any or all of the readings each class period, and
     (3) to thoroughly, thoughtfully, and critically discuss the readings each class period.
     Weekly Synthesis: Students are expected to write a double spaced ~1-page paper
     each week that (1) synthesizes the main ideas of the readings and (2) questions/
     critiques the ideas and/or methods of the readings. The assignment is NOT to
     summarize each paper individually. Rather this exercise is to help students (1) think
     about how the readings integrate with one another and into a whole, (2) practice
     writing synthetic research papers, such as review articles, and (3) practice concise
     writing. Students are encouraged to include a paragraph/discussion about how the
     readings relate to their own research goals.
     Term project presentation: Each student will be required to conduct a small
     research project during the course of the semester and then present the results the last
     day of class in a 10-15 minute professional-style presentation. The goal of this
     assignment is to get your “feet wet” by doing original research and learning how to
     present your data as you would at a national conference (e.g. American Association of
     Physical Anthropologists). I will meet with each student individually to help you
     figure out your research topic, and to help you identify the resources you need to carry
     out your project. If you are unable to collect original data, as an alternative you may
     compile data from the literature to analyze in a new way. ALL STUDENTS MUST
     MEET WITH ME TO DISCUSS THEIR RESEARCH PROJECTS NO LATER THAN
     THE 6TH WEEK OF CLASS (MARCH 3RD), AND FOR A SECOND TIME THE 11TH
     WEEK OF CLASS (APRIL 7th).
     Term project paper: You are also required to write a paper on your research project
     in journal article style. This paper should be approximately 20 pages long, but no
     more than 25 in 12pt font and with 1” margins. You should write a paper that is
     publishable in either the American Journal of Physical Anthropology or Evolutionary
                                                                                             2


        Anthropology. In other words, if your research project crosses the boundaries with
        physical anthropology and archeology, the paper must be written in a broadly
        comparative physical anthropology format. Similarly, if your project examines data
        on a primate(s), it is not necessarily a physical anthropology project – your paper
        must be written as a physical anthropology paper. All papers should explore a set of
        hypotheses and predictions and test these predictions using either empirical data
        collected by the student or empirical data collected from the literature. ALL
        STUDENTS ARE REQUIRED TO TURN IN A PAPER COPY OF A DRAFT OF
        THEIR PAPER NO LATER THAN MARCH 24TH. FEEDBACK ABOUT THE
        DIRECTION OF THE PAPER/PROJECT WILL BE DISCUSSED DURING THE
        MEETING THE 11TH WEEK (see above). Students should continue to work on the
        paper while waiting for feedback from the instructor.
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE:
Jan 21    Introduction, Overview of Evolutionary Theory & Primate Social Evolution
Jan 28    no class
Feb 4     Ecology       Communities and Habitats
Feb 11    Ecology       Diet, Nutrition , & Energy
Feb 18    Ecology       Socioecology
Feb 25    Behavior      TBA – Guest Lecture Dr. Aaron Sandel
Mar 3     Behavior      Sexual Selection
Mar 10    Behavior      Power
Mar 17    Spring Break
Mar 24    Behavior      Intelligence
Mar 31    Genetics      Molecular markers, Genome studies, Genome structure, Comparative
                        primate genomics
Apr 7 Genetics          Population genetics, Microevolution – Guest Lecture Dr Tony Di
                        Fiore
Apr 14 Variation Culture
Apr 21 Variation Human Behavioral Variation
Apr 28 Variation Adaptation, Acclimatization, Plasticity
May 5 Presentations
Power Point files used in class lectures will NOT be made available online.
ELECTRONIC DEVICES POLICY:
Cell Phones – The “Alamo Drafthouse Policy”: Please keep your cell phones dark, silent,
and out of sight for the entire class period. Research conducted here at UT shows that
having a visible cell phone is a major distractor in class, even if it is face down or turned off.
As a result, in addition to not having your cell phone sitting in your lap or on your tabletop,
you are encouraged to not even have it in your pocket and to instead have it off and placed in
your backpack or purse. No cell phone use during class will be tolerated – this includes
texting – unless cell phone use is part of an in-class assignment – which it will not be! If a
student’s cell phone is visible, they will be asked to put it away, so please do not disrupt class
by having one out. After one warning, the student will be asked to leave the auditorium. This
permitted use will only occur with an explicit statement by the instructor. Students engaging
in disruptive behavior of any kind will be asked to leave the classroom.
                                                                                                   3


Computers: Feel free to take notes on a computer. However, no one is permitted to make
audio or video recordings of lectures under any circumstances. This includes taking
photographs of the lecture slides. Please inform your professor or TA if you see anyone
making audio or video recordings of the lecture or taking photos of the slides so that we may
eject them from the classroom. Please note also that students who text or use their computers
for anything other than taking notes may be asked to turn off their computer and/or to leave
the classroom.
OTHER POLICIES:
Please be respectful of the instructor and your fellow students. Do not talk, text, or sleep in
class. Students engaging in disruptive behavior of any kind will be asked to leave the
classroom.
Be sure to regularly check Canvas for class materials and information. Class handouts will be
available on Canvas. If class is missed with an excused absence, it is up to the student to secure
the notes from other students.
No extra credit assignments will be given, so please be sure to pay close attention to dates of
exams and assignments.
If a student chooses to create and administer a web page for this course via social media (e.g.,
Facebook), Prof. Lewis and all of the teaching assistants must be granted access to the page.
                 While Prof. Lewis cannot legally ban concealed guns from the
        classroom, she can exercise her first amendment right to let you know
        that she would strongly prefer that you NOT bring them into her
        classroom or the lab. She CAN legally ban concealed guns from her
        faculty office. Thus, this (and her reading of this statement aloud in
        class) is her official notification that you may not bring any
        concealed guns into her faculty office.
                            STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSIBILITIES
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
your learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
others.
                                                                                                 4


• Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
someone is excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other
to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                     PERSONAL PRONOUN USE (SHE / HE / THEY / ZE / ETC)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the
student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and
Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-
resources/). I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the
official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of
any changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
                            UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes students of all
backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share
with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated,
please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I
promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented
disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this
semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and
taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of
us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning
how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or
anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center: All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                                                                  5


BeVocal: BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual
Longhorns have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all
Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and
how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to:
wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct
occurs in our community, the university can:
    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
         or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to
the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or
with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they
are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies
without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu . For
more information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the
Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                                                                                                6


                                    UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found
at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                                                              7
