                   ALD 328: APPLIED HUMAN LEARNING
                  Spring 2019, Wednesday 1-4, Unique #09440
Instructor: Dr. Mary Claire Gerwels
Office: SZB 506B
Office Hours: by appointment
Phone: 512-554-8556
E-mail: mcgerwels@austin.utexas.edu
PURPOSE: This course covers learning theory, motivation, and assessment as
they are applied in the elementary school classroom. You will have the
opportunity to evaluate theory and research to develop the best teaching
methods for your classroom.
TEXT: Packet of Readings from the Co-op.
    Date                     Topic                             Due
Jan. 23        Introduction to course
Jan. 30        Teaching & Learning and
               Service Learning
Feb. 6         Constructivism/Critical Thinking  Service Learning Project Part
                                                 1 draft
Feb. 13        Creativity                        Service Learning Project Part
                                                 1 edited
Feb. 20        Social and Emotional Learning
Feb. 27        Self-Regulated Learning
Mar. 6         Motivation                        Observation paper 1
Mar. 13        Mindfulness and Stress            Critical Incident 1
               Reduction
Mar. 20        Spring Break!
Mar. 27        Resilience
Apr. 3         Special Education and RTI         Service Learning Project Part
                                                 2
Apr. 10        Stereotypes
Apr. 17        Standardized Testing              Critical Incident 2
Apr. 24        Classroom Assessment              Observation paper 2
May 1          Parent Involvement
May 8          Service Learning Presentations    Service Learning Project Part
                                                 3; TBSI certificate
Check Assignments on Canvas for complete directions for all graded work.


                        Class Participation and Attendance
Class participation is important. Participation means that you come to class on
time, stay until the end, and contribute to activities and discussions in a
professional manner. It also means that you are not checking your phone or
browsing on the web during class at any time, except during a break. Please
keep your phones out of sight. Laptops should not be open during class unless
they are being used for an activity.
Class attendance is expected, but if you must be absent you will turn in a 5-page
paper that 1) outlines the readings from that week and 2) provides a description
of the activities we did in class that day. You will need to ask a peer to take
notes for you when you miss class. Remember, the paper substitutes for 3
hours of class time plus annotations (i.e., you don't have to do annotations
that week), so it should reflect that amount of work. It is incumbent upon you to
remember this policy and to submit the paper within one week of your absence.
Failure to turn in the paper will result in a 5-point deduction on your final
grade.
It is the PDS policy that over 3 absences results in a failing grade.
                               Annotation Drills (10%)
It is important that you read the articles for class each week so that you can
contribute to our discussions. When reading the articles, you should occasionally
write comments and questions in the margins (annotations) that you can share
with the class during discussions; these will be checked before class each week.
If you forget your reading packet you will get a zero for that day, so please
remember to bring your readings to class! Annotations are graded on a pass/fail
basis. Highlighting does not count as annotations.
                       Classroom Observation Papers (30%)
There are two observation papers that are to be completed and uploaded to
Canvas by the beginning of class on the designated date. You are to choose one
of the topics we have already covered and follow the directions (found on
Canvas in Modules) with that topic in mind. For the last paper, you may choose
any topic, including any we have not yet covered in class. A rubric for the papers
is in the assignment directions on Canvas. The papers cannot exceed 6 pages
(not including references, pictures, graphs or other additional material).
                           Service Learning Project (40%)
The service learning project is broken into three parts; proposal, data and
conclusions, and presentation. The first two sections are worth 35% and the
presentation is worth 5%. Full assignment instructions and rubrics are in Canvas.


                                Critical Incidents (20%)
You will write two critical incident reports, which will allow you to reflect on
something that has happened in your internship classroom. You will follow the
protocol that is in Canvas in the assignment to write each of these. Each must be
no more than 2 pages long and must use the 4 steps as subheadings.
                                 Formatting Standards
Each piece of written work must be double-spaced, using at least 1-inch margins
and standard font (e.g., Times New Roman).
                                        Late Work
I reserve the right to deduct points for late work, up to a 10-point deduction per
day. If you need to turn in late work, you must fill out a late request form (in
Modules in Canvas) by emailing it to me at least 24 hours in advance of the due
date. I will determine if you will be granted the extra time for the assignment and
will email you to confirm.
                              Writing Flag Requirements
You will get credit for a writing flag course and so must do a significant amount of
your work in formal, written form. Another condition is that at least one of your
papers is to be edited by your instructor and your peers. The Service Learning
Project part 1 will be used to fulfill this requirement. You will edit each other’s
work in class and then upload the draft as an assignment in Canvas. You will
resubmit it on Canvas with writing, formatting, and other errors corrected for a
grade.
                Online Behavioral Management Certificate - TBSI
You will complete an online module, called the Texas Behavior Support Initiative
(TBSI) through Region 4 that will fulfill a Texas legislative requirement. You will
be introduced to the website in class, but you will have to complete the module
on your own, which takes about 2 hours. Full instructions about how to access
the module are in the assignment in Canvas. You will not get credit for ALD
328 until you have uploaded a PDF copy of your certificate of completion to
Canvas. Your certificate is due on the last day of class by midnight.
                                          Grades
The following scale will be used to determine grades:
        A                   94-100                    C+                  77-79
        A-                   90-93                    C                   74-76
       B+                    87-89                    C-                  70-73
        B                    84-86                    D                   60-69
        B-                   80-83                     F                Below 60%


                                  UT General Information
Feb. 6 is the last day to add or drop a class for a possible refund.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the communication component of
the university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication
skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and personal responsibility.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259, 512-471-4641 TTY,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Day Observance: If an assignment or exam falls due on a day
when you are observing a religious holy day, we will work with you to find a time
to submit the work. You must let us know in advance of the absence (see late
work requests).
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center.
CARE Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as
a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of
Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT, and her office is SZB 212E. To schedule
an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If
you leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number.
Walk-in hours Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM. You will check-in at the
College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let Danie know
you’re waiting. All services are confidential. None of your information will be
shared without your written consent.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: Use this resource to help fellow UT
members about whom you have concerns BCAL: 512-232-5050
                                     Safety Information
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with
all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction
of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions
by the following: The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office. More emergency information can be found
at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
