                       ARE323K PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND ECONOMICS
                                      Fall 2019 – Unique # 14875, 14880
INSTRUCTOR:                Dr. William J. O’Brien
                           Office: ECJ 5.2
                           Email: wjob@mail.utexas.edu
MEETINGS:                  T-TH 9:30-11:00 (14875); T-TH 11:00-12:30 (14880)
OFFICE HOURS:              Monday 1:00-4:00 (subject to change) or by appointment.
                           Note 1: I generally keep an open door policy…if the door is open, I am available.
                           Note 2: I read email frequently but am not always able to respond right away.
                           (But e-mail is a great way to reach me late at night with questions!)
                           Note 3: If the question is of general interest, I will post the reply.
GRADER: TBD
WEBPAGE:
Course content may be found online on Canvas at http://canvas.utexas.edu/
COURSE CATALOG DESCRIPTION:
Solving economic problems related to construction and engineering; construction project management
techniques; characteristics of construction organizations, equipment, and methods.
PREREQUISITES: Mathematics 408D, CE333T
COURSE OBJECTIVES:
This class is an introduction to project management and economics, which in real life are closely related
topics. It is hard to be a good project manager without a working knowledge of finance and cash flow. And
while some people get really good at economic calculations, applying the results usually takes some project
management skill, whatever the domain. As such, my two main learning objectives for the course are simple
but profound:
    1. Learn the basics of how a project comes together (time line, main components, participating
         organizations, etc.) Applications will be CAEE focused, but many of the ideas are generalizable.
    2. Learn to be smart about money on projects (investment, budgeting, risk and decision making).
By taking this class you will be able to:
    1. Define and describe the main elements in the project time and as well as the major sub-elements
    2. Apply net present value and related concepts to the analysis of cash flows, including selection of
         alternatives and life-cycle costing (this is the big one for this class)
    3. Develop elementary project schedules and perform basic scheduling calculations
    4. Estimate construction costs based on square footage and quantities
    5. Identify risks in each phase and apply sensitivity analysis to quantify risks in cost and time where
         possible/practicable.
TEXTBOOK AND READINGS:
NOTE: All assigned readings are required to be completed BEFORE class. As I expect you to be familiar
with them, I have every right to ask you questions about the reading during class time.
                                                                                                           1


There are two required textbooks for the course. The first is available at the bookstore:
     • Newnan, Lavelle, and Eschenbach. (2017). Engineering-Economic Analysis. 13th Edition. Oxford
         University Press, New York/Oxford. (Note: 9th,10th, 11th and 12th editions are ok as substitutes).
The second textbook is available free online! We will use it as a general reference.
     • Hendrickson and Au. (2000/3). Project Management for Construction. Available at
         https://www.cmu.edu/cee/projects/PMbook/
Other reading material will be distributed on Canvas or in class.
GRADING:
Grade components will be weighted as follows:
         Quiz 1                           10%
         Midterm 1                        25%
         Midterm 2                        25%
         Final Exam                       20% (seen note on optional final)
         Homework                         20% (individual weights vary by size of assignment)
         Class Participation              02% (attendance)
                                          102%
Letter grades will be determined as follows:
         A:       grade ≥ 93%
         A-:      90% ≤ grade ≤ 92.99%
         B+:      87% ≤ grade ≤ 89.99%
         B:       83% ≤ grade ≤ 86.99%
         B-:      80% ≤ grade ≤ 82.99%
         C+:      77% ≤ grade ≤ 79.99%
         C:       73% ≤ grade ≤ 76.99%
         C-:      70% ≤ grade ≤ 72.99%
         D+:      67% ≤ grade ≤ 69.99%
         D:       63% ≤ grade ≤ 66.99%
         D-:      60% ≤ grade ≤ 62.99%
         F:       grade < 60%
Assigned grades will strictly follow calculated scores.
Exams and quizzes:
Quizzes, midterm, and final are closed book, closed note exams. I may adjust scores upward if the class
mean is low. Calculators are allowed provided you haven’t programmed them with notes. The final will
be cumulative. Other exams will cover part of the class material (subjects will be announced in class) and
motivate you to review the material to-date. Exams will include problems, definition/matching, multiple
choice, and short answer questions as appropriate to the material covered. This class has both quantitative
and qualitative elements and both will be tested.
Quizzes, midterm and final exams will not be returned to the student. The exam solutions will be reviewed
in class. Exams can be reviewed during office hours.
                                                                                                            2


Makeups exams:
If you have an excused absence, I will work with you to take a makeup exam as close as possible to the
date of the exam. If you have an excused absence that you know about ahead of time, let me know as early
as possible – my preference is for you to take the exam before others. In special cases, I will work with the
student on alternate accommodations.
Homework:
Homework consists of traditional problem sets as well as short written questions relating to the course
materials and reading. All homework should be completed using the format guidelines discussed on the
first day of class (example format will be uploaded on canvas for your reference). 10% will be deducted
from the homework score automatically for not adhering to the format. The format is for your benefit. If
the grader cannot understand your work or thought process, it can be very difficult to grade accurately.
Furthermore, if only an answer is provided, with no calculations (unless appropriate to do so, such as
multiple choice), the problem receives 0 credit.
Homework assignments should be completed individually, but I encourage study groups for discussion.
Length of homework assignments will vary, and weighting of homework grades will vary with length and
difficulty. Homework is due at the beginning of class, at 9:30am/11:00am depending on section. Late
homework will not be accepted unless there is an excused absence or it has been prearranged with me.
Written homework: Some homework assignments include short one page or so written responses. There
will be a write-up about every few weeks based on a short reading or response to a video. The intent is to
get you thinking about broader issues related to class materials. I will randomly call on an individual to
start discussion by giving their answers to the write-up questions – I like to have discussions based on your
input.
Final Exam:
This year, the final exam will be optional. Grades without the final will be posted the last week of classes
(or as soon as possible to allow grading of the final homework). If you elect NOT to take the final, all class
scores above will be proportionally weighted to 100% (attendance/participation score is unaffected). If you
do elect to take the final, scores will follow the table above. If you take the final exam, it will be counted
toward your final grade (i.e., if you take the final and your score lowers your grade compared to not taking
it, you must take the grade with the final).
Class Participation:
Class participation is based on attendance (see below).
GRADE DISPUTES:
You may dispute a grade within 5 calendar days from when the grade is posted or returned in class. Grade
disputes should be submitted to me, in writing, and I will determine if the request will be granted. Do not
submit re-grade requests to the grader.
When submitting grade dispute, you must put in writing (word document) what the nature of the dispute is,
along with the homework to be reviewed.
If you have a grade dispute on an exam, please see me during office hours (or make an appointment) within
5 calendar days from when the graded exams were reviewed in class.
                                                                                                             3


If you do not understand why you received a grade or what mistakes were made, please seek clarification.
Come to office hours so we can sit down and discuss the material to ensure you understand the concepts
can be as successful as possible in this course.
ATTENDANCE:
Class attendance is counted as a bonus of up to 2% of your grade in this course. Attendance in this class is
strongly encouraged. There is a lot of learning that goes on in the classroom, so I want students to attend
and participate. As such, I will take attendance with a class roster most days (you sign by your name). If
you do not want your name on this list, contact me as soon as possible to make other arrangements.
As the goal is to encourage participation, weighting of days in attendance will be scored in favor of those
who attend most days. If attendance is taken for X days, the first quarter will count towards .2%, the
second quarter will count towards .3%, the third quarter will count towards .7%, and the last quarter will
count towards .8% of the total 2%. As an example, if attendance is taken for 20 days and the student
attends 18 days, the score will be .2 + .3 + .6 = 1.2 for the first 15 days and 3/5 * .8 = .48 for a total of
1.68% adjustment to their grade. Note that students get one unexcused absence free, so I will adjust their
attendance grade up by 1 day. If X does not divide evenly by quarters, I will round in favor of the
students.
Please contact me ahead of the class if you need an excused absence (e.g., travel for job interview, student
activity, etc. Family fun is NOT an excused absence). If you miss a class due to illness (or death other
than your own) and were not able to contact me before class, please see me as soon as possible with
evidence of your illness. If you have excused absences, the scale above will apply, but X attendance days
will be adjusted to X-number of excused abscences.
Accommodations: If you have a long-term problem or family emergency, please talk with me about it as
soon as possible so we can make mutually agreeable accommodations. It is difficult for me and generally
unfair to other students if you approach me after the fact.
Accommodations will also be made for religious observance and for military duty. See the University
policy here: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/
EXPECTATIONS OF STUDENTS:
This is an upper division undergraduate course. At this point, I expect you to be able to learn and
assimilate materials on your own. Students are also expected to comport themselves in a professional
manner. Specific expectations for students include:
    1. Students should review course material on their own outside of class.
    2. Students should be on time to class. It can be very disruptive to other’s learning to have someone
         come in late. The attendance sheet will be passed around at the start of class. If you are not
         present to sign, you may not sign in at the end of class, unless you have already made
         accommodations with me before the class.
    3. Students should participate actively in course discussions. If you need to miss class, please inform
         the instructor ahead of time.
    4. In class, students are expected to be courteous and respectful of the views and needs of other
         students and instructors. Disruptive students will be asked to leave. Students are allowed to use
         laptops during lectures for note taking only.
    5. Students will not be engaged with their cell phones (or similarly technology) in class, and cell
         phones will be placed on silent in a bag, or turned off. If you are on your cell phone during class,
         you will receive not participation credit for that class. This is YOUR time in class and I would
         like you to get the most out of every class.
                                                                                                              4


    6. Students should work on in-class assignments as if they were job assignments. At any time, the
         instructor may call upon students to present their work to the class.
    7. Students should turn in their work on-time. In the construction industry, bids for projects are not
         accepted posted the deadline. Similarly, in this class, homework will not be accepted after the
         beginning of class on the due date.
    8. If you have a family emergency or extended problem with attending class or doing homework,
         please contact me as soon as possible so we can accommodate your needs. It is hard to do this
         after the fact!
GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE RULES AND ANNOUNCEMENTS
Course Instructor Survey:
An evaluation of the course and instructor will be conducted at the end of the semester using the approved
UT Course/Instructor evaluation forms. Feedback from students will be requested throughout the semester.
Scholastic dishonesty policy:
You will be expected to adhere to the UT Honor Code: The core values of the University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will
be strictly enforced. For further information, visit the Student Judicial Services web site
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.        In    addition,     see:   http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/
Any class materials may not be uploaded onto 3rd party websites without the professor’s explicit
permission. If you do so, it will be considered a violation of the honor code. The professor has the right
(even after the class is completed) to submit these violations to Judicial Affairs for adjudication.
Students with disabilities:
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (Videophone: 512-410-6644) or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/ .
Office of Campus and Security:
• Contact and further information may be found at 512-471-5767 or www.utexas.edu/safety
• Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
    when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
    outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
    that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
    of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
• Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
                                                                                                             5


      University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
•     Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) 512-232-5050.
•     Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
      at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Counseling:
The University of Texas at Austin maintains extensive counseling facilities for students. Resources are
available at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/. The instructor recommends that you visit this web-site to become
acquainted with the range of services available.
Drop policy for long sessions:
      • Undergraduate Students - From the 1st through the 12th class day, an undergraduate student can
           drop a course via the web and receive a refund, if eligible. From the 13th through the university’s
           academic drop deadline, a student may Q drop a course with approval from the Dean, and
           departmental advisor.
      • Graduate Students - From the 1st through the 4th class day, graduate students can drop a course via
           the web and receive a refund. During the 5th through 12th class day, graduate students must initiate
           drops in the department that offers the course and receive a refund. After the 12th class day, no
           refund is given. No class can be added after the 12th class day. From the 13th through the 20th
           class day, an automatic Q is assigned with approval from the Graduate Advisor and the Graduate
           Dean. From the 21st class day through the last class day, graduate students can drop a class with
           permission from the instructor, Graduate Advisor, and the Graduate Dean. Students with 20-
           hr/week GRA/TA appointment or a fellowship may not drop below 9 hours.
Accommodation for religious holy days:
With notice, we will work to accommodate observance of religious holy days. The University catalog makes
the following statement: “A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations,
for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence.”
Class web sites, use, and student privacy:
This class will use Canvas for posting course announcements, changes to the syllabus, schedule, grades,
additional reading materials, assignments, etc. I will also send messages via e-mail over the course e-mail
list, which I inherit from the registrar/CLIPS. IT IS YOUR RESPONSIBILTY to make sure that address is
up-to-date and an address you read frequently – and one that has space to receive messages. E-mails
bounced back to me are not my responsibility. As to privacy, let me know as soon as possible if you do not
want your name on class lists, etc. Students can elect to restrict their information in general university
functions using this web site: https://registrar.utexas.edu/students/records/restrictmyinfo.
Other:
All other university policies not explicitly included on this syllabus can be found on the General
Information Catalog: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/
                                                                                                              6


SCHEDULE OF CLASS LECTURES, READINGS, AND ASSIGNMENTS
          Date             Lecture Topic                  Reading                Assignments
                                                   (Completed before class (Subject refers to lecture
                                                     on the given date)      topics for the week)
          8/29      Course introduction; Big                               HW#1 due 9/3
                    Dig video
           9/3      Project lifecycle            Hendrickson chap 1
           9/5      Project organizations        Hendrickson chap 2        HW#2 due 9/12
          9/10      Owners’ perspectives /       Newnan chap 1&2 (skim);
                    project selection &          Hendrickson chap 7
                    feasibility
          9/12      Discounting/NPV              Newnan chaps 3 &4, chap   HW #3 due 9/19
                    formulations                 5 pp. 152-153
          9/17      Discount/PV examples
          9/19      Quiz 1
                    Skyscraper Video: Rock
                    and Paper
          9/24      Internal Rate of Return,     Newnan –chaps 7-8         HW # 4 due 10/1
                    Incremental Analysis         (ignore appendices)
          9/26      IRR, Incremental Analysis
          10/1      Assessing RISK               Newnan chaps 9 & 10       HW#5 due 10/10
          10/3      Assessing RISK (con’t)       Newnan chaps 9 & 10
          10/8      Skyscraper Video: Time
                    and Money
         10/10      Spreadsheet exercises
         10/15      Review
         10/17      Midterm 1 (cumulative)
         10/22      Depreciation                 Newnan chap 11            HW#6 due 10/29
         10/24      Taxes                        Newnan chap 12
         10/29      Interlude: inflation and the Newnan chap 14
                    time value of money
         10/31      Life Cycle Costing I         Additional materials      HW#7 due 11/7
          11/5      Life Cycle Costing II        Additional materials
          11/7      Estimating                   Hendrickson Chap 5, RS    HW#8 due 11/19
                                                 Means
         11/12      Estimating
         11/14      Midterm 2 (Depreciation,
                    Taxes, LCC)
         11/19      Project Scheduling           Hendrickson Chap 10       HW#9 due 11/26
         11/21      Project Scheduling
         11/26      Cost loading/control;        Hendrickson Chap 12       HW #10 due 12/5
                    schedule of values
         11/21      Thanksgiving
          12/3      Earned value
          12/5      Course review
         12/14      FINAL EXAM (Cumulative) 9:30 section – 7-10pm
         12/12      FINAL EXAM (Cumulative) 11:00 section – 2-5pm
This is a tentative scheduleit will change. Check the course website on Canvas for updates.
                                    Good luck this semester!
                                                                                                      7
