                                                                                          1
                                            RTF 348:
                          The Working Hollywood Writer
                                          Summer 2020
                                                73485
                     Tuesdays (Lecture) & Wednesdays (Workshop)
                             8am to 10am PT (10am to 12pm CT)
                                           * Writing Flag
                                     Zoom-based classroom
Alisha Brophy
alishabrophy@gmail.com
Office Hrs: via Zoom and by appt.
COURSE DESCRIPTION​:
    RTF 348 will introduce you to the life and expectations of a working Hollywood
    writer, and prepare you for the start of your own screenwriting career. You will
    leave this course with the first act of an original TV pilot, and the first act of an
    original feature. We will explore the basic theory and formal aspects of story,
    structure, and character, which are essential to all forms of screenwriting. In
    addition, we will cover how to navigate the business of being a freelance
    writer, skills that can be just as important as your writing talents.
    We will carefully examine each step of the screenwriting process – from the
    initial premise, through character exploration and treatments, to writing the first
    draft – then apply those steps to the development of your own scripts. With the
    help of your peers in workshop, you will leave this course a better writer than
    you entered. Workshopping is not just for the classroom. Every successful
    writer has their own version of a writer’s group-- I’ve been in the same group
    that meets weekly, for the last nine years.
    COURSE MATERIALS:
    TEXTS: Screenplays available on​ ​http://canvas.utexas.edu/
         .    Various articles and chapters, also available on Canvas.


                                                                                   2
  SCREENWRITING SOFTWARE: There are many options out there, but you
  must use one of them. (Remember to get your discounted educational
  version!)
  Final Draft is commonplace. ​www.finaldraft.com/edu
  Please Note: you do not need Final Draft AV for this class.
  I personally use WriterDuet. And they offer your first 3 scripts for free.
  https://writerduet.com/free
  Others options: Fade In, Movie Magic Screenwriter, or Celtx.
  NOTE: Zoom “backgrounds” are encouraged. Though this is online,
  participation in the discussions is expected. Phones should always
  be out of view.
MECHANICS:
  Writing Requirements: ​By the end of the course, each student will have
  completed:
           • ​Act I of a feature-length screenplay (30
           pgs), plus an outline for going forward.
           • ​Act I of a television drama or sitcom (15
           pgs), plus an outline for going forward.
  Assignments and Readings: ​All readings and assignments will be posted
  on the Canvas class site. No outside texts need to be purchased.
  Due Dates: ​Assignments are to be posted on our Canvas Discussion
  Board by​ Monday 10am PT/12pm CT​ (2 days before workshop). This is
  to give your fellow workshop members a chance to read and thoughtfully
  prepare their notes​.
  Assignments must be typewritten. Must be 12 point courier. Must be in the proper
  format. Must be page-numbered. (None of this should be a problem if you’re
  using screenwriting software.) ​You will receive a 10% reduction in grade for


                                                                                        3
every day your assignment is late​. Each assignment should be treated like a
submission to a producer or agent, and thus should look professional: properly
formatted and error-free. Remember, you have a team of smart people giving
you feedback. Take advantage of this and guarantee that you are getting the
best notes by not wasting your workshop time with notes on spelling and
formatting.
Here is a quick formatting guide:
https://www.writersstore.com/how-to-write-a-screenplay-a-guide-to-scriptwriting/
A more detailed formatting guide can be found on Canvas under “Pages.”
On the assignments for which no rewrite is scheduled, you may, at your
discretion, choose to rewrite your assignment and re-submit it. The second
grade will be averaged with the first, but your grade improvement may not
exceed one letter grade.
ATTENDANCE​:
Attendance will be taken. ​You're allowed ONE unexcused absence​. Excused
absences require a doctor’s note or similar concrete justification. After one absence,
you will be penalized five points per absence -- essentially, half of a letter grade. You
are allowed one late arrival (defined as 10 minutes past scheduled start time) But, after
that, if you are more than 10 minutes late, you will be penalized 2.5 points. In a class
such as this one where your feedback on your classmates' work is a critical component,
you've simply got to be here -- having read the material, of course. Please be on time. If
absent or late, you are responsible for what was covered in class, including
assignments: please contact two fellow students before contacting me for this purpose.
NOTE: Running late from your internship is not an acceptable excuse. The internships
are designed to complement your academic pursuits, not inhibit them. Please let the
UTLA administration know if this becomes a problem.
GRADING:
​Assignment grades will be posted weekly on Canvas.
You will be assessed on three levels:
• ​The   level and quality of participation in class, ie: how often do you talk, and


                                                                              4
   what do you talk about?
   • ​Your understanding of the concepts discussed in lecture -- and how that
   understanding is reflected in your own creative work, ie: are you learning
   and improving?
   • ​Quizzes:  there will be several unannounced quizzes during
   lecture. They will be based on the readings. (hint: they are not
   hard questions. If you’ve done the reading, you should easily be
   able to answer these questions.)
The grading breakdown is as follows:
   ●   Quizzes on Readings: 10 points
   ●   Feature 1pg Outline: 5 points
   ●   Feature Treatment: 5 points
   ●   Feature Step-outline: 10 points
   ●   Feature Act I (pgs 1-15): 15 points
   ●   Feature Act I (pgs 15-30): 15 points
   ●   TV Outline: 5 points
   ●   TV Beat Sheet: 10 points
   ●   TV Act I: 15 points
   ●   Workshop Participation (note giving/note taking): 5 points
   ●   Class Participation (lectures/guest speakers): 5 points
       _____________
       Total: 100 points
There will be no final exam
FINAL GRADE RANGES:
       A 93-100                                         C 73-76
       A- 90-92                                         C- 70-72
       B+ 87-89                                         D+ 67-69
       B 83-86                                          D 63-66
       B- 80-82                                         D- 60-62
       C+ 77-79                                         F 0-59


                                                                                       5
RULES OF CRITICISM​:
   • Don't hold back. If something has problems, it has problems. Say so.
   However...
 • Negative comments are a lot easier to make than positive ones. So, no
   matter how constructive your criticism is, try to match it with a compliment
   somewhere else.
 • Identifying problems isn't enough -- also identify possible solutions. Don't simply
   say that a character or a scene doesn't work for you. Say why it doesn't, then
   tell us what changes to the character or scene would make it work for you.
 • With regard to criticism of your own work: start developing a thick skin.
   Remember that your instructors and classmates are commenting on your
   scripts, not on you. Use their criticism to become a better writer. Keep in mind
   that as a working writer, you will get notes for the rest of your life. First from
   your writer’s group, then from your manager, then from your producer, then
   from your studio exec, then from your director… it’s endless.
      (There’s a rule of thumb in TV writer rooms that you shouldn’t point out a
      problem unless you also have a fix. It’s not always possible, but it’s a good
                                      habit to develop.)
   SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
   The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism,
   unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed
   to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty
   also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
   receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment,
   and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two
   courses without the prior permission of the instructor​. By accepting this
   syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
   Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
   readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate
   University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
   including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
   University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the


                                                                                             6
     Student Judicial services Web site at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
 SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259, or 512-410-6644
(video phone).
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
UNIVERSITY ELECTRONIC MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY
It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in
his or her email address. Students are expected to check email on a frequent and
regular basis-daily, or, at minimum, twice/week-in order to stay current with
University communications, recognizing they may be time-critical. The complete
text of this policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. It is the
policy of The University of Texas at Austin that the student must notify each instructor at
least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates he or she will be absent to
observe a religious holy day. For religious holidays that fall within the first two weeks of
the semester, the notice should be given on the first day of the semester. The student
may not be penalized for these excused absences but the instructor may appropriately
respond if the student fails to complete satisfactorily the missed assignment or
examination within a reasonable time after the excused absence.


                                                                                  7
                                 WEEKLY SYLLABUS
6/02 THE ESSENTIALS
                LECTURE:
                About the Class
                The Basics -- Character, Story, Structure
                Loglines
                ASSIGNMENT: READ: Aristotle, "Poetics"
                                 READ: E.T.
                                 WRITE: Three loglines for workshop
NOTE: All assigned readings must be completed before the ​following​ lecture.
6/03 WORKSHOP BASICS
                WORKSHOP: Structure
                               Getting to know your group
                               Picking a logline
                ASSIGNMENT​: WRITE: Feature 1pg outline
                                        ​(upload to Canvas by 10am Mon. June 8th)
6/09 FINDING THE STORY & 3 ACT STRUCTURE
                LECTURE: "The Godfather": Beginnings, Middles, and Ends
                             Aristotelian Drama
                           “E.T.” 5 Key Moments
                ASSIGNMENT: READ: Hauge Chpt 3
                                 READ: “Schindler’s List”
                                 READ: Art of Betterization
                                 WRITE: Feature Treatment
                           ​(upload to Canvas by 10am Mon. June 15th)
6/10 WORKSHOP: Feature 1 pg Outline


                                                                         8
6/16 CHARACTER, CONFLICT & ACT II
              LECTURE: Dramatizing Character
                           Role of Conflict
              ASSIGNMENT: READ: McKee Chpt. 15
                                READ: “Thelma & Louise”
                         .      WRITE: Feature Step-Outline
                               ​(upload to Canvas by 10am Mon June 22nd)
6/17 WORKSHOP: Feature Treatment
6/23 POLISHING THE STORY
              LECTURE: The Art of Subtlety
                           Monomyth: “The Star Wars of Oz”
              ASSIGNMENT: WRITE: Feature Act I (pg 1 – 15)
                      (​ upload to Canvas by 10am Mon June 29th)
6/24 WORKSHOP: Feature Step-Outline
6/30 INTRODUCTION TO TV WRITING
              LECTURE: Where to Begin: from Bible to Premise
                           World & Rules
              ASSIGNMENT: READ: Goldberg, chapt. 2
                                READ: “Breaking Bad”- pilot
                                READ: Scarbrough
                                READ: “Community” - pilot
                         .      WRITE: Feature Act I (pg 15-30)
                             ​(upload to Canvas by 10am Mon July 6th)
7/1 WORKSHOP: Feature Act I (pg 1-15)


                                                                          9
7/7 TV: SITCOM
               LECTURE: Single Cam vs Multi Cam
                          Comedy Building Blocks
               ASSIGNMENT: READ: Sample beat-sheet
                                READ: “The Shield”
                                WRITE: TV Outline
                       (upload to Canvas by 10am Mon. July 13th)
7/8 WORKSHOP: Feature Act I (pg 15-30)
                TV Ideas
7/14 TV: DRAMA
               LECTURE: Cable vs Network
               ASSIGNMENT: READ: Mamet Memo
                               READ: Schur interview
                              WRITE: TV Beat Sheet
                          (upload to Canvas by 10am Mon. July 20th)
7/15 WORKSHOP: TV Outline
7/21 REVISION: THE REAL WORK BEGINS
               LECTURE: Revision: The 3 I's
                         The Biz: What I Wish Someone Had Told Me
              ASSIGNMENT: READ: Speaker bios and prep 2-3 Q’s
                              WRITE: TV Act I (pg 1-15)
                                (upload to Canvas by 10am Mon. July 27th)
7/22 WORKSHOP: TV Beat Sheet


                                                                            10
7/28 WORKSHOP: TV Act I (pg 1-15)
     ​ Second half: Q&A WITH GUEST SPEAKER
7/29 WORKSHOP: TV Act I (pg 1-15)
       ​Second half: Q&A WITH GUEST SPEAKER
​and always keep in mind...
    “A writer is somebody for whom writing is more difficult than it is for
                          other people.” -​ - Thomas Mann
