                 Syllabus - ACCT 384.1 – Tax Research Methodology
                         Fall 2019 (Unique Numbers: 02780, 02785, 02790)
            Professor Kristina Zvinakis
                Office CBA 4M.222 (512.471.5314)
          Office hours Tuesday 1:30-3:00 pm, Wednesday 4:30 – 5:30 pm, when the door is open and by
                            appointment
                E-mail kristina.zvinakis@mccombs.utexas.edu
1 Learning objectives
   The goals of this class are: (1) to provide you an understanding of what it means to undertake rigorous
   tax research and (2) to teach you how to undertake such research. Thus, this semester we will
   − learn about the sources of tax law and the extent to which these sources can and should be relied
        upon to answer tax research questions,
   − develop and enhance the skills necessary to identify the tax issues in a problem and to formulate
        those issues into tax research questions, and
   − learn how to communicate the results of tax research to a third party and about the consequences
        of such communication.
2 Materials
   Readings: The readings for class consist of chapters from Sawyers and Gill, Federal Tax Research, 11th
   Edition and various tax-related articles. You can access the textbook readings in the manner most
   convenient for you: rent the book, buy the book, or sign up for Cengage Unlimited. Search for the
   book on www.cengage.com (after you enter the “Students” part of their website) using either
   ISBN(10): 1337485942 or ISBN(13): 9781337485944 to explore your various options. You can also buy
   or rent the 11th edition of the text from another source (given this edition of the book was issued a
   few years ago, used copies may be available from other sources). I am not concerned with how you
   access the textbook; I am only concerned that you read the assigned material. The tax-related articles
   are available in Canvas or via links in Canvas.
   Class notes: Available (at least 24 hours prior to each class meeting) on Canvas.
   Tax research services: All UT Austin students have access to three electronic tax databases - CCH OMNI
   Tax, RIA Checkpoint Tax Research Service, and NexisUni – via the University Library’s webpage
   (www.lib.utexas.edu).
   From a tax-law perspective, the content of these services overlaps substantially. However, the
   structure of our Nexis subscription may limit its usefulness for your tax research assignments. You will
   receive training in how to use CCH and RIA during class. You will also familiarize yourself with these
   services via practice in class and outside of class. Note that all of these services should be available 24
   hours a day, 7 days a week. Routine maintenance is performed occasionally and the number of users
   on one service at a single time can be limited. Thus, if you cannot access one of the services, try
 1   Fall 2019


   another. If you cannot access one of the services for an extended period of time, please let me know.
   And, please, please, please always remember to log out of each service when you are done with your
   work, rather than just closing your browser window.
3 Keys to success
   Tax research skills are developed through practice and dedicated study. While my intent is to provide
   you with a solid foundation in the skills necessary to undertake tax research, you will not master these
   skills (or be able to use them well after completing our course) unless you apply yourself and rise to
   the challenges provided.
   In addition to practicing your tax research skills, in order to be successful in this course, you are
   expected to attend class. This means that you are expected to arrive on time, to remain for the entire
   class period, and to understand that your attendance record is factored into your final grade. Your
   success in this course will be enhanced if you also prepare in advance by reading the assigned pages
   in the text and supplemental articles and participate in class by asking questions and responding to
   requests for discussion.
   While you may occasionally be tempted to miss class, please remember that success in this course is
   highly correlated with attendance. If you do miss a class, it is your responsibility to ensure that you
   understand the material covered in the class missed.
   Finally, please do not use cell phones or laptops during class.
   Class participation points come in both positive and negative forms. Arriving late, not attending class,
   using a laptop or texting during class fall in the negative category (see the Evaluation section below).
4 E-mail, course web page, and class notes
   I will communicate with you regularly via e-mail; please establish a habit of checking your e-mail at
   least once a day, as you are responsible for the content of these messages. These e-mails will go to
   the e-mail account that appears in the class roster (the e-mail address that appears in your UT
   Directory entry). You should verify, via UT Direct, that the e-mail address included in the directory is
   the e-mail address you are using/checking. I will verify/update the e-mail list at the end of the first
   week of class. If you change your e-mail address after the first week, please let me know so that I can
   update the e-mail list.
   The Canvas page for this class also provides useful course information (http://canvas.utexas.edu). You
   should also make a habit of checking this page on a regular basis. Additionally, class notes for each
   class (a PowerPoint file) will be posted to Canvas prior to class and you will find assignments, readings
   and other class-related information there, as well.
5 Evaluation
     Grades in Tax Research are earned based on your performance on the following:
 2   Fall 2019


             Midterm exam                                                130 points
             Case assignments and research skills quizzes                335 points
             Attendance, participation and engagement                     75 points
             Final exam (comprehensive)                                  175 points
             Maximum possible points                                     715 points
  Case assignments: Three tax research cases will be assigned during the term. The first case may be
  worked on in a group of no more than three students. The remaining cases are to be worked on
  individually and independently. Late case assignments will lose 10 points per day until they are handed
  in. No assignment will be accepted after the assignment is discussed in class
  Attendance, participation and engagement: I believe that being engaged in class and class discussion
  allows you to better understand the topics we are learning about and improves the learning
  environment for everyone. Explicitly including such amounts in your performance evaluation provides
  an incentive to take preparation for class and participation seriously. Your engagement will be
  evaluated on three dimensions: (1) attendance, (2) voluntary contributions to class discussion and (3)
  answers to questions asked of you (by me) during class. That is, during a portion of class each day, I
  will randomly call on students to answer questions related to the topic of discussion. When you are
  called on, your evaluation will be detrimentally affected if you choose not to answer the question,
  cannot attempt a reasonable answer or are not in class.
  Evaluating class participation and engagement can be subjective. Generally, if you remain alert, add
  to the discussion or ask relevant questions about the material, your contribution will be positively
  evaluated. If you never participate, sleep during class, or otherwise telegraph that you would like to
  be anywhere but class, this will detrimentally affect your evaluation. Note also that points can be
  deducted for counterproductive classroom activity, including disrupting the class by inappropriately
  talking to your neighbors or incessantly texting during class.
  Anyone arriving late to class (meaning arriving I have started talking) or not attending class will lose
  their participation points for that class period. Individual absences from class do not need to be
  explained, but if you would like to e-mail me to tell me that you will not be in attendance, you are
  welcome to do so.
  I expect that you will attend the section of the course in which you are enrolled.
  Midterm and Final Exam: This course has a midterm exam and a comprehensive final exam. You are
  required to take both of these exams. There are no make-ups for any exam. Both the midterm and
  the final will be given as common evening exams. The date and location of these exams will be posted
  to Canvas, will be disseminated to you via e-mail and will be announced in class. Each student is
  responsible for managing their own personal schedule to be present at these exams. If you miss an
  exam because of an illness or other dire and irreconcilable conflict, you should notify me as soon as
  possible and present written documentation of your absence (e.g., note from physician). I have final
  authority to determine if your absence is justified; this is an individual determination based on the
  facts and circumstances of each situation.
  Grading: Final grades are determined relative to the final mean of total points earned by all students
  enrolled in Tax Research this term. My intent is to finish the semester with a distribution of roughly
3   Fall 2019


   2/5ths As (including A-s) and 3/5ths Bs (including B+s and B-s). However, grades of C (or worse) are
   possible and will be earned by those students whose performance warrants such a grade.
   With respect to grades on assignments, any concerns or questions about grading on an assignment,
   case or exam must be resolved in the week after the graded item is distributed. Such concerns must
   be submitted to me in writing in a manner that is detailed enough to explain the concern.
6 Academic misconduct
   Academic misconduct includes (but is not limited to) cheating, fabrication, facilitation of academic
   misconduct by others, and plagiarism. Academic misconduct is a serious academic offense; neither
   the Department of Accounting nor I will tolerate academic dishonesty.
   In this class, careful attention should be paid to what constitutes academic misconduct as many of the
   assignments will require extensive work outside the classroom and, as such, a student might be
   inclined to work with other students to prepare answers to these assignments. Group work is
   encouraged when collaboration is limited to guidance and education; however, everyone is
   responsible for conducting their own research and preparing their own solutions. In all cases, group
   work is prohibited if it involves the communication of a solution. Students may discuss research
   procedures and alternatives with classmates, but, again, communicating solutions is considered
   academic misconduct.
   To clarify this policy, I believe in the value of cooperative learning and so I encourage students to
   discuss the course material and assignments outside of class; discussions with classmates often
   provide invaluable insights. However, the formulation of the final solution and the actual writing of
   any assignment, case, or exam is to be done strictly on an individual basis. This prohibition extends to
   the use of solutions produced by students in this course in earlier semesters and by others not
   enrolled in this course. (This prohibition does not apply to discussions with consultants in the Writing
   Skills Center.)
   To help you better understand what constitutes academic misconduct, here are some examples:
        Example 1: Explaining a specific research technique to a classmate is not an act of dishonesty,
        whereas providing a list of relevant authorities (tax-law sources) would constitute an act of
        dishonesty.
        Example 2: Discussing the merits of a specific argument with a classmate is not an act of
        dishonesty, whereas providing a list of issues or conclusions to a classmate would constitute an
        act of dishonesty.
        Example 3: Questioning a classmate who has finished an exam about the exam's contents would
        constitute an act of dishonesty. Likewise, the communication of information about the contents
        of an exam to classmates who have not yet taken the exam would also constitute an act of
        dishonesty.
   Note that the while the use of written solutions prepared by others is to be strictly avoided this
   prohibition cannot be circumvented by verbally dictating a written solution to another student.
 4   Fall 2019


   Obviously, there will be times when it may be difficult to determine if a communication is intended to
   be dishonest. However, as many public accountants will attest, it is important to avoid even the
   appearance of impropriety. Hence, if there is any question about whether an activity or a
   communication is academically dishonest, the best course of action is full disclosure (ask me for
   clarification or clearance in advance of any action).
   In any case where academic dishonesty is discovered, a grade of “F” will be assigned the student(s)
   involved and the matter will be submitted to the Office of Student Affairs. The grade of “F” will stand
   until the formal disciplinary action administered by the Vice President of the Office of Student Affairs
   is resolved.
7 Dropping the course
   The course catalog details both add and drop-date deadlines. In graduate classes, at the discretion of
   the instructor, a student is allowed to drop the class up until the last day of the term without academic
   penalty.
   A student who stops attending without notification or without the submission of a drop form will
   automatically earn a grade of “F” for the semester.
8 University-mandated disclosures
   Academic accommodation for students with disabilities On request, UT Austin provides academic
   accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Division
   of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities (471-6259; 471-6441
   TTY). Should you need such accommodations, please discuss this with me not later than the end of
   the second week of the semester.
   Religious holy days Per University policy, a student is expected to notify a faculty member of an
   absence related to a religious holy day observance not later than 14 days prior to the observance of
   that holy day. If you must miss an exam or a research skills task as a result of such an observance, you
   will be given an opportunity to make up this work, after the holy day, depending on the nature of
   what was missed as well as the particular holy day observance.
   Privacy in Canvas Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that I will
   use a merged Canvas site for the three sections of Tax Research I teach this semester. This means that
   students in other sections can see that you are enrolled in the course and it may be possible for them
   to send you email from within Canvas. However, other students will not be able to learn your email
   address and no other personal data will be revealed as a result of this merger of sections. If you have
   any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk (475-9400) for help removing your name from view of
   other students.
   Behavioral concerns If you have concerns about the attitude or actions of other students, staff or
   faculty, especially where those concerns could suggest that your or other students’ safety is at risk,
   you should call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050.
 5   Fall 2019


9 Getting to class - Transportation considerations
   To the extent that you utilize a dockless scooter to get to class, please familiarize yourself with the
   potential risks of utilizing such transportation and consider wearing a helmet while you ride.
10 Course outline
   The course outline details daily topic coverage, assigned readings, case due dates and exam dates.
   This outline is contained in a separate document posted to Canvas and is incorporated into this
   syllabus by reference.
 6  Fall 2019
