                 ALD 118C l College-to-Career Co-op Internship Program
Instructor of Record: Dieter, Eric                     Flags: None
Unique #: 09400                                        Restrictions: None
Semester: Spring 2020                                  Computer Instruction: No
Class Time and Location: Mondays, 4:00 – 5:00P in University Co-op Conference Room. The
Co-op <universitycoop.com> is located at 2246 Guadalupe. When you arrive for the first class,
ask a staff member on the first floor to direct you to the conference room. This is where we will
meet each week of the semester unless otherwise directed.
Instructors: This course is taught by the staff of the University Co-op, including Marie Carroll,
Vice President of Human Resources, and Cheryl Phifer, CEO. Dr. Eric Dieter represents the
Longhorn Center for Academic Excellence.
Office Hours & Contact Information: Dr. Dieter is available throughout the week by
appointment. His office is in the Student Services Building (SSB), Room 4.418. Map:
maps.utexas.edu/buildings/UTM/SSB.
Course Website:         Canvas, canvas.utexas.edu
If you need support using Canvas, please                      contact   Dr.    Dieter,  and    visit
utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028.
Course Description: The University Co-op and the Longhorn Center for Academic Excellence
offers this two-and-a-half-year internship program to degree-seeking University of Texas at Austin
students serious about gaining interactive experiences and mentorship opportunities aligned with
their academic and professional goals. Students from all majors are encouraged to apply. First-
generation college students are especially encouraged to apply. This ALD 118C course is the first
step of this intensive and unique program. Completing the course is mandatory for continued
participation in the internship. The purpose of this course is to prepare students to become
productive and confident members of the University Co-op team, and eventually, dynamic and
competitive professionals on the job market. Students in this course will shadow the various
departments within the University Co-op to better understand the operations, management, and
communications of a large nonprofit corporation. Ongoing question-asking and reflection is
expected.
Prerequisites: None.
Other Requirements: Application required, including cover letter, resume, and references.
Applicants must be selected for participation in course and program. Participants must commit to
two-and-a-half-year internship in its entirety, unless unforeseen circumstances arise. Participants
must sign official offer letter and submit to a background check. Participants must comply with all
University Co-op policies as outlined in the Employee Handbook.
Summer Employment: Interns have the opportunity to work at the Co-op during summers.
Interns are encouraged to take advantage of this opportunity for summer employment, but it is not
required. If you cannot work during the summer, please proactively discuss your situation with
program staff. If you have other summer obligations, such as study abroad, please proactively
discuss your situation with program staff. In most cases, we can work with you to fit summer
                                                   1


employment around your other obligations. Summer employment can range from part to full time
(i.e., 20 to 40 hours per week), for either all or part of the summer. Not working during the summers
will not diminish the value of the internship in any way. But, as is typically the case, employees
with more experience may prove more competitive when seeking specific projects as the internship
progresses. All interns are expected to return to the Co-op a few days before the beginning of the
fall semesters for continuing training, and to prepare for the start-of-semester rush.
Course Texts: None for purchase. Readings available via the Canvas course site.
Course Outcomes:
In this course students will…
1. Learn the functions of the Co-op, and how those functions transfer to similar organizations.
2. Learn the values of the Co-op, and how those values transfer to similar organizations.
3. Reflect on their experiences to determine how best to meld their goals and the Co-op’s needs.
4. Develop professional habits relating to communications, teamwork, customer service, etc.
Requirements & Grading: Students will write thirteen (13) weekly one-page reflections
following a provided prompt. Students will also complete a final course project following a
provided prompt. The final course project will require comprehensive reflection, forward-looking
goal-setting, and working in groups. Throughout the semester, students are expected to engage the
course, both in discussion and in writing. Grades are based on attendance and participation,
including shadowing appointments (see below), (15%), weekly reflections (65%), and final
project (20%).
All class writing must be word-processed and submitted electronically to Canvas. Please use
double-spaced lines, one-inch margins, and Times New Roman, with font size 12. Do not submit
PDF files to Canvas.
             The final course grade will be calculated using the following algorithm:
                    (WR X .65) + (FP X .20) + (A&P X .15) = final course grade
This course follows UT’s policy on grades, including the use of pluses and minuses when
applicable. For details, see registrar.utexas.edu/students/grades.
This course does not have a final exam.
Shadowing Expectations: Students are expected to shadow all thirteen (13) departments
throughout the semester, from weeks two to fourteen (no shadowing during week one). A pre-
determined shadowing schedule will be provided to students; download schedule from Canvas.
Students will shadow one (1) department each week. Students will shadow each department for
approximately ninety (90) minutes. Students are responsible for coordinating shadowing
appointment times with appropriate Co-op staff. Each week’s shadowing must be completed by
Friday, 5:00P. Weekly reflections are based on shadowing experiences, and are due Fridays by
11:59P.
                                                     2


Attendance: Attendance will be taken at the start of each class. Engaged participation is necessary
and expected, and thus will comprise a percentage of the course grade. You are expected to attend
class and other appointments, to arrive on time, to prepare assigned reading and writing before
class begins, and to participate in all in-class discussions and presentations and out-of-class
shadowing. You will fail the course after the third unexcused absence. Students with perfect
attendance (i.e., zero absences for semester, attending all shadowing appointments) receive
maximum percentage on their participation grades.
The only excused absences are those taken for religious holy days, federal duties (e.g., jury duty
or guard service), and limited official University business with advance notice. After the second
undocumented absence, an online absence/failing report will be filed with the Office of the Dean
of Students. By UT policy, you should notify us of a pending absence at least fourteen (14) days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class and/or any attendant
classwork in order to observe a religious holy day, we will give you an opportunity to complete
the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Excessive tardiness—chronically being more than five minutes late—will also adversely affect
your grade. We will notify you if tardiness becomes a concern. Save any unexcused absences to
use when you are sick, when you have an emergency, or, recognizing that you will have a heavy
schedule to balance, when your coursework in other classes gets cumbersome. If you find that an
unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, please proactively discuss the situation
with us. Usually we can work something out, but please keep in mind that this course meets only
once per week; miss one week and you miss a lot.
Q Drop Policy: You can drop a course through the twelfth class day without penalty. If you need
to drop a course after the twelfth class day, you will need to execute a Q-drop before the drop
deadline, typically around the middle of each semester. Under Texas law, you are allowed only six
Q-drops while attending college at any public institution in the state. For more information, please
visit utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop. Dropping the course signals that you are
declining to continue the internship.
University Writing Center: You are strongly encouraged to use the services offered by the
University Writing Center. The UWC offers 45-minute, one-on-one consultations with UT
students on any piece of writing. You may visit up to three times per assignment, and are
encouraged to visit within forty-eight hours of the due date. The consultants are well trained, and
the cost of the service is covered in your tuition. You can visit the UWC in either PCL 2.330 or
the LCAE offices in SSB 4.400. If you wish to make an appointment, you may do so through either
uwc.utexas.edu or 471-6222.
Sanger Learning Center: You are strongly encouraged to use the services offered by the Sanger
Learning Center. The SLC offers classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for over seventy courses in fifteen subject areas. For more
information, please visit utexas.edu/ugs/slc, call 471-3614, or drop by SLC in Jester A332.
Scholastic Honesty & UT’s Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community. For additional information on the Honor Code,
see deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php.
                                                   3


Turning in work that is not your own, and any other forms of scholastic dishonesty, will result in
a major course penalty, possibly failure in the course. A report of the incident will also be made to
the Office of the Dean of Students. Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic
credit, then, will be the student’s own work. For additional information on Academic Integrity, see
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/processesandprocedures.php.
Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important
with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics,
sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to
instructors with the student’s legal name. We will gladly honor your request to address you by a
name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise
us of this preference early in the semester so that we may make appropriate changes to our records.
Emergency: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires
exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and
building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructors in
writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty
or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Information
regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at
emergency.utexas.edu.
The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that provides The University of Texas at
Austin’s faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their concerns about another
individual’s behavior. If you have concerns, please contact the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
(BCAL) at either besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line or 232-5050.
Self-Care: The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric,
consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students’ academic and life goals and enhance
their personal growth and well-being. If you need any services, please visit cmhc.utexas.edu or,
from 8A to 5P, 471-3515. For 24/7 support, please call 471-CALL (2255). The CMHC is located
on the fifth floor of the Student Services Building (SSB).
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement’s Services for Students with Disabilities. For more
information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities, in the Student Services Building, at
471-6259 (voice) or 410-6644 (videophone), ssd@austin.utexas.edu, or visit
diversity.utexas.edu/disability. Please advise us of any needed accommodations early in the
semester so we can readily make appropriate arrangements.
Email: Email is an official means of communication at UT, and we will use this medium to
communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email account and to
check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to
it.utexas.edu/services/email-calendar-collaboration.
                                                   4


Approval for Future Research: By remaining in the course, you give your consent to use any of
your ALD 118C and subsequent internship work in any case studies and/or research projects we
might undertake. If your work is used for research purposes, every effort will be made to notify
you. Work will be used anonymously in almost all instances. Similarly, by remaining in the course,
you give consent to use your likeness, including photography and videography, in program
promotions. If you do not want to provide this permission, but wish to remain in the course, please
speak with us before we begin producing classwork.
                                     Spring 2020 Syllabus
WEEK ONE | 27 – 31 January
Welcome & Introductions
Tour of the Course: Policies, Syllabus, Reflections Prompt, Final Project Prompt
Review Shadowing Schedule and Procedures
WEEK TWO | 3 – 7 February
Department Spotlight: Store Management
The Employee Handbook :: What’s It’s Purpose? What’s It’s Value?
                   Weekly Reflection 1 :: Due Friday, 7 February, 11:59P
WEEK THREE | 10 – 14 February
Department Spotlight: The CEO
                   Weekly Reflection 2 :: Due Friday, 14 February, 11:59P
WEEK FOUR | 17 – 21 February
Department Spotlight: Course Materials
                   Weekly Reflection 3 :: Due Friday, 21 February, 11:59P
WEEK FIVE | 24 – 28 February
Department Spotlight: Human Resources
                   Weekly Reflection 4 :: Due Friday, 28 February, 11:59P
                                                 5


WEEK SIX | 2 – 6 March
Department Spotlight: Custom Publishing
                    Weekly Reflection 5 :: Due Friday, 6 March, 11:59P
WEEK SEVEN | 9 – 13 March
Department Spotlight: Merchandising
                   Weekly Reflection 6 :: Due Friday, 13 March, 11:59P
                              SPRING BREAK | 16 – 20 March
WEEK EIGHT | 23 – 27 March
Department Spotlight: Buying
                   Weekly Reflection 7 :: Due Friday, 27 March, 11:59P
WEEK NINE | 30 March – 3 April
Department Spotlight: Marketing
                     Weekly Reflection 8 :: Due Friday, 3 April, 11:59P
WEEK TEN | 6 – 10 April
Department Spotlight: Web Fulfillment
Review Final Project Prompt
                    Weekly Reflection 9 :: Due Friday, 10 April, 11:59P
WEEK ELEVEN | 13 – 17 April
Department Spotlight: Website
                   Weekly Reflection 10 :: Due Friday, 17 April, 11:59P
WEEK TWELVE | 20 – 24 April
Department Spotlight: Distribution Facility
                   Weekly Reflection 11 :: Due Friday, 24 April, 11:59P
                                             6


WEEK THIRTEEN | 27 April – 1 May
Department Spotlight: Management Information Systems
                    Weekly Reflection 12 :: Due Friday, 1 May, 11:59P
WEEK FOURTEEN | 4 – 8 May
Department Spotlight: Finance
Next Steps & Course Evaluations
                    Weekly Reflection 13 :: Due Friday, 8 May, 11:59P
                       Final Tasks :: Due Wednesday, 13 May, 5:00P
                                             7
