                                    C C 348: Horror In Classics and Film
                                                 Unique # 79044
                                                 Online Course
Instructor: ​Elizabeth Adams
Email:​ ​edadams@utexas.edu
Office Hours:​ Available by appointment via Zoom. Please email me in advance to set up a time that is
convenient for both of us.
Required Course Materials:
     ● Students are expected to have regular access to the internet in order to participate and contribute
         to the course.
     ● The course will primarily be presented via TopHat (see addendum at end of syllabus).
     ● Communication with students will primarily take place via Canvas.
     ● Students will be expected to watch films, some of which may only be available via streaming
         rental services.
     ● Students are not required to purchase texts: pdfs and links will be made available.
Course Description: ​This course will examine the function of horror in ancient and modern contexts.
The course will consist of units that focus on categories of horror (e.g., disease, sci-fi, or slasher) that
appear in some fashion in both ancient literature and modern film. Such a broad range of topics
encourages the class to engage with a number of sources from various genres and periods of Greek and
Roman literature -- we will discuss selections of works ranging from Homer’s Greek epic ​Odyssey ​to
Apuleius’s Latin novel ​Metamorphoses​. The ancient texts that we read will expose students to the
political, religious, and cultural features that helped to define the ancient Mediterranean world. By
complementing the literature with modern films, we will be able to more effectively assess how each
reflects its cultural context. By the end of the course, students will be able to articulate thoughtful answers
to questions such as: How does popular media expose cultural anxieties? Are ancient and modern
audiences all that different? Is a reading audience different from a viewing audience? How does horror
encourage (or discourage) specific behaviors? Though we are in a different time and culture, are we still
afraid of the same things?
Global Cultures Flag:
This course carries a Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present (in our case, ancient Greek and Roman societies), and to
reflect on your own cultural experiences.
Expected Learning Outcomes:
By the end of the course, students will be able to:
     ● Critically engage with primary source texts (Greek and Roman literature)
     ● Recognize various genres of Greek and Roman literature and their lasting impact
                                                                                                              1


     ●   Recognize the assumptions and beliefs that structure Greek and Roman societies
     ●   Explain how Greek and Roman societies represent social transgressions
     ●   Interpret and analyze multiple types of media
     ●   Assess how popular media reflects the cultural context of its production
     ●   Examine and articulate complex cultural relationships across time
Content Warning: ​Some topics that will arise in our readings, viewings, and discussions will be
uncomfortable simply due to the nature of the course: horror, ancient and modern, engages with a lot of
painful and difficult material. We will likely come across violence, sexual violence, sexuality, substance
abuse, racism, homophobia, and other sensitive topics. I encourage you to refer to an online movie
review site such as ​Common Sense media​ before starting the assignment if you are concerned about the
content of any film we’ll watch. If you anticipate that you are unable to engage with these texts/films
without distress that inhibits your learning, you may wish to consider enrolling in a different course. If, as
you are completing an assignment, you discover that you are distressed more than you anticipated, contact
me as soon as possible and we will work out an alternative assignment.
         Above all, I expect all students to be sensitive to their own and others’ limitations and to practice
patience and tolerance with one another. If you act inappropriately regarding the course material or
others’ responses to it, I will grade your assignment a zero and take any other disciplinary action I deem
necessary.
Discussions: ​I anticipate a lot of lively and fascinating conversations throughout the course, and I look
forward to our conversations about the material. That said, in all discussions please remember to be
respectful to one another - interpretation of art is subjective. You may have an opinion that differs from
somebody else’s, and you are welcome to voice it, but others’ opinions are equally legitimate opinions,
and each student’s contributions will help us gain a fuller understanding of our topics.
         One of the most effective ways to avoid discussions becoming uncomfortable is to continue to
return to the text. As you discuss, make sure to provide or to ask for examples from the assigned
materials. This will also ensure that you are effectively applying information learned in class and
providing higher quality responses.
         If you see something inappropriate on a discussion board, please tell me. I’m not able to monitor
posts as they arrive, so I rely on students to alert me if a post violates our classroom standards.
         To get full credit for each discussion, you must both contribute your own response to the
questions posed and respond to at least one other student.
Privacy Policy: ​Out of respect for the privacy of your classmates, do not record or screenshot any part of
this class for use outside of this class, even if you omit identifying information about the speaker or
poster. You may not circulate or share images, clips, or other course materials with individuals who are
not enrolled in this class. Doing so is a serious violation of our class ethical code and will result in a
charge of academic misconduct.
Course Work: ​You are expected to check email and course sites (TopHat, Canvas) on a frequent and
regular basis in order to stay current with class and University-related communications, recognizing that
certain communications may be time-critical. Since this is a summer course, it is fast-paced and will
                                                                                                              2


require you to do work every day, and your assignments will likely require a significant time
commitment. If this might be a problem, I recommend getting work done ahead of time, since you will
have access to assignments well ahead of time. Any missing work will be graded a zero.
Grading Policy:
25% TopHat questions; 30% participation in discussion; 15% individual presentation; 15% each exam
Students will be responsible for completing all assignments (reading, viewing, questions, and discussions)
on time. Each student will be responsible for contributing one presentation on one unit of the course. We
will have one midterm and one final exam; the exams will consist of short-answer and essay questions.
Short-answer questions will test your increasing grasp on the context and contents of the primary sources
we’ve read for class; essay questions will require students to synthesize class discussions to form and
defend their own arguments.
Your final grade will be determined from the following scale; your grade will be rounded to the nearest
percentage:
         A = 100-93      C = 76-73
         A- = 92-90      C- = 72-70
         B+ = 89-87      D+ = 69-67
         B = 86-83       D = 66-63
         B- = 82-80      D- = 62-60
         C+ = 79-77      F = 59 and below
If you are taking the course credit/no credit, you must receive at least a 60 in the course.
Scholastic Integrity: ​Inappropriate behavior such as plagiarism or the giving or receiving of
unauthorized aid on any assignments or examinations will absolutely NOT be tolerated, and will result in
a 0 for the assignment. Any plagiarism or cheating will be subject to University procedures under
Appendix C, Section 11 of the General Information Bulletin (these kinds of academic dishonesty and
disciplinary procedures are explained at sections 11-402 and 11-500 of
https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/).
Plagiarism is an offense no matter when it is detected (even after the course has ended). If you have
questions about academic dishonesty, contact me, or contact the Office of the Dean of Students at
512-471-2841, or go to https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
The University Of Texas Honor Code: ​The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
Students with Disabilities: ​The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. If you require accommodation, please
let me know and provide the appropriate documentation as soon as possible. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 512-471-62591; for information on how SSD
                                                                                                            3


accommodations function in online classes, please see:
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/2020/03/update-on-ssd-operations/.
Religious Holidays and Military Service:​ Work missed due to a religious holiday may be made up if
students supply documentation of the holiday at least 14 days ahead of time. All work must be made up
within three days of the end of the holiday. For questions about absences for religious holidays or military
service, please see:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/
BCAL:​ If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line (BCAL) to discuss your concerns by phone or through an online submission form. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line.
Resources: ​Students with concerns related to topics we’ll be covering may wish and are encouraged to
consult the following resources:
         UT Counselling and Mental Health Center:​ ​https://cmhc.utexas.edu
         Voices Against Violence:​ ​https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/index.html
         SAFE (Stop Abuse For Everyone) Austin: ​http://www.safeaustin.org
                                                                                                           4


Schedule of Topics and Readings
Below is a tentative schedule of topics and assignments for the semester. This details what you are
expected to have prepared (read/watched/completed) for each day of class. This schedule is subject to
change as the course progresses. Assignments and material covered can – and very likely will – change
throughout the semester. For the most up to date information on assignments, regularly check the course
Canvas: my primary communication with you will be through Canvas announcements.
R, June 4: Day 1: Syllabus and Course Expectations
F, June 5:
M, June 8: Unit 1 (Theory) Due
T, June 9: End of refundable add/drop period.
W, June 10:
R, June 11: Unit 2 (Disease) Due
F, June 12:
M, June 15:
T, June 16: Unit 3 (Cannibalism) Due
W, June 17:
R, June 18:
F, June 19: Unit 4 (Slasher) Due
M, June 22: EXAM 1
T, June 23:
W, June 24:
R, June 25: Unit 5 (Dystopia) Due
F, June 26:
M, June 29:
T, June 30: Unit 6 (Identity) Due
W, July 1:
R, July 2:
F, July 3: Unit 7 (Witch) Due
M, July 6:
T, July 7:
W, July 8: Unit 8 (Monster) Due
R, July 9: Last day of class
July 10/11: Final Exam (TBA)
The syllabus is subject to change with advance notice.
Your continued enrollment in this course indicates your agreement to the policies in the syllabus.
                                                                                                        5


Addendum: Top Hat
We will be using the Top Hat (www.tophat.com) classroom response system for this class. You will be
able to submit answers to questions and your discussion contributions using smartphones, tablets, and
laptops.
You can visit the Top Hat Overview
(https://success.tophat.com/s/article/Student-Top-Hat-Overview-and-Getting-Started-Guide) within the
Top Hat Success Center which outlines how you will register for a Top Hat account, as well as providing
a brief overview to get you up and running on the system.
An email invitation will be sent to you, but if don’t receive this email, you can register by simply visiting
our course website: app.tophat.com/e/435076
Note: our Course Join Code is 435076
Top Hat will require a paid subscription, and a full breakdown of all subscription options available can be
found here: www.tophat.com/pricing.
Should you require assistance with Top Hat at any time, due to the fact that they require specific user
information to troubleshoot these issues, please contact their Support Team directly by way of email
(support@tophat.com), the in app support button, or by calling 1-888-663-5491.
                                                                                                             6
