                                                1 of 10
                                  UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                COCKRELL SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING
               DEPARTMENT OF CIVIL, ARCHITECTURAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
                              ARCHITECTURAL ENGINEERING PROGRAM
Course Syllabus
ARE 320K: Introduction to Design 1
Fall Semester 2018
UT Unique # 15020
MWF 12-3pm
and
UT Unique # 15025
T,Th 12:30-4:30pm
F 12-1
CLASSROOM:
ECJ 3.104 / 3.106 Datum Design Lab
ECJ 1.204 Friday Lecture Series (12-1p)
INSTRUCTOR:
Professor Gregory Brooks (UT Senior Lecturer)
Office: ECJ 5.432
Office Hours: By appointment, and 1/2 hour before class each day.
Instructor Telephone/Text: (512) 659-8083
Instructor Email: gregorybrooks@mail.utexas.edu
Instructor Website: www.utgb.info
TEACHING ASSISTANTS:
Cade Osborne
TA Email: cade@cdoengineering.com
TA Office Hours: During studio hours and by appointment.
COURSE BLOG:
www.aestudio.info
UT ArchE JOB POSTS BLOG:
https://utarchejobs.wordpress.com/


                                                    2 of 10
COURSE DESCRIPTION: ARE 320K 'INTRODUCTION TO DESIGN 1'
                  (Part 1 of a required 2-course sequence)
Introduction to current (architectural) engineering design issues, design concepts, principles, and
problem-solving approaches.
Nine laboratory hours a week for one semester.
Prerequisite: Credit or registration for Architectural Engineering 217.
COURSE OBJECTIVE
To teach the integration of architecture + engineering + construction concepts during the early
stages of the building design process.
ACADEMIC / LEARNING GOALS:
A. An understanding of the current profession of architectural engineering (recent history, firms
and projects).
B. Critical-thinking skills - an understanding that design problems have multiple solutions - how to
generate multiple solutions and choose the best answer.
C. Problem solving skills, particularly the engineering aspects of an architectural project, including
artistic concepts, site and cultural issues, structural, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, facade
technology, energy and sustainability issues.
D. Collaboration tools, preparing students to be productive members of a building design and
construction team.
E. Communication skills: develop verbal skills, writing skills, sketching, computer drawing, model-
making (physical and digital), time-management and productivity skills, all necessary for a career
in architectural engineering.
F. Be exposed to many aspects of the profession, which will help each student to better decide
on their own future academic and professional direction.
COURSE CALENDAR:
See image on next page.
This calendar is also available on the course web-site.


3 of 10

                                                    4 of 10
SEMESTER OUTLINE OF PROJECTS:
(individual student work, unless noted otherwise)
A. First Principles Project (9 weeks)
Weekly seminars focusing on a different fundamental aspect of design each week.
- Sketching
- Preliminary design methods with digital tools.
- Architecture theory, design.
- Climate design.
- Structure: gravity system.
- Structure: lateral system.
- Mechanical system.
- Water and Electric systems.
- Construction technologies.
First half of week: basic principles.
Second half of week: students apply these principles to an example project.
Design tools: see List of Supplies (at end of this document) + SketchUp and Revit.
B. Semester Project (6 weeks)
Topic: Compact mid-rise tower.
Now familiar with First Principles, student will individually design a building and it’s systems and
model the project in Revit. PDF package of drawings is due on Last Class Day.
Design tools: Sketching and Revit.
C. AEWorldMap Project (ongoing during semester)
www.aeworldmap.com
Research of contemporary architecture and related professional team.
AEWorldMap authored entries and presentation to class.
This project is begun during 1st week of class, but individual student deadlines are scheduled
throughout the semester.
Tools: web and library research, Wordpress blog.


                                                  5 of 10
MATERIALS / SUPPLIES:
Each student is expected to bring the following items to the beginning of the 2nd week of class:
a. Small sketchbook for chronological class journal.
b. USB memory device with student name and contact information taped on it.
c. A few #2 pencils and a sharpener. (no mechanical pencils please).
d. White plastic Engineering scale (6 sided).
e. White plastic Architectural scale (6 sided).
f. Roll of 12” wide WHITE tracing paper. (no yellow tracing paper).
g. Roll of drafting tape.
h. Medium size drafting triangle (metal or plastic).
i. X-acto knife and one pack of #11 blades.
j. Small bottle of Elmer’s Glue All (not ‘School Glue’).
k. Lock for student locker in studio.


                                                  6 of 10
REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS:
Ching, Francis. ‘Building Construction Illustrated’ - 5th Edition. Published by John Wiley and
Sons, Inc.
ISBN: 978-1-118-45834-1.
Related to learning goals beginning Week #02.
SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL READING:
Slade, Ron. ‘Sketching for Engineers and Architects.’ Published by Routledge, 2016.
ISBN: 978-1-138-92540-3 (hardback).
(Required for ARE320L).
Ching, Francis. ‘Architectural Graphics’- 6th Edition. Published by Van Nostrand Reinhold (VNR).
ISBN 978-1-119-03566-4.
Related to class discussion beginning Week #01.
Sketching exercises based on Chapters 10, 5, 6.
Pfammater, Ulrich. ’Building the Future.’ Published by Prestel, 2008.
ISBN 978-3-7913-3926-9.
Related to class lectures beginning Week #01.
General reference related to History of Innovation.
Ching, Onouye, Zuberbuhler. ‘Building Structures Illustrated’. Published by John Wiley and Sons,
Inc.
ISBN 978-0-470-18785-2.
Related to class discussion beginning Week #07.
Highly recommended for any student planning to specialize in structural engineering.


                                                   7 of 10
GRADED COURSE ACTIVITIES AND PERCENTAGE OF GRADE:
Attendance                                           10              Cumulative.
In-class Productivity/Communication                  10              Assessed at end of semester.
Quiz: History of Innovation                          5
Quiz: AEWorldMap                                     5
AEWorldMap Posts                                     5               Students will be assigned specific
                                                                     deadlines for weekly presentation.
First Principles seminars / example project          30              Students will be graded weekly
                                                                     based on understanding and
                                                                     project progress.
Semester Project
     -   Site + Architecture                         15
     -   Structure                                   10
     -   MEP                                         10
Project Grades and Final Grades will utilize +/- additions (Ex: B+)
GRADE EVALUATIONS:
Grading in a design studio is different from other courses. Project grades are based on each
student's understanding of course material as exhibited in the final products of each assignment.
Asking for help with a project:
Each student is expected to ask for assistance when needed, and engage in problem-solving
discussions with their peers, the TA and the instructor. The TA or instructor may be approached
at any time during class for assistance, or you can schedule additional time to sit down privately
to solve a design problem with either the TA or the instructor.
'A' Grades:
Only students who exhibit exceptional effort and strong design skill level will get an ‘A’ grade.
'B' Grades:
Completing the assignments with above average effort and skill level is rewarded by a ‘B’ grade.
'C' Grades and lower:
Projects that are late, incomplete or show only average effort and skill will lead to a ‘C’ grade or
lower.
To check on your overall grade during the semester:
Intermittent overall grade status will be available upon request but must be understood to be an
estimate. Final grades are available only near the end of the semester as your work will be
compared to all other student efforts over the entire semester.


                                                    8 of 10
CLASS ATTENDANCE:
Class attendance is used to determine the course grade. Students are expected to be on-time, to
attend every class session, and should not leave class early unless approved by the instructor.
Lateness or absence can be excused if the student sends an email to the instructor before the
start of class, stating their reason.
UT policy regarding religious holidays:
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence
as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence.
IN-CLASS PRODUCTIVITY / COMMUNICATION:
Students are expected to contribute to a productive, professional working environment in the
studio/classroom. Students are expected to help each other during studio, participate in class
discussions, and show progress regularly to the TA and instructor. Students are expected to
clean up their workspace at the end of each class day.
GRADE REDUCTION FOR NON-PROFESSIONAL BEHAVIOR IN STUDIO.
Professional courtesy and behavior is required during class, and grade reductions will occur after
2 recorded infractions. Examples of non-professional behavior include:
- Texting, or other personal use of digital devices (phones, tablets, etc.) during class-time.
- Use of class-time or university equipment for non-studio-related assignments during class-time.
- Disruptive or negative behavior during class-time.
Students will receive a verbal warning the first time this is a problem. If the problem continues a
second time, an email warning will be issued by the instructor with an offer to discuss the
problem. Any additional instances will result in a one-step reduction of the student's final grade.
For example, due to a third instance, a student's final grade is reduced from A- to B+ and so on.
DEADLINES:
Deadlines for projects are included on the Calendar (see last page of this syllabus). Minor
adjustments are often made to deadlines by the instructor in order to maintain a balanced
workload for the studio. If a deadline is changed, students will be notified in class, via email and
on the class blog.
Work that is due in which the rest of the students in the class or student team are dependent on,
will receive all or nothing credit. Otherwise, work due to the instructor will be down-graded one-
half grade each day of the week that it is late. Credit for projects turned in late due to non-
scholastic reasons may be negotiated with the instructor provided that an agreed upon proof of
the reason is provided by the student for accountability.
EMAIL / CLASS BLOG ENTRIES:
Email and/or the class blog (www.aestudio.info) will be used by the instructor to announce project
clarifications, modifications or tips. Students are expected to check email daily and are expected
to subscribe to the class blog.
STUDENT PROJECTS / TEACHING EXAMPLES:
Some projects or assignments may be kept by the instructor for use as future teaching examples,
public exhibits, or accreditation purposes. Students may make arrangements to pick up any such
materials upon graduation, or once the materials are no longer needed by their academic dept.


                                                    9 of 10
COURSE / INSTRUCTOR EVALUATIONS:
An evaluation of the course and instructor will be conducted at the end of the semester using the
approved UT Course/Instructor evaluation forms.
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR DISABILITIES:
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (Videophone:
512-410-6644) or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/ .
HONOR CODE:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
For additional information related to Scholastic Dishonesty, see the Dean of students’ website
and University General Information Catalog at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ and
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-
conduct/.
Examples of what constitutes plagiarism in this course would be:
- Presenting written work or professional photography of others in research work / website posts,
without giving credit to the source (website, text, author or photographer).
- Presenting the design of a project which has been developed by another person, ie: literal
copying of overall design or component design without acknowledging such direct reference.
- Copying an assignment, quiz or test answer from another student.
UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS - DROP POLICY FOR LONG SESSIONS:
From the 1st through the 12th class day, an undergraduate student can drop a course via the web
and receive a refund, if eligible. From the 13th through the university’s academic drop deadline, a
student may Q drop a course with approval from the Dean, and departmental advisor.
CLASS WEB SITES AND STUDENT PRIVACY:
Web-based, password-protected class sites will be associated with all academic courses taught
at the University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information
that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging
in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, electronic class rosters will be a
component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class
rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Bldg, Room 1.
For information on restricting directory information, see the General Information Catalog or go to:
https://directory.utexas.edu/faq.php


                                                    10 of 10
EMERGENCY EVACUATION RECOMMENDATIONS:
(from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ )
- Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside (across the bridge).
- Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
- Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
- In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Dept., The University of
Texas at Austin Police Dept., or Fire Prevention Services office.
- Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) 512 – 232-5050. For more information visit the BCAL
website: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/
- Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
REFERENCE FOR ADDITIONAL UNIVERSITY POLICIES:
All other university policies not explicitly included on this syllabus can be found on the General
Information Catalog: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/.
