                            Psychology of Race & Racism
        EDP 354J Unique-10450/AFR 372D-1 Unique-30655
                                               Fall 2018
       ***YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR ALL THE MATERIAL IN THIS SYLLABUS***
 Instructor:          Dr. Germine Awad                   Office           Th 11-12
                                                         hours:
 Office:              SZB 506H
 Phone:               471-0526                                            Other times by
 Email:               gawad@austin.utexas.edu                             appointment
 Lecture Time:         TTH    9:30-11 UTC 1.104
 Teaching Assistant:         Email:                                     Office hours:
                                                                         By appointment only
 Required Texts: Smedley, A. (2012). Race in North America: The Evolution of a
                    Worldview (4th Ed.) Boulder: Westview Press. ISBN:0-8133-4554-3
                    Gould, S. J. (1996). The mismeasure of man. (2nd Ed.). New York:
                    Kite & Bernard (2016).The Psychology of Prejudice and Discrimination (3rd
                    Ed.) by New York, NY: Routledge. ISBN: 978-1-138-94754-2.
Course Description:
This course reviews the history and evolution of the construct of race as a psychological and social
phenomenon. While the course will be largely social psychological in nature, the insidiousness of
race in practically every sphere of life necessitates a multidisciplinary approach. As such, in
addition to readings from psychology, students will also be exposed to ideas in the areas of
anthropology, sociology, and biology. The course will emphasize a theoretical and conceptual
approach toward understanding the psychology of racial thinking.
Grades will be based on the cumulative number of points earned in the class from the following
elements:
       Exams:                                         300 points total
       Pop Quizzes:                                   70 points total
       Journals:                                      60 points total
       Critique papers:                               50 points total
       Personal reflection paper:                     50 points
       Participation:                                 50 points total
                                                      Total Points = 580
                                                                                                   1


The following scale will be used to determine final grades:
                                          540-580 points = A                   522-539 points = A-
       504-521 points = B+                481-503 points = B                   464-480 points = B-
       447-463 points = C+                423-446 points = C                   406-422 points = C-
                                          348-405 points = D
                                          347 or less = F
Exams: There will be three exams covering information provided in the lecture and the text. The exams
will consist of short answer, essay, and multiple choice questions. Each exam is worth 100 points. The
final will have a cumulative section.
Pop Quizzes:
There will be 9 unannounced pop quizzes given in class. These quizzes will have 5 short answer questions
based on reading and lecture material. Furthermore, the quizzes serve as practice items for the exams.
Quizzes are worth 10 points each and your two lowest quiz scores (including zeros) will be dropped. There
will be no make-ups for quizzes.
Journals:
Students are expected to maintain a journal and each journal must be at least 2 double-spaced pages long.
The entries are to reflect your personal observations of issues related to the course, your reaction to this
information, and reflections on what you have learned. Journals are worth 20 points each. Journals must
be TYPED. Papers must be in Times New Roman 12 point font, default (1”) margins.
Critique Papers:
Students will be asked to write two critique papers throughout the course of the semester. The first critique
will be based on your analysis of a movie that has ethnic, racial, and/or cultural themes. The second paper
will be based on a newspaper, internet article (from a reliable source), journal article, or other similar media
that address some racial, ethnic, and/or cultural concept discussed in the class. Specific criteria related to
these papers will be posted on Canvas. These critiques are worth 25 points each. Critique papers must be
TYPED. Papers must be in Times New Roman 12 point font, default margins.
Personal Reflection paper:
You will be required to complete a 5-7 page reflection paper in this course. This paper should summarize
your personal experience in the course. Journals should serve as a good source of data about how you were
feeling about material in the course. This paper should include what you felt was the most important part of
the class, a reflection on your personal growth, and a reflection on the course material and discussions. This
paper must be typed. Papers must be in Times New Roman 12 point font, default margins.
Attendance & Participation:
You are expected to attend and be prepared for every class period. Class discussion is usually based on the
readings in the course. Therefore, you are expected to be an INFORMED participant in class discussion.
You are allowed three unexcused absences for the course. After the fourth absence, you must provide valid
documentation explaining your absence. This documentation must be approved by Dr. Awad. More than 3
unexcused absences will affect your final grade (e.g., if you are currently getting a B in the course when
you attain 4 absences, your grade will drop to C):
     Fourth Unexcused Absence: Loss of one letter grade (The best grade you can make in the course is a “B”)
     Fifth Unexcused Absence: Loss of two letter grades (The best grade you can make in the course is a “C”)
     Sixth Unexcused Absence: Loss of three letter grades (The best grade you can make in the course is a “D”)
     Seventh Unexcused Absence: Automatic grade of “F”
                                                                                                               2


 One make-up exam will be offered for students with excused absences for an exam date. To obtain an excused
 absence, you must:
            v Provide a written note with your name, and the day you will be/ were absent, verification for the
                 absence (e.g., doctor’s visit documentation*, sports meet, class field trip, obituary).
                      o For illnesses or doctor’s visits, the physician’s note must state that you were physically
                           unable to attend class or it was medically unadvisable for you to do so.
            v If you miss class due to an emergency, you must email Dr. Awad with a note explaining the absence
                 no more than 48 hours after the missed class day.
            v You must make-up the exam by the next class day after the absence (or when you are physically able
                 to attend class).
       Religious Holidays:
                 Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
                 examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will
                 be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is
                 the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least
                 fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy
                 day.
Policies
Laptops & Cell Phones
       Laptop use is not permitted during class time. Cell phones should be turned off or put on a QUIET vibrate or
       silent mode. No texting during class please.
UT Honor Code
       The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
       opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
       integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
 Academic Integrity
       You and other students are expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in
       scholastic work" undertaken at the University (Sec. 11-801, Institutional Rules on Student Services and
       Activities). This is a very basic expectation that is further reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a
       minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost
       honesty, which requires you to: (1)acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
       (2) complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in
       preparing them; (3) follow instructions for assignments and exams, (4) observe the standards of your academic
       discipline and (5) avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
Students found guilty of academic dishonesty (including all forms of cheating) will receive a grade of 0 (note the
academic dishonesty policy refers to all work and tests in the course, not just exams). For further information about
academic dishonesty, please visit: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Canvas:
       This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
       created for each course. The readings that do not come out of the texts will be posted on Canvas. You will be
       responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. As with all
       computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notification
       of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late
       work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will make an
       adjustment if it occurs close to the due date. Canvas is available at http://courses.utexas.edu. Support is
       provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm, so plan accordingly.
 University Email Notification Policy:
       All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
       student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
       expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
       communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail
       be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for
                                                                                                                        3


      updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.In this course
      e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your e-
      mail regularly for class work and announcements.
Disabilities:
      Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that documents the disability
      from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or
      471-4641) TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in
      each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
      Five business days before an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that
      will be needed. See website below for more information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Emergency Evacuation Policy and Other Emergency Instructions:
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
      fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
      nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
      class.
      In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at Austin Police
      Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
      Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
      Behavior Concerns Advice Line: Use this resource to help fellow UT members about which you have
      concerns BCAL: 512-232-5050
CARE Counseling
      CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to need support when
      dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are available to help
      with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the
      College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB
      212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave
      a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on
      Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM. You will check-in at the College of Education’s Student Division in
      SZB 216, and they will let Danie know you’re waiting. All services are confidential. None of your
      information will be shared without your written consent. Come by and see us, we are here to listen.
                                         Tentative Course Schedule
  Approx.                                      Readings                                                Assignments &
   Date                                                                                                  Information 4


      Introduction, Famous Last words
 8/30
       Introduction to Stereotypes, Prejudice &
      Discrimination by Kite & Whitley ( ch 1)*
      “The Noble Savage” and Science (Guthrie, ch1 reading)*
      Beyond Black/White: The Racisms of Our Time
 9/4
      (Martinez Reading)*
      Asian Americans? (Sonia Shah)*
      Going Beyond Black and White, Hispanics in the
      Census Pick Other (Mireya Navarro)*
      Some Theoretical Considerations (Smedley ch.1)
 9/6
      Etymology of the term “race” (Smedley ch. 2)
      Racial Variation and the perception of Human
      differences (Molnar, ch. 1)*
      Does Race Exist? A Proponent’s Perspective (2001) by
      George W. Gill (BB reading)*
 9/11 Does Race Exist? An Antagonist’s Perspective (2001) by
      C. Loring Brace ( BB reading)*
      The Geometer of Race (1994) by Stephen Jay Gould        9/14- Last day to drop a class
      (BB reading)*                                           for a possible refund.
      Terms of Estrangement (1994) by James Shreeve
 9/13 (reading)*
      Race and Color (1994) by Jared Diamond (reading)*
 9/18 Video
9/20                          Exam 1
      History of Race and Racism                              Journal 1 due
      The Problem of the Color Line (Jones ch. 2 )*
 9/25
      Attacking the Problem (Jones ch. 3)*
      Individual Differences & Prejudice ( Kite & Whitley, ch
      6)
 9/27 Old Fashioned & Contemporary forms of Prejudice
      (Kite & Whitley, ch. 5)
      Affirmative Action
 10/2 Ten Myths About Affirmative Action by Scott Plous
      (Reading)*
      Antecedents of the Racial Worldview (Smedley ch. 3)        Critique Paper 1 DUE
 10/4 Comparing Slave Systems: The significance of “racial”
      servitude (Smedley ch. 6)
      Understanding Prejudice and Stereotypes
      How Psychologists study prejudice and discrimination
 10/9
      (Kite & Whitely, ch. 2)
      Social Categorization and Stereotypes (Kite & Whitely,
10/11
      ch 3)
      Development of Prejudice in Children (Kite & Whitely,
10/16
      ch 7)
                                                                                     5


  Approx.                                Readings                             Assignments &
   Date                                                                        Information
              The Social Context of Prejudice (Kite & Whitely, ch 8)       Journal 2 Due
              From Prejudice to Discrimination (Kite & Whitely, ch
  10/18
              9)
  10/23       Video
  10/25                                Exam 2
              Experience of Discrimination (Kite & Whitely ch 10)    11/1-Last day to drop a class or
              Was That Racist? New York Times*                         change to pass/fail option
10/30-11/1
              (https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/19/us/was-
              that-racist.html)
              A Different Order of Being: 19th Century Science and
   11/6       the Ideology of Race (Smedley ch. 10)
              American Polygeny and Craniometry before Darwin
11/8-11/13    (Gould ch. 2)
              Measuring Heads (Gould ch. 3)
              The heriditarian theory of IQ (Gould ch. 5)
  11/15                                                                   JOURNAL 3 DUE
              Video
  11/20
  11/22       THANKGSGIVING BREAK
              Tim Wise: A White Journalist’s Critical Perspectives
              Motive and Opportunity: The Difference Between White
              and Others*
  11/27       The Trouble With Tolerance by Tim Wise (reading)*        Critique Paper 2 DUE
              Membership Has Its Privileges by Tim Wise (reading)*
              White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack
              (McIntosh)*
              Can’t We All Just Get Along? Are There Any
              Possible Solutions?
              Dismantling the Folk Idea of Race: Transformation of
  11/29       an Ideology (Smedley ch. 14)
              Reducing Prejudice & Discrimination (Kite & Whitely,
              ch 13)
              Video
   12/4                                                               Personal Reflection Due
   12/6
                                    Final Exam
     Note. This schedule should be considered tentative. I reserve the right to
     take more or less time on topics. You will be given ample notice if an exam day
     is changed. *Readings available on Canvas
                                                                                            6
