                            Fall 2019
Course Number:              ARC 561R, 696 / LAR 696
Course Title:               Advanced Architectural Design / Advanced Design Studio
                            Speculations on Water: Infrastructure and Institution
Instructors:                David Heymann / Hope Hasbrouck
Unique Numbers:
Advanced Studios:           Advanced Design Studios explore pressing issues in current cultural
                            discourse through design. The issues have both timeless and current
                            components, as the question of value and meaning – and the
                            structure and interaction of the disciplines (itself one of the pressing
                            issues) – continue their constant evolution. Consequently this
                            Advanced Design Studios requires that you take a thesis-based
                            approach to arguing for the value of your proposal. In the Advanced
                            Design Studios competency in design is not the end, but the means.
                            Your proposal cannot be excused on the circumstances of the brief,
                            but must take part in a larger discourse of the histories and theories
                            of architecture and landscape architecture, into which you must
                            frame your proposals. You must make a convincing argument for
                            the improved structure of the world that your proposed construction
                            would enact in order for your work to succeed.
Cotopaxi volcano from Quito                  Chand Baori Stepwell, Rajastan, India, begun ca. 800
The Inquiry:                Speculations surrounding waters’ impact on the form of Quito’s
                            public realm fifty years in the future.
                            Speculations on Water: Infrastructure and Institution
The Brief:                  Student teams will speculate on future water infrastructure and
                            growth in Quito, the largest city in Ecuador. Quito, to which we will


                    travel for a week, is growing rapidly. The only source of fresh water
                    supporting Quito and surrounding territories is the shrinking ice
                    caps on the volcanoes that surround the city. This is not a regional
                    planning exercise but a fine-grained exploration of designed
                    changes to the public realm.
                    The intent of each teams proposal will be supported by a detailed
                    study of the conditions along a transect from the Pinchincha, the
                    volcano directly over Quito, down to Tena, in the Amazon
                    rainforest, where the Napo River ends Quito’s land reach.
                    The reciprocity between the city’s need for a water infrastructure
                    and how that form transforms the shape of the city, is the site for
                    engagement. As in the example of an Indian stepwell at the center
                    of a Rajastani village, each team must propose both the
                    infrastructure related to water and a social, political, or cultural
                    institution associated with its management, and then speculate on
                    how these changes will positively determine the city in 50 years.
Course Description: The amount of new construction around the globe in the last
                    twenty years staggers the imagination. Landing in Panama City, for
                    example, you see a newly man-made landscape (composed of
                    alterations at every scale) stretching into the sky and to the horizon.
                    Little of it was there a quarter century ago, and almost none of it is
                    cohesively imagined. The same is true of San Paulo, Austin, Berlin,
                    Beijing, Melbourne – and Quito. Everywhere this development is
                    tied to a loosening of strictures — on lending, zoning, planning,
                    approval, oversight, tradition, propriety, political financing,
                    environmental impact, and quality of construction — and a
                    triumphant international real estate market, to which, let’s be clear,
                    architecture and landscape architecture have willingly (mostly) been
                    handmaidens, their voices increasingly mute or marginalized.
                    It’s perhaps the scale and uncertain control of this desperate, blind
                    impulse to build that makes the consequence to you as architect
                    and landscape architect so profound. You can proudly work all day
                    on the perfect detail – a door jamb, a dry-stacked retaining wall –
                    then walk home, eyes open to the ever-metastasizing world actually
                    happening around you, and wonder if, really, good design at the
                    scale we (mostly) serve or the impact we (mostly) have makes any
                    difference at all beyond the internal discussions of our fields.
                    But it has also regularly been the case in our histories that the
                    design disciplines have not merely been servile to what is, but have
                    also served by speculating radically on what should be. These
                    speculations have often had profound consequence (as in, say, Tony
                    Garnier’s Une Cité Industrielle), or have at least stood as evidence of
                    principle (as in, say, the work of John Hedjuk). This studio asks you –


                                          working in 2-person architect / landscape architect teams – to
                                          speculate radically on a positive future. How will you propose the
                                          world to be better in 50 years?
Tony Garnier, Une Cité Industrielle, 1917                       John Hedjuk, Berlin Masque, 1982
                                          The specific means for this speculation is, as described in the brief
                                          above, the proposal of water infrastructure and related institutions:
                                          the discrete constructions that will, by the consequence of their
                                          order and presence, determine the future landscape. Institutions
                                          and infrastructure are like chicken and egg: neither comes first –
                                          and neither is exclusively the domain of either discipline. In your
                                          designs, they must be fundamentally linked as one proposal – the
                                          infrastructure begets the institution; the institution demands the
                                          infrastructure – and for the sake of this studio they must be public.
                                          The subject for your speculation the role of water in the future
                                          growth of Quito, both within its current limits and without. The
                                          specific site is the transect line through the existing city eastward,
                                          from the Pinchincha volcano, which towers over the city’s western
                                          edge, into the Amazon drainage to the east. All of this land is
                                          currently the subject of real estate speculation, much of which is
                                          financed by yet other kinds of speculation: oil in the Ecuadorian
                                          rainforest, mostly, but also international currency (Ecuador uses the
                                          U.S. dollar, which makes it a haven for money to go to ground).
                                          Quito – which we will visit for just over a week – is home to the
                                          most intact Spanish Colonial city in the Western Hemisphere. That
                                          old city (the first UNESCO World Heritage site) is now, of course,
                                          only a small piece of a vast urban expanse — 1.6 million inhabitants
                                          — growing ever outward. Over the last few hundred years, Quito’s
                                          expansion occurred north and south along a narrow hanging valley
                                          originally settled by the Inca. That valley is distinctly defined, bound
                                          on its long, steep west and east sides by the Pichincha volcano and
                                          an uplift ridge, and on its narrow north and south ends by
                                          mountains and an (essentially uninhabitable) valley that protects


          the city from the ash of the massive and iconic Cotopaxi volcano,
          visible to the south of the city.
The Site: Quito’s gradual north / south expansion was traditionally defined by
          large and iconic monuments and monumental buildings, alternating
          with and public voids – squares and parks – that once gave the city
          both a rhythmic scale and a physical identity. But the current
          explosive growth, driven by an energy economy, continued
          movement from country to city, foreign investment, etc., lacks any
          plan that respects that older order, and such a plan may not, in fact,
          be possible.
          There are several reasons for this. First, the geophysical limits that
          defined the traditional city’s domain have been reached (a new
          subway line has just been completed along its length: expanding
          this further is considered irrelevant). But the city wants to grow
          even faster, as money pours in to do so. Second, a new, bigger
          airport was recently completed in the large, adjacent valley to the
          east, which has realigned how the city operates. This valley sits at
          lower altitude (the Inca tended to build above the malaria line),
          where it is often less cloudy. Aircraft approached the old airport by
          descending along the length of Quito, which restricted building
          heights to avoid collisions; now that restriction had been lifted, and
          a new scale of construction dwarfs the old order, as towers sprout
          everywhere. Third, a rapidly expanding upper-middle-class in Quito
          has brought with it a desire to consider city life in a different way,
          which has brought about massive suburbanization.
          This has occurred to the east of Quito, in the same valley in which
          the new airport was built (growth to the west is limited by the
          severity of the massive Pinchincha ridge, which also regularly erupts
          on its west face). That valley, centered about the towns of Cumbaya
          and Tumbaco, is rapidly transforming in a quilt-like pattern, as its
          haciendas – large, family-held agricultural estates – are being
          purchased and subdivided. Though much of it is still agricultural
          (Ecuador’s most lucrative product after oil and bananas is roses,
          which are grown east and south of Quito, and shipped around the
          world), so too was most of old Quito. Like the Hill Country west of
          Austin, this area will soon be city.
          The eastern edge of the Cumbaya valley (on the far side from Quito)
          is formed by the last ridge of the Andes: beyond that, the slope of
          the Amazon drainage begins. While this area (which we will visit for
          3 days) is still mostly cloud and rainforest, it too is in the path of
          Quito’s speculation, connected by a major highway through the
          Papallacta pass, where there is a popular hot springs spa. At the
          bottom of that long slope are a series of towns, like Tena, that mark
          the eastern limit of Quito’s terrestrial reach. Here the Napo River


                begins the system of water movement that, streaming down into
                the Amazon drainage, acts as the highway for the petroleum
                industry from which most of Quito’s wealth is derived.
                But oil is not the only source of revenue or speculation in Ecuador.
                Eco-tourism (and birding in particular) is the third highest economic
                sector after petroleum and agriculture, and growing. This is a
                consequence of a number of factors. First, the range of natural
                environments is astonishingly broad, from the Amazon drainage up
                to the Andes, then down to the Pacific slope, and out to the
                Galapagos. Second, unlike temperate regions, equatorial eco-
                systems tend to be remarkably stabile (daylight length is the same
                all year, and temperature range is limited), which means species
                diversification of fauna and flora is very high, with a tendency
                towards specialization (and, thus, fragility) in evolution. Finally, and
                crucially, one direct consequence of these eco-systems’
                specialization is their fragility. Ecuador is one of the few countries in
                the world in which the right of nature to exist is guaranteed in the
                federal constitution, and this is true of city space as well.
                All of this growth is, of course, made problematic by the need for
                fresh water. Quito’s water supply, and water reserve, is contained in
                the ice caps on the surrounding volcanoes. These ice caps are
                shrinking and at some point their capacity will be outstripped by
                demand. This is not the only water dilemma Quito faces. Much of
                the drinking water in Quito is bought in plastic bottles. The city does
                little to reclaim wastewater. It has no public space relationship to
                the rivers that do course through it (the Spaniards already paved
                over major drainages beginning in the 1500’s). Volcanic ash can
                quickly cause the entire storm sewage system to clog (when the
                Pinchincha erupts, people quickly take to the streets with brooms).
The Assignment: Given this context, the assignment for this Advanced Design Studio
                (in which, again, you will be working in 2 person teams) has, as its
                subject, water. Though water conveyance, collection, treatment,
                and storage is one issue – and you have to consider water collection
                in some form: rainwater, surface sheet flow, ground water from
                springs or wells, reclaimed waste water – it is not limiting. The
                project might arise considering the transportation of water from
                elsewhere across your site by pipelines or aqueducts (the
                opportunities will arise by elevation and orientation). In addition,
                you have to consider wastewater reclamation, new waste water,
                erosion, flooding, human safety, water quality. And, really, these
                technical concerns are the means by which to address a more
                fundamental problem: the formation of the public realm.
                The project has three simple variables.


                           The first variable is the location. Teams will subdivide the territory
                           into distinct units related to water and then claim a unit for change.
                           The second variable is the program. Each team must identify a
                           social, political or cultural institution relevant to the purpose,
                           presence, and phenomenon of water in the site and city. Each team
                           will develop a specific function with regard to this larger
                           programmatic trajectory, then give form to all the constituent parts
                           that advance the institutional mission and be transformative of the
                           units selected: an example of which is a step well, which, while
                           guaranteeing a supply of clean drinking water, also serves as public
                           space, theater, palace, laundry, public offices, etc. The function
                           must be commensurate in scale with what is expected of an
                           Advanced Studio (i.e., larger than a pool or spa!). That said, function
                           in this studio is NOT the justification for form. Sustainability, as you
                           should be aware, is partly responsible for this approach, as the idea
                           of program-driven form — that hallmark of the Modern — slips into
                           the past. Sustainable urban consequence is the justification for form
                           in this studio.
                           The third variable is time. The proposal of today establishes the
                           Quito of 2070. The expansion of Quito, must be beautiful, and
                           teams must demonstrate what will be. That’s the actual design
                           problem. This project is driven by cultural identity and theories of
                           value, not program. It is speculative, and meant to be part of a long
                           history of influential proposals, which includes the speculations of
                           Piero della Francesca, Boullée, Ledoux, Garnier, Melnikov, Tatlin,
                           Speer, Taut, Le Corbusier, Wright, Archigram, Super Studio, Krier,
                           and OMA, among many, many others. You must place your project
                           in that history.
                           The studio will be assisted by Professor Maria Isabel Paz at the
                           University of San Francisco in Quito [USFQ], who will join us for
                           many of the daily trips in Quito.
Crucial Note About Travel: Read this section carefully. This is a travelling studio: we will visit
                           Quito and areas just to its east, departing Austin on Saturday,
                           September 28th and returning Sunday, October 6th (most flights
                           depart around midnight on Saturday). All of the areas we will travel
                           to in Ecuador are Category 4, the safest of the State Department’s
                           listings for Restricted Regions. This travel will require additional cost
                           to the student beyond tuition, fees, and supplies. As of this writing
                           the approximate additional cost to students will range somewhere
                           between $900 and $1,350. A number of variables control this
                           additional cost, including airfare, which cannot be purchased until
                           after the studio lottery; hotel costs, which cannot be established
                           until the number of participants is set; and the amount of Mebane
                           funding available, which has yet to be determined. Please note that


                         the above high and low figures already include assumed Mebane
                         funding of between $700 and $900: this amount is traditional, but
                         not guaranteed.
                         You must have a valid passport to travel; it must be valid for six
                         months after the date of our return. Please check. If you are not a
                         US citizen you must verify if entry visas for Ecuador are required of
                         you. Prior to the studio lottery you must verify that you can obtain
                         those visas in a timely manner. You will need to obtain any
                         necessary visas on your own, but must wait until the studio lottery
                         result to proceed.
                         Finally, Quito is 9,500 feet above sea level. Note that high elevation
                         can have adverse physical effects, and may not be recommended
                         for certain health conditions. Verify with your doctor if there are
                         any reasons why you should not take part in this travel prior to the
                         studio lottery.
                         Note that participation in this travel studio is voluntary. Most of
                         Ecuador (and all of the areas we will be in) is currently listed as a
                         Level 4 Restricted Region, which is the least dangerous of the
                         Restricted Region categories. The University of Texas policy with
                         regard to Restricted Regions, which must be posted on official
                         documents for this program, is:
UT Liability Disclaimer:  No University of Texas at Austin student, faculty, or staff can be
                         required to travel to a Restricted Region. Any participation in travel
                         to a Restricted Region is strictly voluntary, and the traveler assumes
                         full responsibility for all risks associated with this travel.
                         See also UT Risk Notification Statement below
Format:                  The studio will be broken into three parts: a four week session
                         during which we undertake analysis and precedent exercises, as
                         well as exercises to form groups; a week-long trip to Quito for site
                         exploration; and an eight week development of a group proposals.
                         Additional exercises will be undertaken aside from this work,
                         including the development of a library of prototypes.
One Voice or Many:       This particular studio project favors group-of-two authorship over
                         collective apprehension, with the advantages and shortcomings that
                         entails, both to you as a young designers, and to the designs you
                         make. You must think about and be sensitive to the many
                         communities affected by your proposal, but for this project you are
                         very much the author, accountable for the world you propose. The
                         nature of the criticism in this studio will be similar. We will be giving
                         you our opinions in as unvarnished a form as possible, but we are
                         also not experts on the communities in which you will be working.


                   The purpose of our criticism therefore is to help you sharpen your
                   own particular world-views, and how your design proposes a better
                   world as you see it. Again, there are advantages and disadvantages
                   to this approach, but it is the chosen pedagogical model of this
                   studio.
Required Material: What is typically required in design studio along with items
                   necessary for hand drawing and modeling (a parallel bar will be
                   required). The SANAA rule will also apply in this studio: “if you do
                   not have a model, [or drawings we can draw over] you do not have
                   anything to talk about.”
Review Culture:    We will have frequent pin-ups, and reviews with visitors. We are
                   firm believers in the value of a critical review culture. In that culture
                   the basis of professionalism is honesty. Honest public assessment of
                   your own work can be a difficult experience. Review dynamics have
                   an element of instability, and criticism can often seem personal.
                   This is sometimes justified on the basis that developing a tough skin
                   prepares you for practice, though that’s hollow: two wrongs do not
                   make a right. But please note that a review, even very critical,
                   should be a dialogue that you, as the author of the work, should
                   take some control over. It should not be a passive experience on
                   your part, either conceptually or actually. This requires a level of
                   dispassionate awareness and communication on your part. What
                   are you trying to accomplish? Why is this meaningful? What do you
                   feel you are succeeding in? What do you understand and not
                   understand? Present well (put yourself in the reviewers’ position
                   before you map out what you want to say), talk back, ask questions,
                   argue your point.
                   If you feel criticism you have received is unwarranted and personal
                   rather than professional, either from us or any visiting critic, do not
                   hesitate to speak with us about it. Note that often reviews do not
                   discuss what you think they should. We admire the particular
                   discourse that happens in reviews (just as we admire the particular
                   discourse that happens in desk crits). It will often seem tangential to
                   your work; but one definition of architecture / landscape
                   architecture is that it is “the activity that architects / landscape
                   architects do,” and one way that a LOT of architecture / landscape
                   architecture happens is by projection in conversation. Your
                   attention to the tangential discussion is as critical as your attention
                   to the direct discussion; the onus is on you to make clear when you
                   do not understand the relationship of what is being said to your
                   work.
                   That said, in this studio you may NOT present a project by describing
                   the chronological development of the design. Please re-read that


                            last sentence, and think about it for a moment. You may design your
                            presentation any other way. A default possibility is to 1. Generally
                            describe the facts of what you are proposing; 2. Describe the
                            reasons you feel the world you are proposing is good given the
                            specifics of the general circumstances (trajectories in site, culture,
                            economy, material culture, etc.); and 3. Referencing the history and
                            theory of architecture / landscape architecture, describe why you
                            believe this is good architecture / landscape architecture.
Required Reading, books:    The Possibility of An Absolute Architecture, Pier Vittorio Aureli (MIT),
                            A Line in the Andes, Felipe Correa [on reserve, Architecture Library]
                            Damero, Alfonso Ortiz [on reserve, Benson Library].
Required Reading, articles: TBA
Adobe:                      We [you will invariably] use Adobe software in this course. When
                            accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you will be
                            prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not required to
                            purchase Creative Cloud services to sign in on our lab computers,
                            but you are required to create a free Adobe ID. That can be done
                            here: https://accounts.adobe.com/
                            STUDIO COURSE GRADING POLICY
                            Grading will be based on four areas of performance:
ambition:                   The degree of ambition in the ideas and undertaking
grasp:                      The understanding of the project at hand, combined with an
                            appropriate process of inquiry
process/effort:             The consistent and rigorous development and abundant testing of
                            ideas
resolution:                 The demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse
                            through representation and designs that responds to a range of
                            critical positions
                            Your work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the
                            semester.
Grading descriptions:       A : excellent work
                            Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness,
                            appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft,
                            and personal development. Student pursues concepts and
                            techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
                            more than complete on all levels.


            B : good work
            Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and
            successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
            presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required issues.
            Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
            excellence.
            C : acceptable work
            Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in
            class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete
            in one or more areas.
            D : poor work
            Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-
            making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level
            appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill
            and knowledge base.
            F : unacceptable work
            Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met.
            Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
            assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
            X : (excused incomplete)
            Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family
            emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate
            cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
            consultation with the Associate Dean and Program Director’s offices
            and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Studio work
            must be completed before the second week of the next design
            semester in which you are enrolling, according to School of
            Architecture policy.
            ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE
            WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE: Attendance is mandatory. Participation in discussions and work in
            studio is expected.
            The minimum penalty for more than three unexcused absences is a
            full letter drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact
            your instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class. A
            student who misses classes or other required activities for the
            observance of a religious holy day should inform me as far in
            advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be
            made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
            absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the
            time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.


ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:      Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University
                         rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
                         including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
                         from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
                         students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
                         dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Judicial
                         Services website for official University policies and procedures on
                         scholastic dishonesty. Please refer to The Role of Faculty in
                         Confronting Scholastic Dishonesty brochure published by Student
                         Judicial Services for information on confronting students who
                         violate scholastic dishonesty policies. For further information, visit
                         the SJS website at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ or call
                         471-2841.
DISABILITIES:            At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who
                         need special accommodations should notify me by presenting a
                         letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities Office.
                         To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be
                         provided; students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or
                         471-4641 TTY.
SECURITY, SAFETY: STUDIO The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a
                         place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of the
                         individual. Please see your instructor if there are any problems
                         (music, visual pollution) that you are unable to resolve on your
                         own. All spraying of fixative, spray paint or any other substance
                         should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a
                         studio that is accessible 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Please keep
                         all exterior doors locked after hours.
UT Risk Notification:    The University of Texas at Austin must review international travel to
                         destinations on the UT Restricted Regions List, as determined by the
                         I OC. Travel to any location on the UT Restricted Regions List
                         involves a certain degree of risk.
                         It is important that travelers UNDERSTAND & CAREFULLY CONSIDER
                         THE FOLLOWING RISKS:
                         The US Embassy nearest your destination may temporarily
                         close/suspend public services for security reasons.
                         The US Embassy nearest your destination may not be able to
                         provide emergency assistance should you require it.
                         If there is a need to evacuate in an emergency, flights maybe
                         suspended and other departure or shelter options in place maybe
                         limited or non-existent.


              Access to hospitals, emergency medical care and medications
              maybe limited or non-existent.
              Should you experience difficulties, the University of Texas at Austin
              and their contracted emergency assistance provider, International
              SOS, may not be in a position to provide you emergency assistance.
              Participation in travel to a UT Restricted Region has inherent risks
              which may include kidnapping or death. These risks can never be
              completely eliminated.
              Risks of travel to your destination may include (but are not limited
              to) dangers to health and personal safety, including possible death
              posed by natural disaster, disease, terrorism, crime, civil unrest,
              and/or violence.
              Additional risks include (but are not limited to) minor and major
              physical injuries, emotional and psychological injuries inflicted
              accidentally or intentionally by others, and/or catastrophic injuries,
              including paralysis and death.
                    There maybe additional health, safety, and security factors that
              have not been brought to your attention by the University of Texas
              at Austin.
              It is HIGHLY RECOMMENDED that you visit and CAREFULLY REVIEW
              the following websites:
              http://world.utexas.edu/risk/travel/policies UT International Travel Policy
              http://world.utexas.edu/risk/resources UT Health & Safety Resources for International Travel
              http://www.utexas.edu/emergency UT Emergency website
              http://www.internationalsos.com International SOS website (member ID:11BSGC000037)
              http://www.travel.state.gov U.S. Department of State website for Travel Advisories and
              consular information sheets for the intended destination
              http://www.cdc.gov U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website for information
              on health issues and recommended vaccinations for travel to intended destination
              http://www.who.int World Health Organization website for information on disease outbreaks
              and emergencies
CONTACT:      heymann@utexas.edu, 512-232-4083
              hhasbrouck@austin.utexas.edu
OFFICE HOURS: By appointment
