ADV 385                                  Semester: Fall 2019
                                         Meeting Time: MW 4:00 pm – 5:30 pm in PAR 201
Media                                    Unique #: 06260
Management
Professor:        Dr. Laura Bright
                  Office: BMC 4.328
                  Phone: (512) 699-8218 (cell)
                  Email: laurabright@utexas.edu
Office Hours: MW 1:30 – 3:00 PM and by appointment
       Course Description                      Course Requirements                    Policies and Resources
1. Course Description                     1. Required Readings                   1. Classroom Policies
2. Course Objectives and                  2. Classroom Expectations                 a. Grading Policies
   Learning Outcomes                      3. Major Course Assignments               b. Policy on late work
3. How to succeed in this                 4. Course Grades                          c. Plagiarism
   course                                 5. Course Schedule                        d. Policy on absences
                                                                                    e. Course Communication
                                                                                 2. University Policies and
                                                                                    Resources
                                                                                    a. UT Honor Code
                                                                                    b. Student Accommodations
                                                                                    c. Accommodations for Religious
                                                                                       Holidays
                                                                                 3. University Resources for
                                                                                    Students
                                                                                    a. Moody College Writing
                                                                                       Support Program
                                                                                    b. Counseling and Mental Health
                                                                                 4. Safety information
                                                                                    a. Behavior concerns advice
                                                                                       line
                                                                                    b. Emergency Planning
                                           COURSE DESCRIPTION
1) Course Description: Media management seeks to teach students how to identify consumer behavior and tailor
the specific media response in the most strategically effective way. This course introduces the theoretical concepts in
media management and the practical applications to specific media strategies. The course teaches students to
articulate the management decisions advertisers face in developing and executing media strategies. Students should
learn how to articulate the strategic process of advertising management, to understand the factors influencing media
management decisions, to strategically evaluate functioning advertising management strategies, and identify,
formulate and defend advertising decisions grounded in media management issues.
                                                                                                                      1


2) Course Learning Outcomes:
    WHAT:          Identify and critically analyze issues related to media management while using a Theory X
                   Practice approach
    HOW:           Students will be introduced to a variety of topics related to media management. Class meetings
                   will feature both theoretical foundations and practical applications of each topic.
    WHAT:          Develop a media plan that addresses a client’s primary business objectives.
    HOW:           Students will form groups and complete a media plan that addresses business objectives for a local
                   Austin business. Their media plan will be presented at the end of the semester.
    WHAT:          Students will creatively address business problems using a variety of media principles.
    HOW:           Students will participate in Media Trends presentation days that focus on theory integration as
                   well as peer evaluation within our student group.
    WHAT:          Define, identify, and research a specific, topic of the student’s choosing related to media that
                   leads to a “Subject Matter Expert (SME)” level of knowledge
    HOW:           Students will research a media topic of their choosing within their group for the Media Trends
                   presentation day. The topic we will be related to the course content covered during the week of
                   your presentation.
3) How to succeed in this course:
         Come Prepared to Participate: Come to class having prepared for the day by reading and be ready to
         discuss the day’s material.
         Collaborate with Classmates: A career path in advertising is driven through collaboration and discussion.
         Working in teams is crucial to brainstorming creative, strategic solutions.
         Give Feedback: Throughout the semester, please give your feedback on how you learn or topics that
         interest you.
                                           COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
1) Required Readings:
              o Stukent “Media Planning Essentials” online textbook and Commspoint software
                         § Online course registration available at: https://home.stukent.com/join/F3F-78E
                         § Please follow Stukent directions for Commspoint tool installation
              o The Course website on Canvas – http://canvas.utexas.edu
              o Readings posted on the course website and/or distributed in class
2) Classroom Expectations:
         Respect your fellow classmates: In this course, we will have several class discussions. Opinions are
         welcomed; however, it is important to remember that others might not hold your same viewpoint.
         Discussions and healthy debates are an important part of the educational process. Please remember to
         respect your classmates and your professor in all classroom discussions. If you are in violation of this
         policy, you may be asked to leave the classroom. If you are asked to leave for behavioral violations, you
         will be counted as absent for the day.
         Know your industry: Students should read blogs, newsletters, or other periodicals that are relevant to the
         class discussion and provide thought-provoking content for class each week. Media is a quickly evolving
         field, and it is crucial to stay on top of new developments.
                                                                                                                    2


        Take full advantage of every opportunity: The University of Texas at Austin and the Moody College of
        Communication provides many wonderful resources to students. You should take advantage of every guest
        speaker, workshop, meeting, etc. that is made available to you. So often these connections and lessons can
        help land you an internship or a job.
3) Major Course assignments:
        Exams: (2 exams – 20% each, total 40%): Students are expected to read all assigned readings. These
        exams will assess what students have learned from course readings, lectures, and in-class activities.
        Client Strategic Plan: (20%): All groups will develop a strategic plan for a local company. The plan will
        feature a short-term and long-term strategy that addresses the business’s primary objectives. More detailed
        assignment sheet to follow.
        Client Strategy Presentation (10%): Presentations will take place at the end of the semester and will
        require student groups to present their strategic plans. Presentations will be formal and will require students
        to wear business casual dress. More detailed assignment sheet to follow.
        Media Trends Presentation (15%)
        Students will work in teams to develop a Media Trends presentation related to the topic area of the week
        they choose to present – a total of 8 media trends presentation days will be available to choose from in mid-
        September. Presentations will be about 20 minutes in length and teams will work to present a media case or
        event they have found that relates to the weekly content and theory we have discussed. Each team will be
        evaluated by the professor as well as their classmates during the presentation. More information on this
        assignment will be forthcoming.
        Stukent Media Planning Essentials Quizzes (5%)
        Students will be reviewing material online at home via the Stukent platform and completing online quizzes
        before coming to class. We will then use class to dive deeper into the topic and integrate theoretical
        perspectives from your required readings. Quizzes must be completed by the due date and before class
        starts. The Stukent system will provide timestamps to record completion times – any quiz that is turned in
        after the completion date will receive 10 points off per day.
        Media Usage Survey and Diary (5%)
        Students will complete a media diary over the course of three days followed by an online survey about their
        media usage. The professor will provide students with a link to the online survey 3 days before the due
        date. This will be the first assignment that you complete for this course.
        Class Discussion, Attendance, and Professional Conduct: (5%): Come to class prepared and ready to
        actively discuss readings and lectures, interact with classmates, the instructor, and industry guests. You
        will learn that learning flourishes in an active environment, and you are expected to help foster engagement
        throughout the course. I will evaluate your final participation grade based using the following rubric:
        A = Student engages in all activities; interacts with class members during face-to-face by providing
        constructive feedback; expresses individual thoughts and poses questions during each class session;
        actively participates in each small group session; volunteers for class discussion; prepared and familiar with
        course material when called upon; does not use technology (phones, tablets, laptops) inappropriately during
        class.
        B = Student sporadically fails to participate in-class discussion or on learning tasks. Student demonstrates
        lack of preparedness during class by not actively participating with group members to accomplish tasks.
        Student only occasionally volunteers for discussion, and comments/ questions are off-topic. Student uses
        technology (cell phones/tablets) for activities unrelated to the course.
        C = Student seldom volunteers to express ideas or shares thoughts during face-to face meetings. Student’s
        responses to questions demonstrate vague familiarity with module readings. Student is passive during
                                                                                                                      3


      group projects and needs reminders to stay on topic or to actively participate. Student frequently uses
      technology (i.e. cell phone, tablets) inappropriately during class.
      D and below = Student never volunteers, cannot answer direction questions related to the readings,
      participates in less than a semester of online discussion activities, and does not participate in group work
      during face-to-face sessions. Student is routinely using technology inappropriately in class (i.e. texting,
      emailing, Facebook-ing, etc.). Lack of participation and preparedness, both online and face-to-face, is
      routine throughout the semester.
4) Course grades:
      Course Assignment Grades
                                                                    Percent of Final             Due
                                Assignment
                                                                          Grade                 Date
                                  Exam 1                                    20%                  10/2
                                  Exam 2                                    20%                 11/25
                        Media Trends Presentation                           15%               Variable
                             Client Media Plan                              20%                  12/9
                         Media Plan Presentation                            10%            12/9 – 12/18
             Homework (Stukent Quizzes & Media Diary)                       10%                 TBD
         Class Discussion, Attendance, Professional Conduct                  5%                  N/A
                                 TOTAL                                     100%
      Course Final Grading Scale:
                                     Proportion of Points                  Letter Grade
                                        92.5% - 100%                             A
                                        89.5% - 92.4%                            A-
                                        86.5% - 89.4%                            B+
                                        82.5% - 86.4%                            B
                                        79.5% - 82.4%                            B-
                                        76.5% - 79.4%                            C+
                                        72.5% - 76.4%                            C
                                        69.5% - 72.4%                            C-
                                        59.5% - 69.4%                            D
                                         Below 59.4%                              F
                                                                                                                   4


5) Course Schedule:
Please Note: The course schedule is subject to change. Students are responsible for changes that are
announced in class, on Canvas, and by email.
                                      POLICIES AND RESOURCES
1) Classroom Policies:
         A. Grading Policies: In this course, grades are not given. They are earned. Therefore, I do not give you
             a grade; rather, you earn your grade. For each assignment, you will be provided with a detailed rubric
             of how you earned your final score.
         B. Policy on late work: Late Work will not be accepted. Exceptions will be made under extreme
             circumstances, if the student discusses the issue with the instructor ahead of time, either in person or
             via e-mail/phone.
         C. Plagiarism: In accordance with the UT Honor Code, Plagiarism will not be tolerated in this course. If
             words are not your own or are taken from another source, they must be properly quoted and cited. If
                                                                                                                      5


             you have any questions about plagiarism, proper citations, etc., please see me. Please read the
             http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct
        D. Policy on absences: Attendance is mandatory. In order to be successful in this course, it is
             imperative that you attend every single class. You are allowed two free absences for whatever reason
             you choose. After that, all future absences will result in deducted points from your class participation
             grade.
        E. Course Communication: All emails should be written in a professional manner. I will not respond to
             emails that are not properly formatted and/or include severe spelling/grammatical errors. I will assume
             that your email is spam if it is poorly written. If you are unsure as to how to properly format an email,
             please visit: http://smallbusiness.chron.com/proper-business-email-format-40878.html. Technology
             will be used in this course. Laptops, iPads, tablets, etc. are welcomed in this classroom. HOWEVER,
             these items should only be used for classroom-related activities. Please silence all devices before class
             begins. If you are playing on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Snapchat, checking email, etc. during
             class, you may be asked to leave. If you are asked to leave for this reason, you will lose classroom
             participation points.
2) University Policies and Resources:
        A. University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning,
             discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
             University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
             toward peers and community.
             Mandatory reading: All students agree to read then abide by the University of Texas at Austin’s
             Standard of Academic Integrity and understand the nature of Academic Dishonesty as defined by UT-
             Austin at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php and
             http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
        B. Student Accommodations: Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
             accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
             with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
             http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
                  l    Please request a meeting as soon as possible for us to discuss accommodations
                  l    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
                  l    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you.
        C. Accommodation of Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending
             absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
             class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will
             be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
3) University Resources for Students:
        A. Moody College Writing Support Program
        The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC
        3.322, https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting offers one-on-one assistance without charge to
        students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have specialists
        in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen
        core-writing skills in each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-
        hour appointments on our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing process.
        B. Counseling and Mental Health Services
        Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
        anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
        available for support.
                                                                                                                       6


         For immediate support:
         -      Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
         3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
         -      CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
         CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
         -      M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
         FREE Services at CMHC:
         -      Brief assessments and referral services
         -      Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
         -      MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
         -      Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
4) Safety Information:
         A. Behavior concerns advice line: If you’re worried about the behavior of a classmate, roommate,
              friend, etc., please call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050. For more
              information, please visit: https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php.
         B. Emergency Planning: In case of emergency, proper plans can be found online at
              https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/plans.php.
                                                                                                                7
