UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS                                                   SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
Vertical Design, ARC 694                                                                    Fall 2019
Professor Kevin Alter
In this studio course particular attention will be paid to the realm of material manifestation as a
critical juncture in the formulation of architecture. In the concern for the materials of building and
the manners of construction the architect commits speculation to action; attempts to convert
intention into palpable reality. It is here that architecture is most fully and deliberately engaged
with the world and here that architecture initiates the world's response in turn. It seems clear,
however, from even casual observation that while this subject matter may be vital it is oftentimes
treated as a marginal concern. The class begins with the assumption that a denial of
Architecture's material potential seriously undermines architecture's value in society (and raises
fundamental questions about the legitimacy of our profession more generally) and in contrast, the
embrace of architecture’s material reality unlocks its potential for wonder and delight.
This studio poses the proposition that the artifact of building possesses intrinsic meaning and
value, not reduceable to a text in its conception. It aims to mine those material, physical qualities
so as to rescue them from illustration; to present a fresh orientation and an avenue for design.
Starting with Things…
Architects are always thinking about places and landscapes, culture and living, history and time.
Every project has its program and site. These are particular and explicit, and every building is
designed in response to these specific concerns. However, there are other inclinations that are
also present and provide continuity in an architect’s work. One might have an interest in
presence, character or identity; in purpose and usefulness; in time, memory or tradition; in making
and materials. These predispositions come from another place than the architect’s response to
explicit circumstances and betray a powerful guide to their work.
Architects are curious about and engaged with the physical world and, it seems, almost always
surround themselves with things. Things tend to be a daily presence in our lives; they sit on our
desks, appear on our bookshelves and materialize around our studios. Some are relics of our
past or from our travels. Others are representative of the materials or workmanship that inspire
us. Others still simply spark our imagination. There are many characteristics of our things that
cannot be experienced through photographs of them – the immense weight of a bronze maquette,
the acrid odor of a candle burning, the resistance of a circuit breaker, the bright ring of a bell, the
balance and fit of a tool in one’s hand, or the movement of crystals when light reflects off of them,
for example. These physical and atmospheric qualities are even more poignant when posed
against the weight of the visual.
Things are meaningful in and of themselves. They have immutable physical properties. Some
things are significant because they have a history. A stone from the Western Wall in Jerusalem is
no longer an ordinary piece of limestone; it is a sentinel, a marker of time and a witness to a
place. A barn raised by a village is not the same as one contracted with a builder; it contains the
aspirations and the effort of a community. These are not representative things; they are real,
authentic. They contain knowledge, craft, work, history, events – all embedded in the artifact
itself. Moreover, history is continuously made and prompted by things, and their meaning evolves
with time (don’t we all know that feeling of something being different once we know what it was
used for or where it has been?). And beauty is there in our things too….
These things that we cherish open a door to our creative process beyond words and diagrams.
They betray who we are and what we value – and point to our personal positions and interests.
They highlight the tendencies of our work beyond our response to explicit circumstances.
Project 1: taking things seriously
Project 2: building as a noun; building as a verb: a room
Project 3: building a container of things


UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS                                                            SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
Vertical Design, ARC 694                                                                               Fall 2019
Professor Kevin Alter
            TIME                draft 08.20.2019, subject to change
Week 01 Wed           28 Aug.   studio Lottery
            Fri.      30 Aug.   studio Introduction + project 11
Week 02 Mon.          02 Sept. no class: Labor Day
Wed         04 Sept. pin up (WMB 5.114) + project 1b2
            Fri.      06 Sept. desk crits
Week 03 Mon.          09 Sept. no class: AIA Honor Awards Jury in DC
            Wed       11 Sept. review project 1 (goldsmith hall 3.118) + project 23
            Fri.      13 Sept. guest desk crits
Week 04 Mon.          16 Sept. guest desk crits
                                5PM Lecture: Michael Murphy, MASS Design Group
            Wed       18 Sept. guest desk crits
            Fri.      20 Sept. guest desk crits
Week 05 Mon.          23 Sept. review precedent research + site documentation (WMB 5.114)
            Wed.      25 Sept. desk crits
            Fri.      27 Sept. desk crits
Week 06 Mon.          30 Sept. no class: Rosh Hashanah
                                5PM Lecture: Adam Greenspan, PWP Landscape Architecture
            Wed       02 Oct.    pin-up (goldsmith hall 3.118)
            Fri.      04 Oct. desk crits
Week 07 Mon.          07 Oct.   desk crits
            Tue.      08 Oct.   4PM Lecture: Sir David Adjaye OBE
            Wed.      09 Oct.   desk crits
            Fri.      11 Oct.   desk crits
Week 08 Mon.          14 Oct.   review project 2 (goldsmith hall 3.118) + project 34
                                Columbus Day
            Wed.      16 Oct.   site visit + site documentation discussion
                                Meet with Andrea Mellard and Brad Nelson at 3PM at Laguna Gloria
            Fri.      18 Oct.   desk crits
Week 09 Mon.          21 Oct.   review precedent research + site documentation (battle hall reading room,
                                btl 101, at 3:30 pm)
                                ACADIA Conference
            Wed.      23 Oct.   desk crits
                                ACADIA Conference
                                5PM exhibition: Morphosis: The Amplification of Interconnectedness
            Thu.      23 Oct.   6:15PM Lecture: Thom Mayne Keynote Address
            Fri.      25 Oct.   desk crits
                                ACADIA Conference Keynotes et al
Week 10 Mon.          28 Oct.   desk crits
1
  artifact
2
  in-situ
3
  building (v) + precedent research
4
  building (n) + precedent research


         Wed.       30 Oct.    desk crits
         Fri.       01 Nov.    desk crits
Week 11 Mon.        04 Nov.    desk crits
         Wed.       06 Nov.
                               5PM Lecture: Lydia Kallipoliti / ANAcycle
         Fri.       08 Nov.    mid-project review (goldsmith hall 3.118/4.120)
Week 12 Mon.        11 Nov.    desk crits
         Wed.       13 Nov.    desk crits
         Fri.       15 Nov.    desk crits
Week 13 Mon.        18 Nov.    desk crits
         Wed.       20 Nov.    desk crits
         Fri.       22 Nov.    2PM vertical drawing show
Week 14 Mon.        25 Nov.    desk crits
         Wed.       27 Nov.    no class: Thanksgiving break
         Fri.       29 Nov.    no class: Thanksgiving break
Week 15 Mon.        02 Dec.    final reviews (first year)
         Wed.       04 Dec.    final reviews
         Th.        05 Dec.    final reviews
         Fri.       06 Dec.    final reviews
Week 16 Mon.        09 Dec.    portfolio review?
         Tue.       10 Dec.    portfolio review?
         Wed.       11 Dec.    portfolio review?
         Th.        12 Dec.    portfolio review?
This schedule is subject to change – do not make any other commitments during class time.


UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS                                                    SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
Vertical Design, ARC 694                                                                     Fall 2019
Professor Kevin Alter
Studio
Hours:       MWF 1-6:00 PM (contact hours are 12 hours within the 15 hour allotment). These 12
             hours will be determined with your input in conjunction with the needs of the studio.
             You should be sure to be available during all of the above noted class hours.
Location: GOL 3.108 (center)
Contact information
Kevin Alter                   office: BAT 104
                              email: alter@utexas.edu
                              mobile: (512)797-6903
Course Grading
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in
other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may
be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of
issues. Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester.
Grading for Vertical Studios is broken into four components:
·       40% grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand, combined with an
appropriate process of inquiry
·       40% resolution: the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through
representation
·       20% engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration,
group discussions and reviews
Grades are subject to deductions for absences, late work, and late arrivals at the discretion of the
instructor. With respect to the assignments in this course that require a constructed response,
the criteria for establishing a grade for each project are as follows:
A/A- Outstanding work
Work is complete at all levels -- i.e. concept, process, product -- and surpasses the expectations
for Advanced Design work with respect to development, inventiveness, impact, appropriateness
and graphic ability.
B+/B/B- Above Average Work
Work is complete at all levels. Each level is done thoroughly, is well researched and is diligently
pursued. Student has pursued ideas and suggestions presented in class and put in effort to
resolve the required projects. Their project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
excellence. This is the expected performance for this class
C+/C Average work
The project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class were not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Not all levels of the project are developed fully, and it is incomplete in one or
more areas. For example, a brilliant concept and a casual product, or a weak idea, an indifferent
development and a good end result will get a grade of C.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor work
Not all levels are present, some of the requested components of the project are missing. Either
care and attention are missing or basic skills in logic and development are not evident. Project is
incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
appropriate.
F Unacceptable work
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
this grade will be assigned when a student has missed an extended amount of class-time (more
than three classes) without notifying the instructor or the School of Architecture.


X Excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing
the work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this symbol. It may only be used after
consultation with the instructor or the Associate Dean, and with an agreement as to a new
completion date. Studio work has to be completed before the second week of the next design
semester in which a student wishes to enroll, according to school policy.
Studio Culture
A general spirit of collaboration amongst all members of the studio is expected. Our school has
developed a Studio Culture Policy that can be found at: http://soa.utexas.edu/architecture/culture.
Attendance
Punctual and regular attendance is essential, and students are expected to work on projects in
the studio. Students with three unexcused absences during the term, or two consecutive
unexcused absences, may result in administrative failure or deductions to final grades.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific
physical need. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement Services for Students with Disabilities,
471-6259.       Specialized      services    are    also       found     via    the     web      at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Security, Safety and The Studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the
careful attention to the needs of everyone in it. Please see your instructor if there are any
problems (music, visual pollution) that you are unable to resolve on your own. All spraying of
fixative, spray paint or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary
component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week. Please be mindful not to admit any uninvited visitors and keep all exterior doors locked
after hours.
Recommendations
I am happy to write recommendations for students who have received a grade of B+ or higher,
and with at least two weeks advance notice.
