Music and Religious Identity in America • Fall 2019 • Dr. Jason Roberts
RS 346M • US Music/Religious Identity 42105                                  j.roberts@austin.utexas.edu
(also listed as AMS 325)                                                               Office: Burdine 586
Meets MW 2:30PM-4:00PM PAR 303                                                 Office hours: W 9:30-11:30
                                                                                         & by appointment
          Music is an important site of religious identity. The choice of text, the role of the human
voice, the (un)acceptability of musical instruments, and the significance of compositional choices
about melody, harmony, and polyphony are all part of the constellation of factors that distinguish
the varied sounds of religious music. Taken together, they constitute the differences between
Gregorian and Byzantine chant (the Great Schism), Ashkenazic and Sephardic song (Jewish
diaspora), Lutheran and Calvinist hymns and psalms (Western Schism/Reformation), as well as
African American Gospel and American Sacred Harp or “shape note” tunes (early American
Protestantism). In fact, they may even account for a difference in the character of the morning and
afternoon services in a given church or synagogue! These factors and how we physically relate to
them constitute the difference between music that feels like “our music” and music that feels like
“someone else’s” – between music we identify with and music we don’t. When music is connected
to religious identity, music that feels like “someone else’s” is sometimes avoided or rejected as
heretical or even evil!
          We are able to recognize music as “familiar” because we have physically experienced it
before (or at least patterns within it that we take to be significant) and because we have identified
with that prior experience. Maybe every time you’ve heard a particular hymn everyone was
standing, singing along, and clapping in rhythm. Maybe you’re used to hearing a solo cantor
perform while everyone sits quietly and listens reverently. Such habituation of experience leads to
expectations. Music can feel familiar or strange, sacred or secular because it is always to some
degree a physical experience. We recognize “how we do it” and distinguish that from “how other
people do it” on the basis of prior embodied (i.e., physical) experience. Moreover, the performance
and audience conventions of religious music within a group often reflect the group’s religious
conceptions of the individual in relation to the divine as well as to his or her community and its
outsiders through management of bodies in the religious context. For example, who is permitted (or
expected) to sing and what that sounds and looks like may be influenced by religious or
confessional definitions of things like adulthood or gender roles and can differ greatly from
community to community. Finally, the music rejected by a given religious community can define the
groups as much as the music it embraces. Think of that old line, “Rock ‘n’ Roll is the Devil’s music!”
          Focusing primarily on the religious music(s) of Christian and Jewish communities in the
US, this course engages students with theory of the body/embodiment as well as theoretical
frameworks of purity and exclusion (syncretism/anti-syncretism) to show how music is mobilized to
be alternately a source of religious experience and a modus for defining and maintaining
community. We examine a broad variety of American religious contexts as well as some of their
European, Middle Eastern, and Indigenous antecedent communities. We use theories of the body
to talk about the physical experiences of a community’s production and consumption of its
religious music and theories of syncretism and anti-syncretism to talk about the contradictory
tendencies of musicians to mix musical ideas (syncretism) and the tendencies of religious
communities to want to preserve and even highlight their separateness (anti-syncretism). Our
examination of syncretism and anti-syncretism in religious musical traditions allows us to trace
                                                                                                         1


religious and confessional schism and reform through intentional and unintentional (dis)continuities
and affinities with antecedent and neighboring communities. We see and hear, for example, the
intentional Protestant break with Catholic musical tradition in the Reformation as well as the
influences of the Lutheran musical tradition on 19th century Reform Judaism and a Catholic
embrace of American folk rock after Vatican II.
           Students of this course engage with song texts, musical genres, and performance and
audience conventions of religious music. We approach texts as reflections of religious identity
through examination of language (including register), source (original vs. adapted text including
which texts are adapted, e.g. scripture, prayers, etc.), the relationship of the text to religious or
confessional doctrine within historical and geographical contexts (i.e., potential uses in contexts of
conflict [“A Mighty Fortress,” “Go Down Moses”] or solidarity [“Kumbaya”]). Discussion of religious
identity in musical genre (as distinct from text, and performance) will include basic musical
concepts (i.e., the level of an introductory general music class) such as melody, harmony,
polyphony, unison, rhythm, meter, instrumentation, etc.
           The course approaches theoretical analysis both through observation and participant
observation. Every class includes video examples of authentic performances of religious music,
which we discuss in light of the theoretical tools we have accumulated up to that point. Additionally,
once during the semester, students attend a live performance of religious music from a tradition
other than their own as the basis of a short observation paper. (NB: This need not be in the context
of a religious ceremony. A variety of opportunities will be identified, and student suggestions are
welcome but subject to approval.) Participant observation is staged through daily in-class Sacred
Harp choral singing for 10-15 minutes at the end of class. In keeping with the Sacred Harp
tradition, musical literacy is welcome but not required. The collective experience of becoming a
Sacred Harp ensemble serves as a “lab component,” which provides an opportunity for students to
analyze their own embodied experiences as well as observations about those of their peers within
the highly inflected and idiosyncratic tradition of American Sacred Harp singing. After each class
students log “field notes” which serve as the basis for their short participant observation paper.
Flags: WR (Writing) & CD (Cultural Diversity in the United States)
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an
academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity
to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established
by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
This course also carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect
a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
                                                                                                                          2


Basis for evaluation
      •     Two short listening quizzes 2.5% ea.
      •     Short paper, basic theoretical analysis of in-class example: theory of the body (3-5 pages) 15%           due 9/20
      •     Short paper, basic theoretical analysis of in-class example: anti-/syncretism theory (3-5 pages) 15%     due 10/11
      •     Short observer paper (3-5 pages) 15%                                                                     due 10/25
      •     Short participant observer paper (3-5 pages) 15%                                                          due 11/8
      •     Field notes for participant observer paper 5%
            (These are brief observations logged on Canvas after each Sacred Harp sing.)
      •     Final paper: abstract 250 words 5%
      •     Final paper: peer editing of abstract (on Canvas) 5%
      •     Final paper: first page, for initial feedback 5%
      •     Final paper 15% • Due on exam day
Required Texts
      •     Bohlman, Philip V, Edith W. Blumhofer, and Maria M. Chow. Music in American Religious Experience. New York: Oxford
            University Press, 2006.
      •     Fraser, Mariam, and Monica Greco. The Body: A Reader. London: Routledge, 2005.
      •     Ingalls, Monique M, Carolyn Landau, and Thomas Wagner. Christian Congregational Music: Performance, Identity and
            Experience. New York, N.Y.: Routledge, 2016.
      •     Leopold, Anita M, and Jeppe S. Jensen. Syncretism in Religion: A Reader. New York: Routledge, 2005.
Recommended Texts
      •     Cook, Nicholas. Music: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
      •     Hoffman, Lawrence A, and Janet R. Walton. Sacred Sound and Social Change: Liturgical Music in Jewish and Christian
            Experience. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1992.
Attendance
If you must miss class for any reason, please let me know as soon as possible and arrange with a classmate to find out
what was covered in the day's class. Your progress in the class and your preparation for the writing assignments rely
heavily on class discussion. Being both present and prepared are crucial to your success in the class. Moreover, your
ability to complete your participant observer paper depends on your presence and participation in the 10-15 minutes of
“choir practice” at the end of each class. You are allowed two (2) undocumented absences without attendance
repercussions. Each further undocumented absence lowers your course grade by one point (i.e., after the
second absence 100 – 1.0 = maximum grade of 99, etc.). Documentation should be provided on official letterhead from
your doctor, clergyman, or military superior. It must state the date and time of your appointment or obligation explicitly,
as well as the duration of your absence and contact information of the issuing person. In case of serious illness,
hospitalization, chronic disease, death in the family, severe mental health problems I will evaluate the situation on a
case-by-case basis.
Homework
The homework for RS 346 consists primarily of readings assignments. The readings are significant (ca. 20-50 pages
per assignment,) if you cannot commit to reading the material you should consider taking the course in the future when
you are able to do so. Additionally, one of your writing assignments for the class will require you to make plans to
attend the performance of religious music outside of class.
                                                                                                                               3


Class Discussion
I foster a classroom atmosphere in which everyone is treated respectfully, but this does not preclude disagreement.
Classroom discussion of the material is an important part of the learning process and it is important for you to feel safe
and relaxed so that you can speak up in front of the class without undue anxiety, even if you are not certain that your
contribution is correct. Please do not hesitate to contact me if there is anything in the classroom that prevents you from
speaking in class.
Questions? Comments? Concerns?
I value your feedback. If you enjoy your class, let me know. If there are aspects of the class that you do not feel
comfortable with, please inform me.
Additional course offerings from the Department of Religious Studies
      è If you would like information about majoring or minoring in Religious Studies, see Cyndi Goodson,
           Undergraduate Advisor for Religious Studies (BUR 531; cyndigoodson@austin.utexas.edu)
      è or visit the department’s webpage https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/rs/index.php
Use of e-mail for official correspondence to students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to
check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
The class will be using its Canvas site, accessible to each of you at https://canvas.utexas.edu/ or through your UT
Direct account. E-mail reminders and updates will be sent though Canvas. The instructor and TA answers university e-
mail during business hours (M-F 8am-5pm). Do not expect a response after hours, immediately before class time or on
weekends.
Documented disability statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required
to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Details of a student’s disability are
confidential. Faculty do not ask questions related to a student’s condition or diagnosis when receiving an official
accommodation letter.
      §    Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
           instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
           etc.).
      §    Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
           required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
           transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
      §    Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
           reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
           http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
                                                                                                                           4


Behavior concerns advice line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss
by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency evacuation policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
           § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit
                door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
           § If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
           § In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless instructed to do so by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department,
or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                              University of Texas Honor Code
       The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
   opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
                            honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
(1) Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted by a
student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work, unless the instructor explicitly allows
collaboration.
(2) You are encouraged to study together and to discuss information and concepts covered in lecture and the sections
with other students. You can give "consulting" help to or receive "consulting" help from such students.
(3) Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave material
to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be
extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
(4) During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the examinations,
nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during the
examinations will result in failure of the exam and may lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
                                                                                                                          5


       INTRODUCTION: Some Vocabulary (& Etiquette) for Discussing Religion, Identity, and Music
Week 1:
       W 8/28 Introduction
               INTRODUCTION TO THE COURSE: First Day PPT and class outline
               LISTENING
               •   Blind Boys of Alabama - Amazing Grace (Live on KEXP) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B0EN_Hmq534
               •   Amazing Grace-Bluegrass Style https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a_48lTzLsnM
               •   9/11 Memorial - Renée Fleming - Amazing Grace - 08/2013 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J7jS4vDYHf8
               DISCUSSION
               •   Expectations for the course (both yours and mine)
               •   How many different objections can there be to one religious hymn? “Amazing Grace” as an intro to concepts &
                   controversies: doctrine, music (alone), and some basic ideas about theory of the body and syncretism/anti-
                   syncretism theory
Week 2:
       SECTION 1: Thoughts about the Role of the Body in the Production and Consumption of
       Religious Music: Religious/Confessional Ideas of Right Ways & Wrong Ways/Right Bodies &
       Wrong Bodies (Hint: Where are the Women?)
       M 9/2   LABOR DAY
       W 9/4   Producing and Consuming Music as an Embodied Experience
               READING DUE:
                   •     The Body: A Reader, “Introduction” & PART ONE: “What is a body?” pp.1-61.
               LISTENING/VIEWING:
                   •     Sister Act - Oh Maria https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5EcbH1FJ1s
                   •     The Muppet Show - Mahna Mahna https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QTXyXuqfBLA
                   •     Ave Maria - Renée Fleming, Die Deutsche Kammerphilharmonie Bremen, Trevor Pinnock
                         https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3CaEPSAO2Uk
               DISCUSSION: What is the nature of the relationship between the “musical” and the “religious” in religious music?
               •   “Music Alone” PPT summary of Peter Kivy’s Music Alone Philosophical Reflections on the Purely Musical
                   Experience followed by discussion of the question: What makes religious music “religious?”
               •   “Amazing Grace” cont. (embodied performing and listening)
Week 3:
       M 9/9   Embodiment in Early Jewish Music
               READING DUE:
                   •     Sacred Sound and Social Change, “From the Bible to Hasidism” pp. 13-58.
               LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
                         •     An Amazing Shofar Ram's Horn Service https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0jR20-0sy1Y
                         •     Psalm 92 (Yemenite Psalmody) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MtfRabq8cN0
                         •     Chazzan Chaim Adler Slichot 2009 "Shema -Koleinu" https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2zlorxIWLBk
                         •     Yemenite Torah, PARSHAS TETZAVEH https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZgqenoPk4-I
                         •     jonathan leas leining in sephardi trop 8rs old https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AlRHMsaZ7Tw
                         •     Robert Brody sings Yom Ze LeYisrael https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vi69g8AqTOg
                                                                                                                                6


                             •    Niggun Simcha https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2frPSMVsDi4
                             •    Kada Noche De Shabat (Traditional Sephardic Balkan Ladino)
                                  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bGEfQZk2Y2s
                 DISCUSSION: TBD
                 SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                             Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
       W 9/11 Embodiment in Early Christian Music
                 READING DUE:
                       •     Sacred Sound and Social Change, “Christian Liturgical Music from the Bible to the Renaissance” pp. 84-123.
                 LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
                 DISCUSSION: TBD
                 SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                             Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
Week 4:
       SECTION 2: Syncretism & Anti-Syncretism or “To Mix or Not to Mix?”: The Processes and
       Politics of Adopting, Adapting, and Rejecting in Religious Music
       M 9/16 Understanding the Problems and Politics of a Term: “Syncretism”
                 READING DUE:
                       •     Syncretism in Religion, “Part II, The Historical Background of the Term Syncretism: The Problem of Definition”
                             pp. 12-84.
                 LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
                 DISCUSSION: TBD
                 SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                             Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
       W 9/18 Anti-Syncretism in Protestant Reform: Constructing a New Identity by Rejecting
                 READING DUE:
                 •     Sacred Sound and Social Change, “Christian Liturgical Music in the Wake of the Protestant Reformation” pp. 124-
                       144.
                 •     John Calvin: The Form of Prayers and Songs of the Church .pdf
                 LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
                 DISCUSSION: Psalmody vs. hymnody and the intentional departure from Catholic liturgical music.
                 SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                             Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
       ★ Short theory of the body/embodiment paper due (15% of semester grade)
                                                                                                                                          7


Week 5:
       M 9/23 Syncretism in Jewish Reform: Constructing a New Identity by Adopting & Adapting
              READING DUE:
              •    Sacred Sound and Social Change, “Jewish Liturgical Music in the Wake of Nineteenth-Century Reform” pp. 59-83.
              •    Readings from the yearbook of the CCAR (Central Conference of American Rabbis) regarding liturgical music.
                   public domain, .pdf
              •    Union Hymnal for Jewish Worship (1914) “Summer Suns are Glowing” pg. 196
                   https://archive.org/details/unionhy00cent
              LISTENING/VIEWING: selections from The Union Hymnal for Jewish Worship
              •    Summer Suns Are Glowing-196- Union Hymnal (1914)
                   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3TdE0Z_wzm0
              DISCUSSION: TBD
              SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                         Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
       W 9/25 Syncretism in Catholic Reform: Constructing a New Identity by Permitting
              READING:
              •    Sacred Sound and Social Change, “Catholic Prophetic Sound after Vatican II” pp. 150-173.
              •    Musicam Sacram .pdf
              LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD (examples of post-Vatican II music)
              DISCUSSION:
                         What changes are welcomed in Musicam Sacram? How are they qualified?
                         Are the goals and guidelines expressed in Musicam Sacram reflected in the examples?
              SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                         Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
Week 6:
       SECTION 3: (Re)Inscribing Bodies with Music: Maintaining and/or Changing Social Order
       with Religious Music
       M 9/30 The Effects of Musical Order on Physical Bodies
              READING:
                   •     The Body: A Reader, PART TWO: “Bodies and social (dis)order” pp. 67-104.
              LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
              DISCUSSION: TBD
              SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                         Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
       W 10/2 Musically (Re)Inscribing the Body with Reformed Protestantism
              READING:
                   •     Sacred Sound and Social Change, “Present Stress and Current Problems: Music and the Reformed
                         Churches” pp. 174-186.
                                                                                                                                8


                 LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
                 DISCUSSION: TBD
                 SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                             Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
Week 7:
       M 10/7 Musically Inscribing the Body with Reform in American Judaism
                 READING: Sacred Sound and Social Change, “The Hymnal as an Index of Musical Change in Reform Synagogues” pp.
                 187-212.
                 LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
                 DISCUSSION: TBD
                 SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                             Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
       SECTION 4: The Role(s) of the Body in Processes of Syncretism and Anti-Syncretism:
       Performing and Consuming Change, Memory, Togetherness, and Separateness through
       Religious Music
       W 10/9 Musically (Re)Inscribing the Body with Memory of African American History
                 READING:
                 LISTENING/VIEWING:
                 •     March 12, 2013 "When The Brook Runs Dry" Rev. Dr. Otis Moss, III
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wTh89uTbGt4
                 •     May 6, 2012 "When The Change Comes" Rev. James Milton McCarroll
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rv05BQNYBBg
                 •     Rev. C.L Franklin I Will Trust In The Lord
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PURFKf1qTK8
                 •     August 28, 1963 Dr. Martin Luther King’s “I have a dream...”
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1UV1fs8lAbg
                 DISCUSSION: TBD
                 SACRED HARP SINGING: 10-15 min.
                             Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
       ★ Short syncretism/anti-syncretism theory paper due (15% of semester grade)
       Week 8:
       M 10/14 The Scope and Limits of (Religious) Conversion in a First Nation’s Religious Music:
                 Embodying Both Abenaki And Catholic Identity
                 READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “Medeolinuwok, Music, and Missionaries in Maine” pp. 57-82.
                 LISTENING/VIEWING:
                 •     Quam suavis~Motet in ABENAKI at the Canadian Jesuit´s missions (Nouvelle-France, 17th-18th century)
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=83E0pr880dA
                 •     Catholic praise songs in Abenaki (first nations language)
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wt1g9cJTLFI
                                                                                                                              9


          DISCUSSION: TBD
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                     Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
W 10/16 The Religious Music of Spiritual Separatists: Russian-American Molokans
          READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “Singing as Experience among Russian American Molokans” pp.
          83-119.
          LISTENING:
          •    Molokan American Folk Music (CA): Our Father who art in Heaven Psalm preceding third
               https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q7R4jpdeHBU
          •    Molokan American Folk Music (CA): Isaiah 40-1-2 Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people
               https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J1QFKRKDpqY
          •    American Folklife Center, Library of Congress: Eight discs containing portions of a service at a Russian Molokan
               Church. Recorded in Potrero Hill, San Francisco, California, September 14, 1938. (90 minutes; tape copy on LWO
               4872, reels 249B-250)
               https://www.loc.gov/folklife/guides/Russia.html
          DISCUSSION: TBD
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                     Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
Week 9:
SECTION 5: Syncretism and Anti-Syncretism: The Power of Narrative in Processes of
Conserving/Changing a Canon of Religious Music
M 10/21 Reclaiming the Term “Syncretism” to Describe Modes of Resistance
          READING: Syncretism in Religion “Part IV Religions in Contact: Power, Syncretism, and Creolization” pp. 139-253.
          LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
          DISCUSSION: TBD
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                     Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
W 10/23 Fighting and Losing: The Dynamics of Language Change in the Hymnals of
          Linguistic/Ethnic German Protestant Communities
          READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “Singing from the Right Songbook: Ethnic Identity and Language
          Transformation in German American Hymnals” pp. 175-194.
          LISTENING: TBD
          DISCUSSION: TBD
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                     Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
★ Short observer paper due
                                                                                                                                10


Week 10:
M 10/28 The Syncretistic Effects of an Ecumenical Hymnal: The Loss of Distinction between
          Psalmody and Hymnody in German American Reformed Protestantism
          READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “The Evolution of the Music of German American Protestants in
          Their Hymnody: A Case Study from an American Perspective” pp. 155-174.
          LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
          DISCUSSION: TBD
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                      Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
W 10/28 The Selective Nature of Anti-Syncretism and the Question of Protestant Hymnody as
          Protestant Ritual
          READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “Hymnody and History: Early American Evangelical Hymns as
          Sacred Music” pp. 123-154
          LISTENING/VIEWING: TBD
          DISCUSSION: TBD
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                      Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
Week 11:
M 11/4 Syncretistic/ Anti-Syncretistic Responses to Tradition within Jewish Communities:
          Musical Past as Threat to/ Source of Modern Identity
          READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “Nusach and Identity: The Contemporary Meaning of Traditional
          Jewish Prayer Modes” pp. 271-286
          LISTENING: TBD
          DISCUSSION: TBD
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                      Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
SECTION 6: “Changing Your Tune”: Religious Music as Reflection/ Embrace of
Differentness
W 11/6 Embodying Difference and Taking Control of the Processes of (Re)Inscription
          READING: The Body: A Reader, PART THREE: “Bodies and identities” pp. 105-144.
          LISTENING: TBD
          DISCUSSION: Previously, we have discussed the processes by which religious music can inscribe the body with identity.
          Here we will examine the modes by which identities are (re)asserted through religious music in acts of resistance to
          those processes.
          SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                      Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
★ Short participant observer paper due
                                                                                                                               11


Week 12:
M 11/11 “Pure White” and “Black as Sin?”: Rethinking Racist/Sexist Language in Religious
Music
        READING: Sacred Sound and Social Change, “‘Sing a New Song’: A Petition for a Visionary Black Hymnody” ” pp. 300-
        313.
        LISTENING: TBD
        DISCUSSION: TBD
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                   Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
W 11/13 Religious/Ritual Music for Women’s Spirits and Women’s Bodies
        READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “Women’s Ritual Music” pp. 255-270
        LISTENING: TBD
        DISCUSSION: TBD
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                   Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
Week 13:
M 11/18 Religious Music in Gendered Space: Muslim Women’s Recitation (Singing) in the
        Private Sphere
        READING: Music in American Religious Experience, When Women Recite: “Music and Islamic Immigrant Experience”
        pp. 24-42.
        LISTENING: TBD
        DISCUSSION: TBD
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                   Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
★ABSTRACT for final paper due
W 11/20 The Act (and Metaphor) of Singing Together as Gesture/ Practice of Community in a
        Congregation of Diverse (Ethnic/LGBTQ) Bodies
        READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “‘When in Our Music God Is Glorified’: Singing and Singing about
        Singing in a Congregational Church” pp. 195-212
        LISTENING: TBD
        DISCUSSION: TBD
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                   Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
Week 14:
M 11/25 Religious Music as Occasion for (Non-)Religious Bodily Ritual: Diversity in Sacred
        Harp Singing Groups
        READING: “Bodies in Sync: Ritual Theory Applied to Sacred Harp Singing,” Sociology of Religion, Vol. 71, No. 1
        (Spring 2010) pp. 76-97
        LISTENING: TBD
        DISCUSSION: TBD
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                   Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
W 11/27 THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
                                                                                                                        12


★PEER EDITING of abstract due (on Canvas)
Week 15:
SECTION 7: “Changing Your Tune”: Religious Music as Reflection/ Embrace of
Differentness
M 12/2 Confessional vs. Generic Difference: “Body Memory,” Performance Practice, and
        the Feeling of the Familiar in Religious Music
        READING: Music in American Religious Experience, “Aesthetics and Theology in Congregational Singing: A Hymnal
        Intervenes” pp. 335-344
        LISTENING: TBD
        DISCUSSION: TBD
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                    Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
W 12/4 Anti-Syncretistic Responses to Ecumenical Religious Music by
        Fundamentalist/Separatist Religious Groups
        READING: Watch the YouTube series (approximately 1 hour) “The Dangers of Contemporary Christian Music”
        LISTENING:
        •     The Dangers of Contemporary Christian Music Part 1
        •     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kx9grVmWBbc
        •     The Dangers of Contemporary Christian Music Part 2
        •     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BDtNqW6wfr0
        •     The Dangers of Contemporary Christian Music Part 3
        •     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5AWz3yLm0z4
        •     The Dangers of Contemporary Christian Music Part 4
        •     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DjTFDFvL4YU
        DISCUSSION:
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                    Remember to log your field notes on Canvas!
★FIRST PAGE of final paper due
M 12/9 The Amazing Grace Controversy Revisited
        READING: TBD
        LISTENING: TBD
        DISCUSSION: On the first day of class we discussed the many objections that seemed to have erupted around the use
        of the hymn, “Amazing Grace.” Do the objections given by the interested parties make more sense to you? Has your
        appreciation of what is at stake changed? (How so?) Do you believe we should take the objections (as they were stated)
        at face value? (Why/Why not?)
        SACRED HARP: 10-15 min.
                    Flashmob the Tower rotunda?
FINAL
★FINAL PAPER due on scheduled exam date (TBA) 15% of grade
                                                                                                                            13
