Syllabus        ALD 328        Fall 2019               Unique Number: 09110
Introduction to Teaching: Applied Learning and Development
Professor:      Dr. Melissa Wetzel, 512-810-8250, mmwetzel@utexas.edu
University Facilitators: Kerry Alexander, Heather Dunham, and Jessi Murdter-Atkinson
Teaching Assistants: Erica Steinitz and Heather Dunham
Class Sessions: Mondays 1-4 at Guerrero-Thompson Elementary School
Mentoring 12:30-1:15; followed by debriefing
1:30-3:45 class
Plan to stay until 4 pm if you want support on your lesson planning.
_____________________________________________________________________
This course is designed as the “capstone” course in your ALD course sequence. Topics
include: Development, cognition, language, and sociocultural influences in learning
contexts; child assessment, identification of learning styles, and tests and measurements.
Your Intern II experience is connected to the course as the context to apply the theories
you learn.
Through this course, the understandings you have developed through your earlier ALD
work (e.g, individual differences; cultural influences; cognition, learning and motivation;
language acquisition) will be applied to classroom teaching. We will focus on topics from
ALD 322 (Individual Differences); 327 (Sociocultural Influences) and 329 (Aquis. of
Lang. and Literacies). In addition, we draw on the framework of inquiry to guide our
learning. What are our questions about teaching? About students? How do those
questions lead us in our work? Therefore, our work in this course will rely heavily on the
observations, interactions and reflections that are part of your field experiences this
semester and understanding those experiences in the concentric circles of local to global
community.
The organization of this course is tied to the EDC 331E Classroom Organization and
Management Course and to your Reading Methods course. Some of the assignments for
these three courses will overlap. In those cases, work you do will be counted toward the
requirements for all three classes.
Course Texts
Puzzling Moments, Teachable Moments: Practicing Teacher Research in Urban
Classrooms (The Practitioner Inquiry Series) (Ballenger, 2009)
We Make The Road by Walking (Horton & Freire)
Course Requirements
                                                                                           1


 Attendance and Participation                                                   20 points
 Readings and Class Discussion                                                  20 points
 Purposeful Observation/Activity Configuration Plan                             10 points
 Teaching Reflection 1                                                          10 points
 Teaching Reflection 2                                                          10 points
 Teaching Reflection 3                                                          10 points
 Plan for Inquiry                                                               20 points
 total                                                                          100 points
Participation
Your class participation grade is based on active participation, including sharing your
thoughts and questions as well as listening to the thoughts and questions of others. This is
the expectation in every class.
As we meet only once weekly, your class participation grade is based on these specific
questions:
    ● Did my presence in class make the class better today?
    ● Did I actively engage with class community?
    ● Did I conduct myself in a way to ensure I learned?
    ● Did I help my colleagues learn?
    ● Did I take advantage of what was offered?
Technology Etiquette
Your laptop or iPad should be used for class purposes only. Please silence and put away
your cell phones and other devices that will not be used for the class. Your course
participation grade is influenced by your mindful use of technology for class purposes
only (i.e. not for emailing, texting or non-related search activities).
Professional Communication
    ● As teachers, you will need to address concerns in a professional manner with
        colleagues, parents, and administrators. Please approach your work in this class in
        a similar way. If you have a concern, please address it directly with Erica.
    ● When writing electronic communications, adopt an appropriate tone that
        demonstrates your identity as a teacher.
As long as you are participating in the ways specified, you can assume that you are
receiving full credit. If you have questions about this portion of your grade please contact
the instructor.
                                                                                           2


Attendance
You must contact both instructors prior to class if you plan to miss. If you choose to be
absent for a reason other than illness, a family emergency or other unavoidable
circumstance, it is not necessary to ask for permission. The attendance policy is firm and
required in the College for PDS courses.
     ● No unexcused absences.
     ● One excused absence is allowed (may or may not require make-up work).
        Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor.
     ● Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of 3/4 letter grade in the final
        grade.
     ● More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing
        grade for the class.
     ● Serious or continuous lateness (or early departures) will affect your grade.
Readings and Class Discussion
As you interact with the readings, reflect on your teaching practice, respond to ideas you
find especially compelling, elaborate on your thinking by making connections to other
readings or your experiences, and outline your puzzles and/or questions. It is “essential
that you attend to your felt reactions, and attempt to sort out what those reactions tell you
… [think] about [your] expectations and assumptions” (Zeichner & Liston, 2010). Read
the assignments through the eyes of a teacher. Think about how you can use this new
knowledge to extend or challenge what you already know about students, teaching, and
literacy. Sometimes we will post questions or prompts but other times your responses
will be open response. Our expectation is that you share your thinking in ways that builds
a community; your responses might vary in length. We will tell you if you are not
meeting our expectations for length and quality.
Please respond to readings on Canvas by Saturday at 11:59 pm. Discussion leaders will
Sunday to read responses and choose a few quotes to illustrate themes in the online
discussion. You will be a discussion leader once, with a partner. (10 pts total)
We will also use class time to write quick write posts on Canvas to a focus question.
Because this is a writing flag course, I will ask you to expand on 2 of these quick writes
as longer essays, due at the end of the semester. Extended Quick Writes (10 pts total)
Purposeful Observations (active link to google doc)
One Purposeful Observation is required and will be used as the basis of the Activity
Configuration Assignment. Use the link above to access the document. Each one will be
turned in on Canvas as an assignment.
Here is the structure:
Planning. You'll agree ahead of time on an area to observe. Part of this is having a
discussion about the architecture of this activity. For example, if it is a read aloud, you'll
want to know, what are all the parts of a read aloud in your classroom? What do you do
first? Next? What variation is there in the activity structure? If you're in more than one
                                                                                               3


classroom, try to divide your observations across teachers (at least 1 with the teacher who
is not your primary).
You'll do a pre-conference. Different from a planning conversation, this pre-conference
occurs as close to the lesson observation as possible. It's a chance for the teacher to create
a "mental image" of the lesson and talk through what will occur. This is a key part of an
observation cycle. It guides the observer as well to what the teacher thinks is important or
what she is working on in her practice. A pre-conference is short: 5 minutes or so,
depending on your time constraints.
Observation. You'll observe the teaching and take notes of what happened in the left
hand column. You'll go back and add in questions, patterns, and noticings in the right
hand column. Choose a single focus of something you really want to know more about
based on your observation. For example, "you responded to student x, y, z with this
particular kind of response, and I'm wondering if you could tell me more about why you
made that choice among others in response to these students."
If your CT is in the mentoring program, she will also ask you to videotape her teaching.
In that case, your FS is required to sit in for one of these cycles. If not, they are still
willing to do this--just schedule with them. It can be very helpful to have another person
in the conversation!
Post Conference. You'll do a post-conference. In this post-conference, you'll think with
your CT about the events as they unfolded. Again, ask the questions we suggest on the
form. The purpose of this activity is to let the CT guide you through her thinking during
the lesson (reflection in action) as well as after the lesson (reflection on action). She
should be doing most of the talking. Your focus point, if it doesn't come up naturally, is
something you can ask at the end of the post conference. Your post conference may be as
long as 15 minutes or more, depending on your time constraints.
Activity Configuration. Create an AC for the type of activity you observed. Samples can
be found here but are expanded based on the work of a Literacy Leader in the Master’s
program. The template is here and we will work together in class to understand this
design.
Reflection. Reflect on your conference. See first bullet point below.
Planning for Teaching and Reflection
    ● Conduct a Purposeful Observation of your CT. Complete an Activity
        Configuration based on a regular instructional practice in your classroom. Use the
        Activity Configuration to design an experience for your students and teach using
        that document.
    ● Plan and teach a Math Lesson (lesson planning will be conducted as part of your
        Math Methods course). We defer to your Math instructor for guidelines. Your
        Field Supervisor will facilitate a pre-conference, observation, and post-conference
        around this experience.
                                                                                             4


     ● Universal Design for Learning: Using your EDC 331E inquiry as a guide, plan to
        implement one action in your classroom. You will plan for this using resources in
        the Chp. 5 of the Minor text, and focus on Universal Design For Learning. Your
        Field Supervisor will facilitate a pre-conference, observation, and post-conference
        around this experience.
     ● Literature Unit. Plan and teach one lesson in your literature unit (see 370E
        Reading Methods syllabus). You will use a Formal Lesson Planning Template for
        this Lesson. Videotape at least part of this lesson. Transcribe a portion. Your Field
        Supervisor will facilitate a pre-conference, observation, and post-conference
        around this experience.
Note: For three of these lessons, of your choice, you will be observed. For these three,
you MUST submit your lesson plan to your FS in advance of your lesson. Your FS will
provide you feedback and you may be asked to revise before teaching the lesson.
Therefore, please turn in your plan at least 5 days in advance of your observation. Your
CT will be involved in the planning of this lesson as well. It may make sense to work
with the CT first, then send to the FS.
You are required to write a 3 page reflection for the three lessons that are observed (not
all four, which are required for you to teach per your Intern II guidelines.) You can draw
on your CT and FS’s notes of your post-conference as a guide. A model will be provided.
Plan for Inquiry
Based on your work across this course and your Community Organization and Classroom
Management Course, we would like for you to plan for an inquiry you’ll do during your
Student Teaching Semester. We will draw on the Minor book to help us plan for inquiry
and will extend from the inquiry assignment you do in the COM class. You can work
with your CT and FS to accomplish your plan. Your plan will include:
     ● A set of questions for inquiry and how you came to them
     ● A rationale for the inquiry grounded in the contexts of the classroom (local,
        district, national)
     ● A plan for collecting in your classroom based on your questions
     ● A few readings you can explore with your CT and FS in preparation
     ● A plan for initial curricular or instructional changes that align with TEKS
     ● A feasibility plan (how you will ensure you have time and energy for the inquiry)
WRITING & PROPER CITATION
This course carries the Writing Flag, designed to give students experience with writing in
an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise
one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
                                                                                            5


Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
All assignments should be written using 1-inch margins all around, double-spaced, using
Times New Roman 12 point font. You should carefully and thoroughly cite any
information you use from published materials. Failure to do so could have serious
consequences, including failing an assignment, failing the course, or suspension from the
University. Policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Here is a website
with information on plagiarism. Please review thoroughly:
http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/writing/plagiarism.pdf.
All formal written assignments will be graded according to the following criteria:
    ● The degree to which the assignment has been completed thoroughly.
    ● The degree to which the assignment has been polished and edited carefully.
    ● The degree to which the assignment shows insight/thoughtfulness with respect to
        the topic, other course readings, and other classroom/teaching or reading
        experiences.
University Information
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community. Each student in this course is expected to abide by the
University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted by a student in this course for
academic credit will be the student’s own work.
ACCESSIBLE/COMPLIANT STATEMENT:
If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need
accommodations please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). You may
refer to SSD’s website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with SSD, please
deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the semester so we can
discuss your approved accommodations.
ACCESSIBLE, INCLUSIVE, AND COMPLIANT STATEMENT:
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment
consistent with university policy and federal and state law. Please let me know if you
experience any barriers to learning so I can work with you to ensure you have equal
opportunity to participate fully in this course. If you are a student with a disability, or
think you may have a disability, and need accommodations please contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD). Please refer to SSD’s website for contact and more
information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with
SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the
semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations and needs in this course.
                                                                                            6


USE OF EMAIL FOR CORRESPONDENCE
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to
your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay
current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical.
You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I
will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
GRADING SCALE, POLICIES, AND CRITERIA
Grades will be calculated according to the total points earned (minus points deducted)
divided by the total points possible:
  A           A-         B+        B          B-        C+        C          C-
  94-100      90-93%     87-89%    84-86%     80-83%    77-79%    74-76%     70-73%
                                                                                         7


Calendar
                Most readings in   Most readings in    Sign up to lead
                class              class unless        convo in class:
                                   indicated in color
 Week           Putting ALD        Lesson Design       Inquiry (in my
                content together                       classroom, in my
                (ind. differences,                     school, in my city,
                sociocultural                          larger social
                foundations,                           issues)
                language
                acquisition)
 9/9/19         SC FND: Race,      Purposeful          Ballenger pp. 1-55
                racism and anti-   Observation
 Week 1         racism
 9/16/19        SC FND: Gender     Activity Config.    Ballenger pp. 56-86
                and sexuality
 Week 2
 9/23           SC FND:            Activity Config.    Ballenger pp. 87-
                Intersectionality                      end
 Week 3
 9/30           IND. DIFF. Topic   Activity            Freire & Horton pp.
                ADHD               Configuration Share vii-95
 Week 4
 10/7           IND. DIFF. Topic   Universal Design    Freire & Horton
                LD                 Minor Chp. 5        pp. 97-144
 Week 5                            https://www.youtub
                                   e.com/watch?v=bD
                                   vKnY0g6e4
 10/14          IND. DIFF. Topic   Universal Design    Freire & Horton
 NO KIDS AISD-- Differentiation                        pp. 145-end
 Indigenous     In class reading
 People’s Day
 Week 6
 10/21          Ind Diff topic     Universal Design    Cuban
                Dyslexia           Share               Introduction
 Week 7
 10/28          Language           Lesson planning     Cuban--Jigsaw
                                                       read
                                                                           8


                acquisition and       using TEKS, ELPS,    1. pp 25-38
Week 8          ELPS                  etc.                 2. 38-53
                                      http://www.colorinc  3. 54-65
                                      olorado.org/article/ 4. 65-84
                                      49646/ including
                                      interview with
                                      Lundgren
11/4            Language              Lesson planning      Local Text Inquiry
                acquisition and       using TEKS, ELPS,
Week 9          ELPS                  etc.
                                      (in class reading)
11/11           Technology and        Integrating          Local Text Inquiry
                Lesson Design         Education Reading
Week 10                               Lesson planning
                                      Share (Lit Unit)
11/18           N/A                   Putting it all       N/A
                                      together…
Week 11                               designing inquiry
                                      for ST
Last Mentoring                        Chapter from
                                      research book
11/25           Balancing round                            Inquiry
No School AISD- stones                                     Presentations
Class at
Melissa’s House
Week 12
12/2/19         Mental Health
Online Class    Online Training
                https://texas.kognito
Week 13         .com/
12/9/19                                                    TBA
Final Class
                                                                              9
