ADV 373/PR 377K
Integrated Communication Campaigns
Spring 2020
Mon/Wed 3 – 4:30 pm
Deena Kemp, PhD
dkemp@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Wednesdays 1:30 – 2:30 pm (or by appointment) BMC 4.376
Congratulations! You’ve made it to the capstone course—where you’ll take
everything you’ve learned in all of your courses and put it into action for a real client.
Course Objectives
The goal of the course is to give you experience planning, presenting and implementing an
integrated campaign. While the course is not designed to teach new skills, it is intended to help
you synthesize and apply what you have learned so far, refine and integrate your skills, and
improve your competence working in a professional environment.
The ability to work in teams is a particularly important skill in our industry; thus, teamwork is a
significant component of the course. How you each perform as members of your team is also a
significant component of your assessment. The course is demanding, but it is also very
rewarding. Work hard. Have fun!
Structure
The class will be divided into teams of four to five students each functioning as an agency to
develop a campaign for your assigned client. Teams with the same client will be competing to
“win the client’s business.”
You will be introduced to the clients in person soon. At this meeting, they will give you some
background on their organization and the problem they are trying to solve. You will ask
questions to begin getting to know your client. Then you will spend the next several weeks doing
research to understand the organization and their problem better and start conceptualizing
possible solutions. From here, you’ll develop and implement your strategy. The class culminates
with the delivery of a plans book and presentation of your ideas to the client.
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. That means a substantial portion of your grade
will be based on your team’s independent operations and presentation of your work. Although I
will be directing your work throughout the semester, you will determine the nature of your tasks
from week to week. I will serve as a consultant to each group and a liaison with the client,
providing advice, resources, and moral support as needed.


Prerequisites
ADV 370J/PR 367 Integrated Communication Management completed with C- or better.
Our Clients
Our clients have volunteered their time and assistance to contribute to the educational goals of
our department. Although we do not receive payment, this is a professional client-agency
relationship. The most successful group is the one that is professional, organized, respectful, and
flexible in meeting the client’s needs. As an incentive for volunteering, the plans, ideas and other
materials prepared for your client automatically become their property and may be used at their
discretion. All materials furnished by the client are to be treated as strictly confidential.
Williamson County and Cities Health District
wcchd.org
Kelli Becerra, Community Partnerships Manager
kelli.becerra@wilco.org
Melissa Tung, Director of Quality and Strategic Management
melissa.tung@wilco.org
Three Little Bears Clubhouse
threelittlebears.com
Heather Burke, Owner/Operator
heather@threelittlebears.com
Client Relationship and Communication
All interactions with your client should be purposeful. Team communications with the client
must be coordinated so that you do not bother them with unnecessary or redundant interruptions.
Outside of scheduled in-person client meetings, your primary form of communication should be
via email (unless requested by the client).
Required Reading
Steel, J. (2006). Perfect pitch: the art of selling ideas and winning new business. John Wiley &
Sons.
Additional Resources
Everything you’ve read, watched or used in previous courses. Additional materials will be made
available on the course Canvas site: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1268581.
Young, JW (1960). A Technique for Producing Ideas.
Williams, E. (2012). How 30 Great Ads Were Made: From Idea to Campaign. Laurence King.
Gangadharbatla, H., Sheehan, K., Koranda, D. (2017). Advertising Campaigns Workbook.
Melvin & Leigh.
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                             2


Assignments & Grading
Cover Letter & Resume                   5%
Crash Pitch & Plan                    10%
Status Report                           5%
Reading Response Essay                10%
Main Client Plans Book                30%
Main Client Pitch                     20%
Performance Evaluations               20%
A        94% or higher                B       80 – 83.99%                   D+       67 – 69.99%
A-       90 – 93.99%                  C+      77 – 79.99%                   D        64 – 66.99%
B+       87 – 89.99%                  C       74 – 76.99%                   D-       60 – 63.99%
B        84 – 86.99%                  C-      70 – 73.99%                   F        59% or lower
* Grades will not be rounded.
Resume & Cover Letter
You will each submit a cover letter applying for a position on an agency team: account services,
account planning, media, or creative. Your cover letter should indicate what position you are
applying for and why you believe you are the best person for the job. You may indicate which
client you would prefer to work with, or if you have no preference, and if there is a second role
you prefer. I will do my best to honor your position and client preferences but assignments will
ultimately be made to ensure balance in representation across teams. You also will include a
resume detailing your skills and experience. If you have never written a cover letter or resume
before, make an appointment to see a career counselor at Moody Career services right away.
Crash Pitch & Plan
You won’t always have months or even weeks to respond to a client request, whether you are
working for an in-house department or contracted agency. This assignment reflects that reality. It
is also intended as a warm up to your main project and an opportunity to reflect on what makes
for successful teamwork. More details will be provided soon.
Status Report
Over the course of the semester, each team member will submit a status report on the aspect of
the campaign they are taking lead on (think of these as a draft segment of the plan). This is an
individual assignment grade, although it will require input from members of your group. The
status report deadlines are unannounced. Once requested, you will have 72 hours to submit.
Reading Response Essay
This assignment is mainly to ensure you read the Steele book and distill the points most
important for developing a winning strategy and “nailing” your pitch. This is an individual
assignment and an opportunity for personal distinction. The essay question will be posted one
week before your response is due.
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                            3


Client Plans Book
The plans book will feature detailed information on the organization and its mission; the problem
and/or opportunity (your research); resources, budget and timeline; integrated strategy including
an evaluation plan; fully developed creative and messaging examples. The plans and tactics you
develop should demonstrate the strengths of an integrated communication approach, include both
advertising and public relations outcomes. The final book should be easy to read, visually
appealing and professional; include an introduction and executive summary of your
recommendations. You will submit one copy to me and another copy to the organization.
Client Pitch
Part of succeeding in any business that requires making pitches and competing for new business
is the ability to present your ideas in an engaging and convincing manner. While the value of
your ideas is, of course, extremely important, so is the manner in which you present those ideas.
You are expected to have both good ideas and good presentation skills.
Performance Evaluations
Evaluations will be a part of your professional career. Decisions about retention and promotion
are often based on others, and your, evaluation of your work. Your performance evaluation in
this course will mainly be based on how your peers rate your contribution to your team over the
entire semester. It will also include my observations of your participation at scheduled class and
team meetings. Show up, actively engage, make consistent, quality contributions; and
demonstrate you can work productively and respectfully with others, and you will do well.
Course Policies
Attention to details and deadlines is important for success in this industry and in this class.
All work must be professionally prepared and presented. Assignments and e-mail messages with
the client and/or me should be appropriately formatted, professional in tone and style, and free of
grammatical or typographical errors. Ensure that work is edited by more than one person prior to
submission or presentation. All work must be client-ready. Presentations should utilize
professional software, such as Microsoft PowerPoint or Google Slides.
Late work will not be accepted—no exceptions.
Although your agency directors take lead for their respective roles, everyone is expected to work
on all parts of the campaign and should be present for all meetings. Assume team meetings will
take place during our assigned class time. Do not schedule internships, work or other activities
during this time slot. Be present and punctual and stay for the entire class time.
During class meetings, use of electronic devices should be limited to work for this course. When
others are presenting, give them the respect of your full attention by putting devices away.
Silence cell phones and all other messaging devices during class.
Any questions about a grade must be presented in writing within 7 days after the grade is posted.
I will communicate with you primarily through the e-mail and announcement functions in
Canvas. Make sure your e-mail for Canvas is correct and consider activating Canvas alerts.
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                             4


Course Schedule
The course schedule is tentative. Changes may be necessary as our clients’ schedules shift and
group projects develop. Students are responsible for any changes to the schedule, which will be
announced in class and through e-mail. Readings and other material should be completed before
the scheduled session. There is no final exam for this class.
 Date            Topic/Task                                      Readings/Assignments
 Wed. 1/22       Course Overview & Introductions
 Mon. 1/27       Campaign Development &                          Due: Resume, Cover Letter
                 Project Management
 Wed. 1/29       Teamwork Strategies                             see Canvas
                 Assign: Crash Campaign
 Mon. 2/3        Crash Campaign Presentations                    Due: Crash Campaign Plan
 Wed. 2/5        Discuss Crash Campaign                          Sinek Talk: “Start with Why”
                 Communicating with the Client
 Mon. 2/10       Client Briefing: Williamson County*             Questions for Client
 Wed. 2/12       Client Briefing: Three Little Bears*            Questions for Client
 Mon. 2/17       Insights & Ideas                                see Canvas
 Wed. 2/19       Group Work
 Mon. 2/24       Group Work
 Wed. 2/26       Group Work
 Mon. 3/2        Consultations                                   Schedule on Canvas
 Wed. 3/4        Consultations                                   Schedule on Canvas
 Mon. 3/9        Group work
 Wed. 3/11       Group work                                      Due: Reading Response
 Mon. 3/16       Spring Break
 Wed. 3/18       Spring Break
 Mon. 3/23       The Art of Execution                            see Canvas
 Wed. 3/25       Effective Presentations                         see Canvas
 Mon. 3/30       First Pitches: Williamson County                Due: Creative Brief
 Wed. 4/1        First Pitches: Three Little Bears               Due: Creative Brief
 Mon. 4/6        Group Work
 Wed. 4/8        Group Work
 Mon. 4/13       Group Work
 Wed. 4/15       Group Work
 Mon. 4/20       Group Work
 Wed. 4/22       Pitch Preparation                               Due: Final Plans Book
 Mon. 4/27       Client Pitches: Williamson County               All groups in attendance
 Wed. 4/29       Client Pitches: Three Little Bears              All groups in attendance
 Mon. 5/4        Debrief & Reflection                            Due: Slides; Plans Book**
 Wed. 5/6        Course Wrap up                                  Due: Evaluations
*Only pitching agencies in attendance. **Only if there are client-requested changes (not graded).
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                          5


Student Rights & Responsibilities
    ▪ You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    ▪ You have a right to respect.
    ▪ You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    ▪ You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    ▪ You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    ▪ You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
        improve your learning environment.
    ▪ You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
        shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    ▪ You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
        with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
        overwhelming.
    ▪ You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
        others.
    ▪ Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
        bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    ▪ You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
        someone is excluded.
    ▪ You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each
        other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Statement of Respect and Inclusivity
You are expected to contribute to an inclusive and respectful class environment. Students of all
backgrounds are to be treated fairly and with honesty, integrity, and respect. We will cover
sensitive issues in class. Civil discourse, reasoned thought, sustained discussion, and constructive
engagement without degrading, abusing, harassing, or silencing others is required of all students.
Names and Personal Pronouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to instructors with the student’s
legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender
pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                             6


and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you
use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a previous class), you must
cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web
address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
You should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted to a plagiarism-
detection tool such as Turnitin. Turnitin is a software resource intended to address plagiarism
and improper citation. The software works by cross-referencing submitted materials with an
archived database of journals, essay, newspaper articles, books, and other published work. In
addition, other methods may be used to determine the originality of the paper. This software is
not intended to replace or substitute for my judgement regarding detection of plagiarism.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
email address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but
at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your
e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, quiz, assignment, or
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: https://ugs.utexas.edu/vick/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you
from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we can develop a
plan to meet your need and the requirements of the course. The University also provides a range
of resources to help you achieve your academic and personal goals:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                              7


learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644
(video phone) or ssd@austin.utexas.edu. http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p, SSB 5th floor,
512.471.3515 cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7, 512.471.2255 cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is Abby Simpson, LCSW
CMA 5.140, 512.471.7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services
Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Moody Writing Support Program
The Moody Writing Support Program provides one-on-one coaching, workshops, and video
resources to help undergraduates become better writers.
moodywriting@austin.utexas.edu
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/undergraduate/moody-writing-support-program
Canvas Tech Support for Students
Canvas technical support for students is available 24/7 at 1-855-308-2494. Or click the Help icon
in Canvas to have a live text chat with a technical support representative.
University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu
UT Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
IT@UT: https://it.utexas.edu
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                              8


BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a
culture of care on campus, go to: https://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
         have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or
with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they
are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The Office of Campus Safety and Security provides the following recommendations regarding
emergency evacuation. For more information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety or call 512-
471-5767.
▪ Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
    evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires
    exiting and assembling outside.
▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
    Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
▪ Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
    first week of class.
▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
    enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
    University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
▪ Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
    be found at: https://emergency.utexas.edu.
Kemp | ADV 373/PR 377K                                                                              9
