Download pdf version of syllabus here:
https://docs.google.com/document/d/111I8VvMI4oHJpPWNds4fcVgGpVIlQ6xPlXm-bUA5_FI/export?format=pdf
                        Applied Human Anatomy
                                              KIN s424K
                                         Unique Number: 74305
Instructor
Lisa Griffin, Ph.D.
l.griffin@austin.utexas.edu
Virtual Office Hours: M & TH 1:30 - 3:00p.m.
Description
This web-based course provides an overview of human anatomy. We will examine the
anatomical structures of the systems of the body with an emphasis on the regional anatomy of the
skeletal and muscular systems.
Objectives
This course is designed to provide you with the foundational knowledge necessary for future
work in a kinesiology-based field. You will gain an understanding of the structures of the body
and how they interact to create human movement. By the end of this course, you should be able
to:
     ❏ identify the anatomical structures and describe the basic functions of the systems of the
          body.
     ❏ describe the interrelationships between each of the systems of the body.
     ❏ explain the primary role that each of the systems of the body plays in creating and/or
          regulating human movement.
     ❏ identify and describe the functions of the bones, joints and ligaments of the body.
     ❏ identify the locations and describe the actions of the muscles of the body.
     ❏ explain the ways in which bones and muscles interact to create movement.
     ❏ identify and describe the various types of movements that occur throughout the body.
Essential Resources
You will need to purchase two essential resources for this course. First is the online content
from Human Anatomy & Physiology (Marieb & Hoehn, 11th edition, Pearson Modified
Mastering A&P edition). The textbook content is what is used throughout the online course.
Second is access to Visible Body, the 3D Anatomy suite upon which the virtual lab assignments
are based.
                                                                                                  1


Purchasing info and details available in Canvas. Costs below.
           Course            Human Anatomy & Physiology, 11th ed., Marieb
                                                                                    $119.99
           Content*          & Hoehn plus Modified Mastering A&P, Pearson
           Virtual Lab
                             Visible Body, web-based and mobile applications         $49.99
           Software
                                       TOTAL COST                                   $168.98
         *Optional printed loose leaf text available from Pearson for an additional cost.
Essential Technology
As this is a fully online course, all course materials -- videos, activities and assignments -- are
offered through Canvas. You will need dependable access to high-speed internet and a web
browser like Chrome or Firefox. Assessments will take place in Canvas, but utilize Proctorio
remote exam proctoring service. For those, you will need access to a webcam.
If you encounter a technical issue while taking this course, email oi2@utexas.edu for assistance.
ORGANIZATION OF THE COURSE
Applied Human Anatomy is divided into two units: Systems, which explores the body by
functional system (e.g. heart, lung, nerve) and Regions, which examines the bones, joints,
ligaments, muscles and movements of different parts of the body by location (e.g. head, elbow,
leg). There are a total of 13 modules in these two units.
Prior to each of the two major units, you must complete an Essentials module. These are
competency-based modules. Scoring 80% or higher on the assessment at the end of the
Essentials module unlocks the unit to follow. Essentials assessments do not count toward the
final grade, and they can be retaken as many times as you like.
                                                                                                    2


The outline for the course is as follows:
            Essentials I: Orientation to the Body*
            Unit I: SYSTEMS
              1)  Cardiovascular & Lymphatic
              2)   Nervous
              3)   Respiratory
              4)   Digestive & Urinary
              5)   Reproductive
            Essentials II: Musculoskeletal Anatomy & Human Movement*
            Unit II: REGIONS
            Axial Skeleton
              6) Head & Neck
              7) Trunk
            Appendicular Skeleton: Upper Extremity
              8) Shoulder Complex
              9) Elbow
              10) Wrist & Hand
            Appendicular Skeleton: Lower Extremity
              11) Pelvis & Hip
              12) Knee
              13) Ankle & Foot
         *competency-based module – you must pass the assessment with a score of at least 80%
         in order to move on to the unit-based modules
Practice Activities
After you have gone through the presentation of the course content, you will see a Practice
section in each module that provides additional opportunities to engage with the material. These
activities do not count as a grade, but do provide you with feedback on your learning and prepare
you for virtual lab and the assessment. Note that these activities link out to Pearson and Visible
Body websites.
                                                                                                   3


Virtual Lab Activities
For most modules, you are required to complete a virtual lab activity. Labs are designed to
simulate a dissection lab environment, and you will use Visible Body’s Human Anatomy Atlas
app to complete them. Virtual lab assignments are open note, and untimed, but virtual labs
must be submitted to Canvas by 8:00pm on due date. No late submissions can be accepted.
The designated due dates for the lab activities are listed below:
                    Virtual Labs (due by 8pm)
         Cardiovascular & Lymphatic July 14
         Nervous                          July 16
         Respiratory                      July 19
         Digestive & Urinary*             NO LAB DUE
         Reproductive*                    NO LAB DUE
         Head & Neck                      July 28
         Trunk                            July 30
         Shoulder Complex                 August 2
         Elbow                            August 4
         Wrist & Hand                     August 6
         Pelvis & Hip                     August 9
         Knee                             August 11
         Ankle & Foot                     August 13
        *There are no lab activities for these modules. This is a good time to get a head start on
        Essentials II and the Regions modules in Unit II.
        A Note on Grading and Labs in Summer
Due to the short duration of the course, grades for lab activities may not be posted before the 24
hour module assessment window opens. In order to ensure that you have the correct information
to study for the module assessments, answers for the lab activities will be posted to Canvas two
hours after the submission window closes. Please note that making copies of lab activity
answers or other course material in the form of printouts or screenshots is considered academic
dishonesty and may result in failure of the class and possible expulsion from the university.
Module Assessments & Final Exam
You will end each module with an online quiz, or module assessment. For each module, there is
a 24 hour window in which the assessment remains open on Canvas. Module assessments are not
long - 15 to 20 questions - and you have 45 minutes in which to complete them. You will use
Proctorio exam proctoring to show that you are not using any materials outside of your own
memory to complete the assessment. Keep in mind that you can start the assessment any time
within the 24 hour window, but once you open it, there is no way to stop the timer. (Use the
restroom, feed your dog, tell your mom you will be busy for an hour, etc. before you start.)
                                                                                                   4


The comprehensive final exam covers the material from across the semester, and includes 100
questions. You will have 2 ½ hours to complete the final exam.
Assessments will open on Canvas at 12:00am and close at 11:59pm on the following dates:
                MODULE ASSESSMENTS*
         Cardiovascular & Lymphatic July 15
         Nervous                         July 17
         Respiratory                     July 20
         Digestive & Urinary             July 22
         Reproductive                    July 24
         Head & Neck                     July 29
         Trunk                           July 31
         Shoulder Complex                August 3
         Elbow                           August 5
         Wrist & Hand                    August 7
         Pelvis & Hip                    August 10
         Knee                            August 12
         Ankle & Foot                    August 14
                       FINAL EXAM
         Comprehensive Final Exam        August 17
       *Please note that the competency-based modules (Essentials I and II) must be completed
       before accessing their respective unit-based modules. You will not be able to open future
       modules until you have passed the competency-based assessment with a score of at least
       80%. Scores on these assessments will not count towards your final grade.
                                                                                               5


GRADES
Grades for the courses include grades from on the virtual labs, module assessments, and the final
exam. Grading scheme is below:
          Virtual Lab Activities (x10)*      20%
          Module Assessments (x12)*          60%
          Comprehensive Final Exam           20%
          TOTAL                              100%
         *The lowest score for each of these categories will be dropped. Therefore, only 10 labs
         and 12 module assessments will factor into your grade.
Final grades are calculated based on the following scale:
          A     92.5-100%
          A-    89.5-92.49%
          B+    87.5-89.5%
          B     82.5-87.49%
          B-    79.5-82.49%
          C+    77.5-79.5%
          C     72.5-77.49%
          C-    69.5-72.49%
          D+    67.5-69.49%
          D     62.5-67.49%
          D-    59.5-62.49%
          F     < 59.49%
Keys for Success
Please understand that in summer, this course moves at a quick pace in order to provide you with
all of the information included in an introductory, kinesiology-based anatomy course.
This course has been designed to give you the tools you need to learn quickly, retain what you
have learned, and monitor your progress along the way. The key to success for most students
will be to use the tools available to you and keep up with deadlines.
                                                                                                 6


Course Timeline
As you will see in the timeline below, lab assignments are due the evening before module
assessments. To avoid missing a deadline
You will need to stay on top of the course content so that you do not miss a deadline. Here are a
few recommendations to keep you on track:
    ➔   Complete Essentials I module by 11:59 pm on July 13 (the first day of class)
    ➔   Complete Essentials II module by Sunday, July 26
    ➔   Complete lab assignments by 8:00 pm on the designated due date
    ➔   Take module assessments by 11:59 pm on the designated due date
You know your schedule and how you learn, so view these as suggestions. Just be sure to give
yourself time to go through all of the module content, virtual labs and practice activities before
taking the assessments.
              MODULE                             LAB                       ASSESSMENT
  WEEK 1
 Essentials I                                      --                              **
    Cardiovascular & Lymphatic                  July 14                         July 15
    Nervous                                     July 16                         July 17
  WEEK 2
    Respiratory                                 July 19                         July 20
    Digestive & Urinary                            --                           July 22
    Reproductive                                   --                           July 24
  WEEK 3
  Essentials II                                    --                              **
    Head & Neck                                 July 28                         July 29
    Trunk                                       July 30                         July 31
  WEEK 4
    Shoulder Complex                            August 2                       August 3
    Elbow                                       August 4                       August 5
    Wrist & Hand                                August 6                       August 7
  WEEK 5
    Pelvis & Hip                                August 9                       August 10
    Knee                                       August 11                       August 12
    Ankle & Foot                               August 13                       August 14
  WEEK 6
    Final Exam                                     --                          August 17
                                                                                                   7


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Honor Code:
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/events/sjs_honorcode.php
Policy on Academic Dishonesty:
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student
may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of Students.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
Services for Students with Disabilities
At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations
should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) Office. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be provided,
students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.For more information,
visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Religious Holy Days
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. Sections 51.911
and 51.925 of the Texas Education Code address absences by students and instructors for
religious holy days. Section 51.911 states that a student shall be excused from attending classes
or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day,
including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may
not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or
complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the
absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance
of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Counseling and Mental Health Center
There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often
helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or
feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
                                                                                                    8


Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                                                                                                9
