Advanced Social Psychology
Psychology 365L (unique 42905), Summer 2019
Mondays and Wednesdays 1:00 – 2:30pm (dismal at 2:15pm)
Location: Sea 2.108
Professor: Professor Marlone Henderson
Office: Seay 4.224
Office Hours: Thursday 2:30pm-3:30pm and by appointment
marlone.henderson@gmail.com
Prerequisite: For lower division courses (except Intro) the Psychology Department will drop all
students who do not meet the prerequisite PSY 301 with a C or better
Reading – No textbook. Readings will consist of journal articles, book chapters, newspaper articles,
and blogs. All reading will be available at least two weeks before class on canvas.
Course Overview: The purpose of this course is to provide an in-depth discussion of the social
psychological factors that increase versus decrease a person’s likelihood to engage in prosocial
behavior. This course will touch on the consequences (psychological, physical, and economic) of
engaging in different kinds of prosocial behavior. Topics will include charitable donations,
volunteering, corporate philanthropy, and other acts of helping behavior. Readings will draw
heavily on social psychological theory and evidence. Class will involve “debate type” discussions
and active class participation.
Grading: Your grade will be based on class discussion, reaction papers, and a final paper. The
professor will provide feedback on reaction papers to help students improve their writing.
1. Class participation (66 points total based on maximum possible 3 points for each of the 22 class
    discussion dates, excludes the first and second class dates, the final paper check in date, and the
    round table date).
    •   Starting July 17th, each week, two or three students will lead class discussion. Those
        students that are not assigned to be class leaders will be required to submit
        comments/questions about each of the assigned reading to the class leaders. Class leaders
        will grade these comments based on their creativity, critical assessment, and overall
        usefulness for facilitating the class discussion.
            o Each leader will assign a score of 1 (low), 2(moderate), or 3(high) for each class day
                submission. Professor Henderson will take the average of these scores and assign
                that for that class day submission.
            o Class leaders automatically receive a 3 for the class day submission.
            o When should you send your comments/question to the class leaders? By 5pm
                before the relevant class date. No exceptions. If they are not submitted by 5pm
                before the relevant class date, you will automatically receive a zero.
2. Class attendance (120 possible): Attendance required. Sign in every class. Each class worth 5
points. Excludes the first two dates, leaving 24 class dates.


            o Non-class leaders are allowed to miss two classes without penalty
            o Class leaders are allowed to miss one class without penalty. Class leaders must
                 notify other leaders and Professor Henderson no later than 5pm the day before class
                 if they will miss; automatic deduction of 30 points from final grade will be
                 applied if this is violated. No more than 1 leader can miss on the same day.
                 automatic deduction of 30 points from final grade will be applied if this is
                 violated.
2. Reaction papers 1-4 (40 points total based on 10 points for each reaction paper). You will
   have the opportunity to revise your first reaction paper. For each reaction paper, you
   should submit a 3-5 page new times roman, double-spaced 12 point font, 1-inch margin
   paper that
   •   Focuses on one of the readings and summarizes the main prediction(s) from that paper [2
       point], explain why we (as readers) should care about the research, specifically identifying
       the gaps in the scientific literature that the article aims to fill [2 points] and practical value of
       the research for society [2 points]
   •   Identify at least one potential boundary condition (i.e., moderator variable that reduces or
       eliminates the observed effect) that was not identified by the author(s) [2 points]. DO NOT
       identify a moderator variable that you believe would enhance the observed effect.
   •   Provide a description of a realistic procedure that you would use to test your boundary
       condition [2 points]
3. Final paper (100 points total) that will be graded based on clarity, completeness, and
   creativity. You should write a 10-20 page (references not included), double-spaced, new times
   roman, 12 point font, 20 references minimum, that includes the following:
   •   A prediction for a novel basic effect & discuss the practical relevance of this idea for society
       if you are correct [20 points]
   •   A prediction for a boundary condition (i.e., a moderator variable that reduces or eliminates
       the predicted effect (manipulated or measured) of the basic effect [20 points]
   •   A description of a gap in the relevant literature and how your proposed experiment would
       fill this gap [20 points]
   •   A realistic experimental design (constraints of an undergraduate at UT), including
       participants & procedure [20 points]
   •   A prosocial behavioral outcome that will be measured and justification of why this is a
       reasonable measure [20 points]


How to calculate your grade?
Your Class Participation Total (66) + Your Reaction Paper Total (40) + Your Final Paper Total (100) +
Attendance (120) / Total Possible Points (326) = Your percentage
Grading scale for you grade in the class (percentage):
   A = 93-100                        C = 73-76
   A- = 90-92                        C- = 70-72
   B+ = 87-89                        D+ = 67-69
   B = 83 - 86                       D = 63-67
   B- = 80-82                        D- = 60-62
   C+ = 77-79                        F < 60
Notices/Policies:
1) Class Website: Please check canvas regularly. I will post announcements, grades, and the
assigned reading.
2) Attendance: See above
3) Late assignments: Any assignment not turned in on time will be marked as a zero! That
includes comments sent to discussion leaders, reaction papers, and the final paper.
4) Note on avoidance of academic offences: All students registered in this course are expected to
know what constitutes academic integrity, to avoid committing scholastic dishonesty, and to take
responsibility for their actions. Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating,
plagiarism, collusion, using, buying, stealing, and/or divulging the contents of an examination,
removing a test from the examination room, substituting for another person, having someone take a
test for you, misplacing or damaging property of the University or destroying information so
another student may not have materials, falsifying research data, misrepresenting facts including
providing false grades or resumes, presenting someone else’s work as one’s own academic work
and falsifying academic records. The Student Judicial Services office in the Office of the Dean of
Students has the responsibility for following up and making the final determination. If you need
further help in learning what constitutes an academic offence, ask your TA and/or your course
instructor for guidance.
5) University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
6) Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence: Email is recognized as an official mode of
university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your email for university and
course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
(including me) informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail
regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s
policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.


7) Documented Disability Statement: If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a
letter that documents your disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users
who are deaf or hard of hearing). Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can
discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should
remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
8) Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, quiz,
or examination, to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
9) Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
10) Emergency Evacuation Policy: Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is
made. Please familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require
assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an
evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the
Fire Prevention Services office.
11) Dropping Courses, Rules for Undergraduate Students:
    Subject to the conditions below, an undergraduate may drop a course through the midsemester
    deadline in a long-session semester or the last class day in a summer term; these dates and the
    dates of other deadlines discussed below are given in the academic calendar. The student must
    remain in conformity with the quantity of work rule and must obtain all required approvals.
    International students must obtain written permission from the International Office, in addition to
    other required approvals, to drop a course.
    On the recommendation of the instructor, and with the approval of the student's academic dean, a
    student may be required to drop a course at any time because of neglect or for lack of
    preparation.
    Dropping a course through the twelfth class day. The following rules apply from the first
    class day through the twelfth class day of a long-session semester and from the first class day
    through the fourth class day of a summer term: To drop a course during this period, the student
    must have the approval of the chair of the department offering the course. In some colleges and
    schools, the student must also have the approval of his or her adviser and dean; each student
    must consult the regulations of his or her college or school. If the student is allowed to drop the
    course, the course is deleted from his or her academic record. Normally, the approval of the chair


of the department during this period is routine, and the student may initiate the drop through the
registration system. However, in some circumstances, a department may disapprove requests to
drop certain courses. If a drop request is not accepted by the registration system, the student
should consult the department that offers the course for more information.
Dropping a course through the fourth week of classes. The following rules apply from the
thirteenth class day through the twentieth class day of a long-session semester and from the fifth
class day through the tenth class day of a summer term: To drop a course during this period, the
student must have the approval of his or her dean. In some colleges and schools, the approval of
the student's adviser is also required; each student must consult the regulations of his or her
college or school. If the student is allowed to drop the course, the symbol Q appears on his or her
academic record to indicate a drop without academic penalty.
Dropping a course after the fourth week of classes. The following rules apply from the
twenty-first class day through the midsemester deadline in a long-session semester and from the
eleventh class day through the last class day of a summer term: To drop a course during this
period, the student must have the approval of the instructor, the student's adviser, and the
student's dean. If the instructor approves the drop, he or she will assign the symbol Q or a grade
of F. The symbol Q indicates that the student has a grade of at least C in the course, that no final
grade has yet been assigned, or that no academic penalty is in order because of the student's
performance and the nature of the course. In compelling circumstances, the student's dean may
assign the symbol Q for nonacademic reasons.
Dropping a course after midsemester. After the midsemester deadline for dropping courses in
a long-session semester, an undergraduate may not drop a course except with the approval of his
or her dean, and then only for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons.
Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You may be asked to read and discuss your peers’
work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written
work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.


Proposed Schedule of Classes
 Class    Monday                       Assignment Due Date     Assigned Reading
 Date
 July 15  Course overview
 July 16  Broad Perspective on Human
          Nature
 July 17  Self vs. Others
 July 18  Biology                                              See files on canvas
 July 19  Morality                     Reaction Paper 1 due    See files on canvas
 July. 22 Religion 1                                           See files on canvas
 July. 23 Religion 2                                           See files on canvas
 July. 24 Religion 3                   Revision of P1 due      See files on canvas
 July. 25 Status 1                                             See files on canvas
 July. 26 Status 2                                             See files on canvas
 July. 29 Group Dynamics 1                                     See files on canvas
 July. 30 Group Dynamics 2                                     See files on canvas
 July. 31 Media 1                                              See files on canvas
 Aug. 1   Media 2                      Reaction Paper 2 due    See files on canvas
 Aug. 2   Media 3                                              See files on canvas
 Aug. 5   Final Paper Check -in        Current Grade Displayed See files on canvas
 Aug. 6   Gift giving                                          See files on canvas
 Aug. 7   Mood, Feelings, and Affect 1                         See files on canvas
          (Well-being)
 Aug. 8   Mood, Feelings, and Affect 2 Reaction Paper 3 due    See files on canvas
          (Stress)
 Aug. 9   Mood, Feelings, and Affect 3                         See files on canvas
          (Guilt)
 Aug. 12  Compliance Techniques 1                              See files on canvas
 Aug. 13  Compliance Techniques 2                              See files on canvas
 Aug. 14  Choice 1                                             See files on canvas
 Aug. 15  Choice 2                                             See files on canvas
 Aug. 16  Self-regulation              Reaction Paper 4 due    See files on canvas
 Aug 19   Round Table Review           Final Paper due
