AET 326C            The University of Texas at Austin | | Department of AET
Fall 2019           Syllabus
Course Information  3D Modeling And Texturing
                    Thursday 6:30 - 9:30pm in ​DFA 4.126
                    Course website at ​http://canvas.utexas.edu
Instructor          Isaac Oster, Adjunct Faculty, AET
                    ioster@utexas.edu​ / isaac.oster@gmail.com
                    office hours: By Appointment
Catalog Description An introduction to surfacing 3D game models using state of the art workflows and tools.
Course Overview     This course will focus on training students to create realistic materials for existing 3D assets using
                    Substance Painter.
Prerequisite(s)     None
Objectives &        By the end of the course, students should be able to:
Assessment          1) Create complex, realistic hard surface geometry using Zbrush. Students will be proficient with
Instruments            the following components:
                               a. ZModeler
                               b. Dynamesh
                               c. Subtools
                               d. ZSpheres
                               e. Retopology
                               f. Dynamic Subdivision
                               g. Live Boolean
                    2) Create anatomically accurate organic models using Zbrush
Course materials    Fusion 360 - Introduction
                    http://www.isaacoster.com/?page_id=2405
                    Fusion 360 - Pistol Tutorial
                    https://www.pluralsight.com/courses/modeling-pistol-fusion-360-2390
                    Real time Pistol Tutorial (After Fusion tutorial is complete)
                    https://www.pluralsight.com/courses/photorealistic-weapons-zbrush-quixel-suite-2456
                    Introduction to Zbrush
                    http://www.isaacoster.com/?page_id=2043
                    PW - zbrush_austin
                    Mask tutorial (Hard surface Zbrush)
                    https://www.pluralsight.com/courses/modeling-rendering-a-face-mask-zbrush-keyshot-2121
                    Introduction to Python Scripting in Maya
                    http://www.isaacoster.com/?page_id=2245


                        PW - python_austin
                        1 hour Substance Painter Crash Course
                        https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IANS610d-VQ&list=PLpoXxlr0idMn26r9VavnnZesmzjZFXw4R
                        Additional course material will be posted to Canvas.
    UT Electronic Mail  Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students.
    Notification Policy  Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
                         University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be
                         time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
                        It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his
                         or her official e-mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
                         Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for
                         missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a
                         spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
                        (see ​http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy​)
    Use of Class        The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
    Materials            assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
                         violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
                         Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may
                         be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could
                         result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to
                         websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
                         (from https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Attendance              You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for
                        in-class assignments or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up. However, if a
                        serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance,
                        please inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
                        Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without
                        permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy. Three tardies equals
                        an absence. Four absences will lower your course grade by one letter grade. Additional absences may
                        result in failure of the course.
Religious Holidays      Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes
                        or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including
                        travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized
                        for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
                        student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
                        notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be absent from
                        scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
                        (from ​http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf​)
Classroom Etiquette     Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the instructor.
                        1) ​Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. ​If you must come in late at the beginning of
                         class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t
                         hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an announced break, since often the
                         second part of the class period is when we will engage in group activities.
                        2) ​Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the classroom​. If you forget to do so, and
                         your phone rings, chirps, or vibrates loudly during class, turn it off immediately and discreetly. I reserve
                         the right to penalize repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s assignment.
                        3)​ Don’t distract other students.​ Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights, sounds,
                         and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music,
                         polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.


               4)​ Consider bringing earphones and/or earplugs to class for work sessions​. If you like to listen to music
               while you work, you are welcome to do so, so long as no one else can hear it. And if you are easily
               distracted by noise/conversation, please bring earplugs to wear so that the conversation from desk
               critiques will not bother you.
Exams      There will be no exams. Grade is determined by project quality.
Grading    Course work will be weighted as follows in calculating the final grade:
           Ears - 10 points
           Hands - 20 points
           Fists - 30 points
           Animal - 40 points
           Mask - 100 points
           200 Points Total
           A    95
           A-   92
           B+   88
           B    85
           B-   82
           C+   78
           C    75
           C-   72
           D+   68
           D    65
           D-   62
Academic   The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide
Integrity  by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to maintain
           absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the
           University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors
           with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
                 ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                 ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
                      assistance in preparing them;
                 ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
                      discipline; and
                 ● avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
           (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic   In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty
Dishonesty as including ​any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage​, such as:
                 ● Cheating
                 ● Plagiarism
                 ● Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
                 ● Falsifying Academic Records
                 ● Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
                      extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
                 ● M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
                      without authorization to do so)
                 ● Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
           (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)


                      Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
                      including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
                      (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
   Plagiarism             “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a
                          gift, or obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another
                          source, including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other
                          expression or media, and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being
                          offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
                          http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline
                          -and-conduct/).
   Copyright and          Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to
   Fair Use               designers. Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will
                          be covered by the doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of
                          your own and other copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license
                          your own and others’ works. We will discuss these issues during the semester as needed,
                          but when you have questions about whether or when you can appropriate someone
                          else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K. Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at
                          http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
   Services for           The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
   Students with          accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
   Disabilities (SSD)     Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​,
                          http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
                          documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make
                          the necessary accommodations promptly.
   Student Support        There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT.
   Services               They include (but are not limited to) the following:
                          Fine Arts Career Services​ (512-232-7333, ​utexas.edu/finearts/careers​) provides a full
                          range
                          of services and resources to support students and alumni.
                          The Undergraduate Writing Center
                          (512-471-6222, ​uwc.utexas.edu​) helps students with every phase of writing assignments
                          for
                          their courses.
                          The Sanger Learning Center​ (512-471-3614, ​utexas.edu/ugs/slc​) provides study skills,
                          time-management, and note-taking courses.
                          University Health Services​ (512-471-4955, ​healthyhorns.utexas.edu)​ provides medical and
                          health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who
                          are
                          officially enrolled in certain University programs.
                          The Counseling and Mental Health Center​ (512-471-3515, ​cmhc.utexas.edu)​ helps
                          students with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of
                          student life.
Emergency                 Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to
Procedures                provide students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the
                          safety and security of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify
                          students, faculty, and staff of emergency situations and keep them updated on the
                          situation. Emergency officials also have the ability to disseminate important information
                          via text message directly to the cell phones of users subscribed to the service. Please
                          consider subscribing to this service at ​https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
                          (​adapted from
                          http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf​)


Campus Carry              The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas,
                          as well as buildings and spaces that are accessible to the public. Permit holders are
                          allowed to carry in classrooms.
                          It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or
                          about their person at all times while on campus. “About” the person means that a license
                          holder may carry a holstered handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or
                          handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially
                          changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have enough
                          tension to keep the gun in place if jostled. A license holder may not carry a partially or
                          wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway, street,
                          sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
                          The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly
                          carried gun on campus should immediately call 911. (from
                          https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
Overview of Schedule      Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need
                          to be altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and
                          design program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the
                          schedule will be announced via Canvas.
                          Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas. Use the
                          numbers in the left-hand column of this schedule (01, 02, 03,...30) to locate the Canvas
                          module that corresponds to a given day of class (e.g., if you are looking for the reading
                          assignment for the seventh day of class, T 4 Feb, it will be posted to module 07 in Canvas).
Thursdays class meeting dates, Fall 2019 (from https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/19-20)
Assignment Schedule
29 Aug - First Day
05 Sep - Ear 1
12 Sep - Ear 2
19 Sep - Hand 1
26 Sep - Hand 2
03 Oct - Fist 1
10 Oct - Fist 2
17 Oct - Animal in progress
24 Oct - Animal Due
31 Oct - Mask
07 Nov - Mask
14 Nov - Mask
21 Nov - Mask
28 Nov - No Class, Thanksgiving
05 Dec - Final Class, All Work Due
Fall 2019 final exam calendar: h     ​ ttps://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/199/finals
