                                    Advertising 377 [06510]
                                  Advanced Media Strategies
                                            Spring 2019
Lisa Dobias, Associate Professor of Practice            Dobias@austin.utexas.edu
BMC 4.360                                               Office Hours: TTh12:30 – 2:00
                                                               & by appointment
Class Meetings: TTh 2:00 – 3:30 in BMC 4.206
There is not TA for this course. There are several critical out of class meetings required
throughout the semester per our schedule. Please plan accordingly in advance.
There is no final exam scheduled for our course.
Course Objectives
This is a TexasMedia cornerstone class and our objectives are simple – to transform you into
sponges. The outcome of this semester’s work will be to have you soak up as much information
from as many perspectives as possible across the worlds of communication, technology, and pop-
culture. The more you experience, the more flexible you are in your thinking, the smarter your
ideas become, the better job you’ll get, the sooner you’ll get the corner office, and so it goes…
Understand from this point on you are a super sponge that can never be too saturated.
Course Description
This class will immerse you in the many issues that comprise the media industry today on the road
to fostering your sense of independence in media analysis and recommendation. In here you will
be put in the driver’s seat where you are personally responsible for creating great media
solutions. It is not enough to simply use your “I’m a media person” brain. You must think about
the various worlds in today’s communication, entertainment, and business environments and
attempt to craft ideas that bring these facets all together for your clients in just the right way.
Let’s face it. No matter how you look at it, this is a highly competitive field you have chosen. You
better know as much as possible about using media as a competitive tool in business because this
is what will show immediately how you think – and ultimately – make it happen for you. This
means you need to be able to view each scenario you are dealing with from any of many angles.
This fluidity of thought is only one of the major things we will be working on.
Throughout the semester, you will be required to complete a number of different assignments
that focus on a wide variety of muscle groups in your brain. We will exercise you in large and small
group environments as well as individual experiences. You will read, write, and present. You will
also be exposed to quick response projects that mimic day-to-day industry demands as well as
longer-term projects that allow more in-depth research, analysis, and strategy development. Our
goal is to put you into as many different situations and push as many buttons as possible in 15
weeks that are both inside and well outside of your current comfort zones.
                          Warning: This is an extremely hands-on class.
                                  Get ready to roll up your sleeves!


Course Design
This course has been designed as a seminar. That means that I don’t do all of the talking. Rather,
we have an ongoing exchange of ideas. Most class periods will be devoted to the discussion of
selected topics as indicated in your course schedule daily plan of attack. In-class activities will also
keep things lively. Throughout the semester, you will also be given class time to use as required
agency breakout sessions.
We will complete a variety of work over the next 15 weeks to exercise many different brain muscle
sets. Specific logistical details [deadlines and expectations] will be provided for each project at
the appropriate time. What follows is a top-line summary of the work we will take on this
semester. Please note, late work will be critiqued, but will receive a grade of 0.
         • You, Inc. - At the beginning of the course, you will be subdivided into small groups and
will be asked to pull together a quick, yet professional document and presentation that is meant
to jump start your semester while creating maximum sponge potential.
         • Client #1 & Client #2 Insight & Communication Decks/Presentations – We will work on
developing your sense of business as well as of strategy and content development via two very
real clients on extremely diverse projects. As always, this semester will include a unique
competitive twist for your teams. You will be doing everything from a full digital media presence
analysis, to creating media platforms portfolios that center on all mass and niche media, including
social, mobile, guerilla, and PR efforts. You will be exposed to new resources and skill sets
throughout this process. We will conduct all of this work under very strict non-disclosure
agreements, so please take this seriously.
         • Creative Collaboration Brief – Because it is critical that you work on short-term,
investigative strategic development with tangible creative impact we will be doing an
experimental project this semester. For two-weeks you will be partnered with ADs + CWs in Texas
Creative to research and formulate unique target insights, a solid brand plan, and a detailed
content plan. Should this experimental project not come together as intended a substitute
individual project will be used.
         • What Now? - From time-to-time we will have in-class small group work sessions. These
impromptu assignments will stem directly from other discussions in the class, and are meant to
replicate the quick thinking needed to successfully support a company’s need to make in-the-
moment decisions. You must be present by signing the daily roster to get credit for these sessions
and there are no make-ups if you miss class on these days.
         • Peer Rating – Because team work is such a huge requirement in our industry, each
student will be given a detailed peer review at the end of each group project. A student’s
combined reviews throughout the semester will be used to generate their individual peer rating
for the semester. Please note, a student earning below an acceptable rating on their peer reviews
is in danger of not being able to continue in TexasMedia courses in future semesters. In other
words, you are here because you want to be. If your performance indicates differently, this is
evidence that the program is not for you.


         • Regular Attendance - Yes, I’m one of those instructors who actually expects you to
attend class and to interact with us while you’re there. The reason for this is that our course is so
discussion and project based that you have to be present to grow with us. I will take role via a
sign in sheet each day and not being present will affect your grade. You must sign the roster
each day for yourself (no friend sign ins) to get recorded for attending. I will remind you, but I
cannot be asked to “remember” you being there. The sign-in sheet is the final say. Because life
happens, two absences are excused. Each additional absence is a 5% deduction.
Course Materials
Most of the materials you will need for this course will be provided on-line via Canvas.
You will also be responsible for covering the costs associated with producing materials for all of
your class assignments and presentations. Some semesters this will include any small costs that
are incurred for travel to and from client presentations.
You will also be required to sign up for free email updates from two of the following providers of
your choice and to regularly check the headlines to stay current:
Media Post - https://www.mediapost.com/register/
AdWeek - http://www.adweek.com/newsletter-signup
Ad Age - http://adage.com/help/emailprefs
PR News - http://www.prnewsonline.com/
Media Life Magazine - http://www.medialifemagazine.com/subscribe/
Online Wall Street Journal - http://online.wsj.com/news/technology
Communications
We will communicate regularly using the Canvas site for this class at http://courses.utexas.edu. I
will also be glad to have conversations with you via email, but will utilize a guaranteed 48-hour
return email policy due to the heavy volume of emails at certain times of the semester. I will not
be able to use email to answer your questions regarding projects or other detailed coursework
because such questions are best addressed in a person before or after class or during office
hours.
Grades
Grades will be handed back with feedback in class per our schedule. Canvas will be used to post
final course grades. Grades will be assigned based on the following distribution.
Client #1                              25%
Client #2                              30%
You, Inc.                              15%
POVs                                   10%
Peer Rating                            10%
What Now? [3]                          5%
Regular Attendance                     5%
                                       100%


We are under the system of +/-. The following scale will be used to determine the general breaks for
final grades.
                     Proportion of Points       Letter Grade
                          92.5-100%                        A
                          89.5-92.4                        A-
                          86.5-89.4                        B+
                          82.5-86.4                        B
                          79.5-82.4                        B-
                          76.5-79.4                        C+
                          72.5-76.4                        C
                          69.5-72.4                        C-
                          59.5-69.4                        D
                          Below 59.4                       F
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University of Texas Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
To make sure we are all on the same page, the following details UT’s policy on academic
integrity:
“Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the
Student Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.”
What does this policy mean to you in this class? If you are caught cheating in any manner
[including plagiarizing work in your project], you will be significantly reprimanded in a manner that
correlates with the severity of the problem. This can range from being required to repeat the
course, to expulsion from the University. Please take this as seriously as we do!
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259 [voice] or 471-6441 [TTY].
If you have already made official arrangements with the Dean of Students office for approved
accommodations, please present your official letter of accommodation to me within the first two
weeks of class to allow time for us to set up your program of accommodation.


Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there
are options available for support.
For immediate support:
- Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
- Brief assessments and referral services
- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Closing Thoughts
Please notify me in advance if you are having any difficulties with which I can assist. It is my job to
make sure that you have all the information and guidance you need to learn a great deal in this
course. It is your job to see that you take full advantage of all resources and put forth the effort
needed to succeed.
This is what you’ve been waiting for guys!
Good Luck! And hold on. Here we go!


                                                   Advanced Media Strategies                                          rev. 1
                                                                                                                    1.22.19
                                                         Daily Plan of Attack
                                                              Spring 2019
        Day  Date    Topic                                                        Relevant Events
   1    T     1/22   Course Overview & Expectations
   2    Th    1/24   Introduction to Yourself and Your Media Cohort
   3    T     1/29   What is a Deck? - Logistics and Basics - You, Inc. Assigned
   4    Th    1/31   Digitas Campus Visit                                         Ground Hog Day this weekend
   5    T     2/5    Client 1 NDA & Reveal - Remaining Time Work Day              Lunar New Year
   6    Th    2/7    Project Launch with Client 1
   7    T     2/12   You, Inc. due; Presentations
   8    Th    2/14   Prioritizing Markets - Tiering Structures - What Now 1?      Happy Valentine's Day
   9    T     2/19   You, Inc. Feedback Session
  10    Th    2/21   Plan Breakouts - Check Point
  11    T     2/26   Plan Breakouts - Check Point
        W     2/27   COC CCS Career Fair 10:00 - 3:00, DKR Stadium, 8th Floor Attendance highly recommended
  12 Th       2/28   Interviewing 101: What Now 2?
  13 T        3/5    The Richard's Group Campus Visit
                                                                                  Daylight Savings Time starts this
  14 Th       3/7    Plan Strategy Day                                            weekend
        M     3/11   Client 1 Plans Due by 5:00
  15 T        3/12   Presentation Strategy Sessions
        W     3/13   Client 1 Presentations
  16 Th       3/14   Texas Media 20th Celebration!!!
  17 T        3/19   Happy Spring Break!                                          Spring Break
  18    Th    3/21   Happy Spring Break!                                          Spring Break
  19    T     3/26   Client 2 NDA & Reveal
  20    Th    3/28   Project Launch with Client 2
  21    T     4/2    Creative Collaboration Kick Off
  22    Th    4/4    Plan Organizational Day - Q&A Session
  23    T     4/9    Creative Collaboration Sessions
  24    Th    4/11   Creative Collaboration Sessions
  25    T     4/16   Plan Breakouts - Check Point
  26    Th    4/18   Plan Breakouts - Check Point                                 Passover + Easter this weekend
  27    T     4/23   Creative Collaborations Due - Discussion
  28    Th    4/25   How Agencies Make Money - What Now 3?
  29    T     4/30   Plan Strategy Day
  30    Th    5/2    Plan Strategy Day                                            Cinco de Mayo this weekend
        M     5/6    Client 2 Plans Due by 5:00
  31 T        5/7    Presentation Strategy Sessions
        W     5/8    Client #2 Final Presentations
  32 Th       5/9    Wrap Up Session + Cohort Photo                               Last Class Day
Please note, this schedule is highly subject to change due to the nature of the course and the reality of working
with outside industry professionals. Updates will be announced and/or posted with new revision numbers as needed.
It is the responsibility of each student to keep track of any announced schedule changes.
Key Blue Text: Contact with the "outside world" is planned. Please prepare and dress in business casual.
        Green Text: No organized class meeting. On workdays, meet your instructor in her office.
        Orange Text: Meeting outside normal class time will be necessary.
