                               Barack Obama and American Democracy
                                              Dr. Peniel E. Joseph
                                                    Fall 2018
                            HIS 350R (unique# 39227)/AFR 372F (unique# 30702)
                                       GAR 0.128 M 3:00PM-6:00PM
Office: GAR 3.114
Office Hours: Th 12:30-2:30pm
Office phone: 512-475-7241
peniel.joseph@austin.utexas.edu
@PenielJoseph
                                              Course Description
This undergraduate seminar focuses on the impact of Barack Obama’s watershed presidency on American
democracy.
The course utilizes President Barack Obama’s personal biography and political trajectory as a prism to
view larger conflicts, debates, transformations, and setbacks in the black freedom struggle and the
relationship between race and democracy at the local, regional, national, and global levels. Barack
Obama’s watershed 2008 presidential election inspired hopes for a “post-racial” future that confronted
harsh political, cultural, and economic realities that at times reinforced entrenched racial divides. In other
instances, Obama’s election opened new opportunities for Americans and citizens around the world to
forge a more radically multicultural, multiracial, and multiethnic future
Students interested in black politics, civil rights, social policy and the deep connections between the
historical development of racial justice struggles and contemporary policy debates and challenges would
find this course of interest.
Students will be evaluated based on four criteria:
     1) Weekly three-paragraph critical analysis of the readings.
     2) Five Page Book Review of Obama, Dreams From My Father
     3) Five Book Review of Dyson, The Black Presidency
     4) Class participation
Readings: We will a total of four books during the semester
The course books will focus on Obama, the historical and political context that shaped him, and the one
he helped to transform as a student, community organizer, state senator, U.S. senator, and two term
president. We will read, study, discuss, and critique several different kind of works related to Obama
including his own memoir; a critical political and intellectual biography; the first policy assessment of his
presidency by a group of historians; and the meaning of his iconography to black Americans.


                                                  Assignments
         A weekly three-paragraph response on the assigned reading is due by 5 PM the day before
our seminar. Each student should read everyone’s essay before the start of class and provide comments,
both positive and critical, that will be used for class discussion. Your responses should be submitted in the
“Discussion” section of Canvas which will allow you to post your response as well as comment on the
responses of others.
Each paragraph should be five sentences and consider the following:
1.       How does the author approach race and democracy in shaping Obama? How does the history
         being explored connect to our contemporary understanding of black and Africana identity
         and what are the theoretic and political implications of the work, both historically and
         contemporaneously?
2.       What’s the argument being laid out and how persuasive do you find it to be? Examine the sources
         in the bibliography and endnotes to consider the way in which the author has marshaled their
         evidence.
3.       How does the work (book chapter) merit analytically and stylistically? Does the author’s analysis
         seem persuasive and insightful, even when you disagree?
4.       Think about the readings in tandem, both thematically, chronologically, and theoretically. How
         does America’s complicated racial history and legacy shape the social, political, and cultural
         contexts that Obama imbibes on his journey intellectualy, personally, and politically?
5.       Meetings with Professor Joseph: All students are required to meet with Professor Joseph one-
         on-one once during the semester.
Midterm Assignment: Complete rough draft of final essay.
Final Assignment: Barack Obama, Race, and American Democracy: A Critical Historical
Assessment
Students are required to write a critical 10-15 page essay assessing President Barack Obama’s impact and
influence on American democracy as both a political leader and symbolic figure.
Based on our readings this semester, what makes Barack Obama such a historic figure? What are his most
important successes and failures? Did Obama’s presidency lead to greater racial progress in the United
States and around the world? If so, provide three specific examples of why. If not, provide three examples
of why not. If, as I suspect, his presidency proved a more complicated and contingent phenomenon,
outline the nuances here as well. As a candidate in 2008, Obama offered himself as part of the “Joshua
Generation” standing on Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s shoulder. Yet many critics alleged that President
Obama’s use of drone strikes, his failure to prosecute Wall Street crimes, and his unwillingness to
promote radical policies to promote racial and economic justice betrayed King’s legacy. Others countered
that his support for equal pay for women, the passage of the Affrodable Care Act, promotion of
environmental protection, and effort to scale down mass incarceration offered definitive proof of Obama’s
social justice commitments. Given what we have read in great detail this semester about the world that
shaped Obama—from both his and various critics, journalists, and historians’ perspective—what will
future Americans and world citizens define as his enduring legacy?
Our semester reading list provides a sample of many of these issues, but of course is not exhaustive. How
has this scholarship impacted the real world and what are its flaws, omissions, strengths, and weaknesses?
Please source your speech/policy paper with a bibliography and endnotes. This final project is due in
Professor Joseph’s GAR office by 6PM on Monday, December 10, 2018


                                            Class Schedule
Part 1. The Making of Barack Obama
September 10 Obama, Dreams From My Father, Ch. 1-3
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 1.
                Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 1-2
September 17 Obama, Dreams From My Father, Ch. 4-6
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 2
                Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 3
September 24    Obama, Dreams From My Father, Ch. 7-10
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 3
                Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 4
October 1       Obama, Dreams From My Father, Ch. 11-14
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 4.
                Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 5
Part 2. Barack Obama, Race, and American Democracy
October 8       Dyson, The Black President, Ch. 1-2
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 5
                Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 6
October 15      Class Does Not Meet
                Dyson, The Black President, Ch. 3-4
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 6.
                Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 7
Part 3. A Place Where All Things are Possible: The Black Presidency, Part 1
October 22      Dyson, The Black President , Ch. 5
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 7
                Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 8.
                Obama Dreams From My Father Book Review Due
October 29      Dyson, The Black President, Ch. 6
                Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 8


               Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 9
November 5     Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 9
               Dyson, The Black President, Ch. 7
               Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 10
November 12    Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 10
               Dyson, The Black President, Ch. 8
               Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 11
               The Black Presidency Book Review Due
Part 4. The Age of Obama is the Age of Ferguson and Mass Incarceration: The Black Presidency,
Part 2
November 19    Baker, Obama: The Call of History, Ch. 12 and Epilogue
               Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 12
               Obama, Dreams From My Father, Ch. 15-19
November 26    Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 13
               Coates, “My President Was Black”
December 3     Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 14-15
               Coates, “The First White President,”
December 10    Zelizer, The Presidency of Barack Obama, Ch. 16-17


                                           Assigned Readings
Books can be found at the MAIN Co-op, on Guadalupe, under HIS 350R/unique# 39227. They are also
on reserve at the Benson Latin American Collection Library in SRH 1 and can be borrowed for 24 hours.
In addition, those that are offered as e-books for checkout from UT are noted below.
Dyson, Michael Eric. The Black Presidency: Barack Obama and the Politics of Race in America (New
York: Hoghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2016).
Baker, Peter. Obama: The Call of History (New York: Callaway, 2018).
Obama, Barack; Dreams From My Father: A Story of Race and Inheritance (New York: Three Rivers
Press, 2004).
Zelizer, Julian E., ed., The Presidency of Barack Obama: A First Historical Assessment (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2018).
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice), 512-410-6445
(video phone) or via email ssd@austin.utexas.edu For more information on available services, please see
http://diversity.utexas.edu/
By UT Austin policy, you must notify Professor Joseph of any pending absence to observe a religious holy day
at least 14 days in advance of the day you wish to take an absence. If you miss a class to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete any missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
For information on UT policies on Student Conduct and Academic Integrity, please see
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
