                                      THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                             STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
  Course Number:               SW N387R                  Instructor:         Christine Winston, LCSW-S
  Unique Number:               87615                     Email:              christinewinston@utexas.edu
  Semester:                    Summer 2020               Office:             online
  Meeting Time/Place:          Tuesday/ Thursday         Office Phone:       512.289.5802
                               8:30-11:00AM              Office Hours:       by appointment
                               Online, Via Zoom in
                               Canvas
    CHILD AND ADULT ATTACHMENT IN CLINICAL SOCIAL WORK
                                               PRACTICE
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
The concept of attachment has gained increased recognition as the scope of brain research has grown. While
attachment theory initially focused on early childhood relationships with caregivers, current literature
includes the impact of disrupted attachment through the lifespan. This course will focus on attachment
dynamics across developmental stages, including child, adolescent, and adult relationships. Both theoretical
and treatment applications will be emphasized, and particular attention will be given to the impact of child
maltreatment and parental/family functioning.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, students will demonstrate the ability to:
a.       Identify various elements of attachment disruption using a biopsychosocial framework.
Critically assess differential diagnoses in children and adults who might have attachment-related issues.
b.       Evaluate the ethics and effectiveness of treatments available for attachment-disordered individuals.
c.       Apply attachment theory in assessing and treating the individuals and families who interface with
social work practice.
d.       Develop relational skills considered effective in working with children, families, and adults who
have experienced attachment disruption.
e.
f.       Discuss the interconnection of current brain research and interpersonal neurobiology on attachment
theory and practice.
g.       Discern cross-cultural and global attachment issues and practices with particular emphasis on
increasing cultural awareness and sensitivity.
III. TEACHING METHODS
This class will be taught using a variety of methods with an emphasis on clinical applications via an active,


learning-centered model. Teaching methods might include role-plays and simulations, case examples,
student presentations, videos, class discussions, small group interactions, collegial consultation, lectures
and guest lectures. The assignments will provide the opportunity for "learning by doing" in role-play, small
groups, and individual and group projects. To achieve success in learning in this course, you must stay
current with course readings and materials. In addition, you must participate in discussions and small group
work, risk yourself, stretch your creativity, and attend class! You are encouraged to ask questions as well
as provide the professor with information and feedback along the way.
IV. REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Brown, D. & Elliott, D. (2014). Attachment Disturbances in Adults: Treatment for Comprehensive
Repair. NY: W.W. Norton.
Perry, B. & Szalavitz, M. (2008). The boy who was raised as a dog and other stories from a child
psychiatrist's notebook: What traumatized children can teach us about loss, love, and healing. NY: Basic
Books.
Siegel, D. & Hartzell, M. (2003). Parenting from the inside out. NY: Penguin Putnam, Inc.
Solomon, M. F. & Tatkin, S. (2011). Love and war in intimate relationships: Connection, disconnection,
and mutual regulation in couple therapy. NY: W. W. Norton.
Wallin, D. (2007). Attachment in psychotherapy. NY: Guilford.
Any additional course readings will be located on Canvas, offered in handouts, or provided via internet and
downloads.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
1. The Clinician’s Own Attachment - Self Assessment (25 points) Due 6/18 by 8:30AM on Canvas
Self-awareness is one of the keys to effective clinical practice. When working with issues of attachment, it
is important to reflect on one’s own experiences, the impact of these experiences, resilient qualities, and
predominant ways of healing. You will complete a reflective narrative about your own primary and
secondary attachment figures and your subsequent attachment qualities and characteristics. Self-
Assessment detail sheet is under this assignment canvas and will be discussed in class.
2. Attachment Presentation and Paper (25 points) Presentations will be over the last two class days.
Order of groups will be randomized. All fact sheets must be submitted to Canvas by 8:30AM on 7/22.
Students will research a focused area of attachment that interests them and create and in class presentation
to offer material in an engaging and educational way and a 4-5 page fact sheet that summarizes the literature
researched and provides any pertinent details to assist fellow students to apply the material presented. The
fact sheet will go beyond what the presentation slides include and should be organized in a publication-
oriented, informational format. The fact sheet will be made available electronically to students.
Presentation topics might be focused on identified populations, specific treatment options, or particular
problem areas. Topic areas require approval from the professor in order to meet the expectations for this
assignment.


3. Attachment Final Exam (25 points) Due 7/16 by 8:30AM on Canvas
This case based, take home exam will offer you the opportunity to apply what you have learned from the
course material, including readings, lectures, guest presentations, class presentations, and discussion
material. The test will consist of both content and application-oriented material.
4. Class Participation (25 points)
Even though we may be meeting online, it is important to attend class on time, remain awake, remain for
the entire class, and be actively and meaningfully present for effective learning and demonstration of
professional behavior. Because you are graduate level social work students, it is expected that you will be
able to participate on a deeper level in class discussions, taking healthy risks to work outside of your comfort
zone. In order to receive the highest level of participation points, healthy risk-taking for professional growth
must be demonstrated. Participation points will be determined by attendance, level of interest, respect for
others’ learning needs and contributions to classroom discussions and activities. Being prepared for class
by reading assigned material is part of this professional expectation as well. Please challenge yourself to
participate.
Please note that you will not earn credit for graduate courses if your grade falls below a ‘C’. You must
earn a ‘C’ or above for credit to be given for the course.
VI. GRADES
GRADING SCALE
          94.0 and Above              A
          90.0 to 93.999              A-
          87.0 to 89.999              B+
          84.0 to 86.999              B
          80.0 to 83.999              B-
          77.0 to 79.999              C+
          74.0 to 76.999              C
          70.0 to 73.999              C-
          67.0 to 69.999              D+
          64.0 to 66.999              D
          60.0 to 63.999              D-
          Below 60.0                  F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Professional Conduct in Class.
Students are expected behave as professionals in class. This means arrive at class on time, be prepared to
participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. The class will not, and
should not, always agree with one another. In this environment it is a goal to be exposed to diverse ideas
and opinions, and sometimes agreement with the ideas expressed by others will not occur. It is required,
however, that you engage one another with respect and professionalism. Professional behavior is expected
of all students in the classroom.


Attendance and Participation
The skills of leadership, assertiveness and critical thinking are an integral part of effective social work
practice. All students are expected to participate fully in class activities and class discussion. Since the
overall goal of this course is to help students apply knowledge and theory to practice, the success of the
course is dependent upon students assuming an active role in class discussion. Attendance and participation
for two-and-one-half hours of class is expected of all students. Missing more than two classes may require
a Level Review, and absences can lead to a lowered grade. If you are going to be absent or tardy, please
contact the professor via cell phone or email message prior to the absence or tardy. This exhibits
professionalism.
Maintaining Confidentiality
Information shared in class about agencies and clients is considered confidential according to the NASW
Code of Ethics re: the sharing of information for educational purposes. However, discussion outside of class
with individuals outside of the course regarding information shared in class about clients, supervisors or
agencies is a breach of confidentiality. Breach of confidentiality is grounds for disciplinary action within
the School and/or possible expulsion from the program.
Time Management
Students will lose 5 points per calendar day that an assignment is late. Assignments are due at the
beginning of class. Papers turned in after class begins are considered late. On subsequent days, papers must
be submitted by 8:30 a.m. via email to avoid an additional 5-point penalty (out of 100 points or
proportionally adjusted for point totals less than 100).
Professional Communication and Conflict Resolution
The student is expected to bring any concerns directly to the professor on an individual basis, if the issue is
not appropriate to be discussed in class. Students should be prepared to discuss the concern openly, with
willingness to accept feedback, and offer possible solutions.
Email will be a frequently used mode of communication between the professor and class. All students are
responsible for checking their email and Canvas on a regular basis for class updates. Students are also
responsible for alerting the instructor about any changes to their email addresses. Students can use email to
ask the instructor questions between class meetings.
Campus Carry Policy
The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You
also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
APA Guidelines and Crediting Sources
When using information from other sources, references and bibliography should conform to current APA
style. Instances of plagiarism will be dealt with according to University policy.
Special Learning Needs
Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who requires academic accommodations
should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-
6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations. Students with learning challenges are encouraged to
discuss special needs with the professor within the first two weeks of the semester.
Concerns about grades


Students with concerns or questions about grades are invited to discuss these with the professor. Students
with concerns related to equitable distribution of work on a group project should first give the colleague in
question a chance to address the concerns. Discussing the problem with your peer first is requested, using
skillful and direct communication provided in a way that can be heard. If concerns remain, the student(s)
is/are encouraged to approach the professor during the assignment’s completion process, before the
assignment is due.
Use of Computers/Cell Phones/Smart Phones/ PDAs in the Classroom
This is a clinical course, and class participation is essential. Electronic note-taking is generally considered
useful to some students but is only permitted during lecture portions of the course. Minimizing the use of
computers/electronic devices ensures an environment that is conducive to group learning.
Cell phones should be silenced when class begins and remain this way throughout the duration of the class.
This is considered an issue of professionalism. Text messaging during class times is disruptive to the
professor and your peers and is therefore prohibited. Please step outside of class to surf the web, make calls,
send or read texts, send or read emails, and/or post electronically in any way unless we are on an official
break during regular class time.
Course-Instructor Survey
Students are encouraged to use their professional social work skills to discuss issues related to class. It is
helpful to know of concerns in or about the class before the course-instructor survey results, and the input
students provide is very beneficial to planning for the course each week. Students are encouraged to
participate in the course/instructor survey at the end of the semester as well, but if issues can be addressed
prior to that time, it is usually time well spent. Students are also invited and strongly encouraged to provide
ongoing feedback to the professor during office hour visits throughout the semester.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations
must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the
semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the
professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects
students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared
to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings
together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by
such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national
origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of
positive engagement and mutual respect. This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and
dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with
complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult


conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas and
opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor
requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to
course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the
professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course
assignments and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is
desired. If counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the
UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain
that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to
participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is
said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing
potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms of
electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived by
clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to
minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training.
Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are obliged to
block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should not be
referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the identification
of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate
any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as certain
material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for
Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as
well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the
university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity
of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the
student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to
exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action being
taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific, express
approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of


academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other
things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other
current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal
matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is
protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such,
sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of
confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of
academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as
an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email
for university and course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping
the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly
and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating their e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must
miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, the
professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the
University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from
discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field instructors, staff,
and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or any other forms of sexual
misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will
be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources
related to Title IX, may also be found at https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu
on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that involve
working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present some risks.
Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to
be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students
should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their behavioral
health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made.
Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that the
        nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of
        class.
    · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the
        UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
GRADING SCALE
        94.0 and Above             A
        90.0 to 93.999             A-
        87.0 to 89.999             B+
        84.0 to 86.999             B
        80.0 to 83.999             B-
        77.0 to 79.999             C+
        74.0 to 76.999             C
        70.0 to 73.999             C-
        67.0 to 69.999             D+
        64.0 to 66.999             D
        60.0 to 63.999             D-
        Below 60.0                 F
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
   6/4     Course Overview/Syllabus Review              PLEASE NOTE: Readings are due to be read
     1     Introduction to course material              on the dates listed.
                                                        Schore and Schore article
           Attachment experience exercise
                                                        Wallin, Chapters 1-2
           History of Attachment Theory                 Brown and Elliott Chapters 1-2
   6/9     Infant Attachment strategies/styles          Optional Deeper Reading:
     2     Bowlby to Ainsworth                          van IJzendoorn & Sagi-Schwartz article
           Small group child attachment exercise        SES and Attachment
           Adult States of Mind with Respect to         Wallin, Chapter 3-6
   6/11    Attachment:                                  Brown and Elliott 3-4
     3     The Adult Attachment Interview (AAI)
           Mary Main and forward                        Optional Deeper Reading:
                                                        Brown and Elliott Chapter 5
           AAI experiential exercise in class           Hesse and Main article
                                                        Hesse article


      Real world implications of interrupted     The Boy who was raised as a Dog- Perry
      attachment:
 6/16 Impact and treatment of trauma and
   4  Severely Disordered Attachment
      Discussion of Perry book
      Using Attachment theory and research to    ATTACHMENT SELF ASSESSMENT DUE
      guide intervention                         8:30 AM
6/18  Considering the continuum of attachment
   5                                             Wallin Chapter 7-8
      The importance of Reflective               Brown and Elliott Chapters 6, 7
      Functioning/Mentalizing/
      Metacognition                              Optional deeper reading:
                                                 Fonagy et al, Ch 1. Attachment and Reflective
      Presentation groups will meet and get      Functioning: Their role in Self Organization
      topics approved
      Child/Parent focused Interventions:        Wallin Chapter ch 9
 6/23 Parenting from the Inside Out—             Brown and Elliott ch 9
   6  The Whole Brain Child
                                                 Siegel & Hartzell—Parenting from the Inside
      Impact of implicit memory on the           Out (read whole book, skimming ch 5-6 and
      generations                                closely read 7,8,9)
                                                 Hughes Chapter 2
      Small group attachment and parenting
      exercise
      Child/Parent focused interventions:
 6/25 Theraplay and the importance of play       Wallin Chapters 10-11
   7                                             Brown and Elliott Chapter 10
      Playfulness, Acceptance, Curiosity and
      Empathy --Attachment Based Family          Hughes Chapters 3-4
      Therapy
      Bringing attachment to life in the session
      Small group PACE exercise
      Adult Intervention Applications:
      Dismissive/Avoidant clients                Wallin Chapters 12,15
 6/30 Transference/countertransference           Brown and Elliott Chapters 11 and 14
   8  Small group case exercises
                                                 Wallin Chapters 13,16
  7/2 Adult Intervention Application:            Brown and Elliott Chapter 12
   9  Preoccupied/Anxious Adults                 Stern et al article
      Transference/countertransference
      Small group case exercise


           Adult Intervention Application:
           Disorganized states of mind
    7/7    Affective co-regulation
    10     Somatic interventions                        Wallin Chapters 14, 17
           Small group case exercises                   Brown and Elliott Chapter 13
           Sliver of memory and other Ogden             Ogden Readings
           worksheets
                                                        Solomon and Tatkin (book), review all, focus on
           Attachment Application:                      chapter 4, 6-13
  7/9      Adult Intimate Relationships
  11                                                    Optional Deeper Readings:
           Psychobiological Approach to Couples         Shaver readings
           Therapy
           Tracking exercise                            RECEIVE TAKE HOME EXAM
           Toward and away exercise (described)
           PAI demonstration
                                                        Solomon and Tatkin (book) continued
  7/14     Attachment Application:
  12       Adult Intimate Relationships, continued      Optional Deeper Readings:
                                                        Josephson chapter
           Attachment in Same-Sex Relationships         S. Johnson readings
           Small group case exercises                   Mohr Chapter
                                                        TAKE HOME EXAM DUE AT 8:30 AM
           Out of the box interventions:
   7/16    EMDR and Attachment                          Brown and Elliott Ch 8
    13     EMDR Video presentation
           Ideal Parent Figure Protocol
           IPF partner exercise
           Attachment Presentations                     Presentations in Class
   7/21    Presented and Discussed in Class
    14                                                  Submit Fact Sheets to Canvas by 8:30 AM
   7/28    Attachment Presentations
           Course-Instructor Survey on your own
*Any additional information not listed on the course schedule will be provided in class as a handout,
posted on Canvas with notification, or emailed directly to the student. Professor reserves the right to make
changes to the course schedule as needed.


X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Badenoch, B. (2008). Being a brain-wise therapist: A practical guide to interpersonal neurobiology. NY:
         W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Badenoch, B. (2011). The brain-savvy therapist’s workbook. NY: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.
Becker-Weidman, A. & Shell, D. (Eds.). (2005). Creating capacity for attachment. Oklahoma City, OK:
         Wood ‘N’ Barnes Publishing and Distributing.
Brandell, J. & Ringel, S. (2007). Attachment and dynamic practice. New York, NY: Columbia University
         Press.
Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P. (Eds.) (2008). Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical
         applications. NY: Guilford Press.
Curran, L. (2013). 101 trauma-informed interventions: Activities, exercises and assignments to move the
         client and therapy forward. Eau Claire, WI: Premier Publishing and Media.
Crittenden, P. M. & Landini, A. (2011). Assessing Adult Attachment: A Dynamic-Maturational Approach
         to Discourse Analysis. New York: Norton.
Flores, P. (2012). Addiction as an attachment disorder. Lanham, MD: Aronson.
Forbes, H. (2009). Beyond consequences, logic, and control: A love-based approach to helping children
         with severe behaviors. Boulder, CO: Beyond Consequences Institute.
Forbes, H. & Post, B. (2006). Beyond consequences, logic and control (vols. 1 & 2). Orlando, FL:
         Beyond Consequences Institute, LLC.
Fosha, D. (2000). The transforming power of affect; A model for accelerated change. NY: Basic Books.
Hughes, D. (2004). An attachment-based treatment of maltreated children and young people. Attachment
         and human development, 6(3), 263-278.
Jernberg, A. & Booth, P. (1999). Theraplay: Helping parents and children build better relationships
         through attachment-based play, 2e. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Johnson, S. (2008). Hold me tight: Seven conversations for a lifetime of love. NY: Little, Brown and
         Company.
Johnson, S. & Whiffen, V. (Eds.). (2003). Attachment processes in couple and family therapy. New York,
         NY: The Guilford Press.
Josephson, G. (2003) Using an Attachment-Based Intervention with Same-Sex Couples in Attachment
         Processes in Couple and Family Therapy: NY: Guilford Press.
Lieberman, A. F. (2003). The treatment of attachment disorder in infancy and early
childhood: Reflections from clinical intervention with later-adopted foster care children. Attachment and
         human development, 5(3), 279-282.


 Keller, H. And Bard, K. eds. (2017). The Cultural Nature of Attachment: Contextualizing Relationships
        and Development. MIT Press.
Muller, R. (2010). Trauma and the avoidant client: Attachment-based strategies for healing. NY: W.W.
        Norton & Co.
Ogden, P. & Fisher, J. (2015). Sensorimotor psychotherapy: Interventions for trauma and attachment.
        NY: W.W. Norton & Co.
Oppenheim, D., & Goldsmith, D. (Eds.). (2007). Attachment theory in clinical work with children. NY:
        The Guilford Press.
Renn, P. (2002). The link between childhood trauma and later violent offending: The application of
        attachment theory in a probation setting. Attachment and human development, 4(3), 294-317.
Ringel, S. & Brandell, J. (2012). Trauma: Contemporary directions in theory, practice, and research.
        Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Schore, A. and Schore, J.(2007) Modern Attachment Theory: The Central Role of Affect Regulation in
      Development and Treatment. Clincial Social Work Journal. 36(1):9-20.
Schore, A. (2011). Family Law and the Neuroscience of Attachment, Part I. Family Court Review, 49,
        501-512.
Siegel, D. (2007). The mindful brain. NY: W. W. Norton & Co.
Siegel, D. & Hartzell, M. (2003). Parenting from the inside out. NY: Penguin Putnam, Inc.
Siegel, D.J., & Bryson, T.P. (2011). The whole-brain child: 12 Revolutionary strategies to nurture your
         child’s developing mind, survive everyday parenting struggles, and help your family thrive. New
         York: Delacorte Press.
Smolen, A. G. (2001). Connecting with Sara: Facilitating attachment. Smith College Studies in Social
        Work, 72(1), 53-75.
Solomon, B. (2002). A social constructionist approach to theorizing child welfare: Considering
        attachment theory and ways to reconstruct practice. Journal of Teaching in Social Work, 22(1/2),
        131-149.
Solomon, M. F. & Siegel, D. J. (Eds.). (2003). Healing trauma. NY: W. W. Norton & Company.
Steele, H. (2003). Unrelenting catastrophic trauma within the family: When every secure base is abusive.
        Attachment and Human Development, 5(4), 353-366.
Tatkin, S. (2011). Wired for love: How understanding your partner’s brain and attachment style can help
you defuse conflict and build a secure relationship. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger.
van der Kolk, B. (2014). The body keeps the score: Brain, mind, and body in the healing of trauma. NY:
Penguin Group.


