             German 612 Accelerated Second Year German: Reading Modern Germany
                                                Unique: 80490
                                        Department of Germanic Studies
                                          University of Texas at Austin
                                                SUMMER 2020
                                     Class Day/Time: MWF/10.00-12.00
Instructor: Matthew J. Sherman (pronouns: he, him, his)        E-mail: matthew.sherman@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Via Zoom, by appointment
About the Course:
German 612 is an intensive intermediate German course that builds on language abilities acquired in German
506–507 (or equivalent). With a content-based approach to language instruction, the course helps students
not only to review and expand their German language abilities, but also to develop these within a meaningful
context that supports the development of specific content knowledge: geography, history, literature,
demographics, education, media, pop culture, film, music, art, and architecture. Authentic texts representing
a number of genres will be used to enrich students’ developing content knowledge of the German-speaking
world.
The communicative approach to language learning that we take in this course focuses on learning to use
German language forms, i.e., grammar and vocabulary, in meaningful contexts across both spoken and
written genres. The course aims to develop students’ ability to interpret (not merely read or listen),
communicate (not merely give and receive information), and perform (not merely write or speak) in German.
In other words, the course will help students to become literate users of the German language. To this end,
students of German 612 are expected to take on greater involvement in their own learning than they have in
their beginning-level German language classes. Class activities (from class discussions to group projects) will
require collaborative and cooperative learning on the part of all class members. Please note that this course
requires that students commit approximately 60–120 minutes per weekday (not per class day) to homework
and studying outside of class. Students not able to make this commitment over the entire span of the
upcoming semester should not take this course.
Required Course Materials:
1. Textbook: Christine Anton, Tobias Barske, Jane Grabowski, & Megan McKinstry. Sag mal. An Introduction
    to German Language and Culture. Vista Higher Learning. 2nd EDITION!
2. Sag mal Basic Supersite
3. Sag mal WebSAM (Student Activities Manual)
The textbook and access codes to the online materials can be purchased as a bundle [ISBN: VARIES! JUST
MAKE SURE IT IS 2ND EDITION!] at the COOP bookstore. Please double check that you purchase the right
edition. If you order these materials from other sources and/or if you purchase the wrong edition, you are
responsible for possible delays in shipping of materials and additional costs.
Additional Resources:
1. A German-English or German-German dictionary in book/printed format, such as Langenscheidt,
    Cassell’s, Duden or similar. (check Amazon marketplace for a very affordable used dictionary)
2. Zsuzsanna Abrams (2008). Grimm Grammar. Texas Language Technology Center.
    http://www.coerll.utexas.edu/gg/index.html (Though we will not be using this e-learning tool in class,
    you may want to use it to review certain aspects of German grammar.)
3. Texts and materials distributed via Canvas throughout the semester
                                                       1


Assessment:
Your progress in the class will be assessed during the semester across the following categories
   Participation and Preparation:          15%
   Online Homework:                        20%
   Cultural Analysis Homework              10%
   3 Writing Tasks:                        15%
   4 Chapter Tests:                        20%
   Quizzes:                                10%
   Oral Exam:                              10%
   Class Participation and Preparation (15%)
   Daily attendance and active participation in class are necessary and expected components to your
   language learning experience and will be assessed weekly. For the online meetings, you are expected
   to have your cameras turned on. You may mute your microphones, but must be able to unmute
   yourself at a moment’s notice to engage in conversation and participate. You are expected to use
   German as much as possible.
   You are allowed up to 5 absences for illnesses, doctor’s visits, family matters, job interviews, etc.
   Beginning with the 6th absence, your course average will drop dramatically (a 1% deduction
   off of your final grade per missed day). Coming late to class can be disruptive. Every two times
   you arrive late to class will count as one full day absence. Family emergencies that can be
   substantiated to the satisfaction of the language program director or serious illnesses verified by a
   doctor’s note may be treated as exceptions.
   The following criteria are used to determine your participation grade:
   15 always well-prepared (i.e., does assigned readings and written work before class; fully
           participates in online discussions); is attentive and volunteers often; tries to use German with
           classmates and instructor; makes the most of each activity; shows real resourcefulness and
           imagination in using the language; responds to and engages classmates in a respectful
           manner; remains critical and open-minded toward target and native culture.
   10-14 usually well-prepared; is attentive and volunteers occasionally; tries to use German with
           classmates and instructor; makes the most of each activity; completes exercises with some
           imagination and resourcefulness; makes some effort to engage fellow students; shows some
           development of cultural sensitivity.
   5-9 adequately prepared and attentive (often waits to be called upon); occasionally needs to be
           reminded to use German with instructor and classmates; responds and completes exercises
           with minimal imagination; does not engage classmates beyond the minimum requirements
           for an assignment.
   1-4 is unprepared; makes little effort to participate or complete exercises; rarely tries to use German
           with instructor or classmates.
   0 makes no contribution to class whatsoever; is not on task.
   Online Homework (20%)
                                                        2


Daily homework provides regular occasions to practice your German and is therefore key to your
language development. Online homework is done through Sag mal’s accompanying Supersite (VHL
portal: www.vhlcentral.com) The exercises target reading, listening, writing, and speaking abilities.
On the Supersite, you get immediate feedback on exercises. Since you can do these online exercises
repeatedly throughout the semester, they also serve as excellent study tools for quizzes and tests.
Daily homework must be done by the due date and time indicated by your instructor. Language
learning is far more effective if it becomes a daily habit. Homework turned in late will be penalized
5% for every day late. Your instructor will provide you with registration instructions to get you
started. Should you experience any technical difficulties, it is your responsibility to contact VHL’s
technical support immediately at http://support.vhlcentral.com, or tel. 800-248-2813. Their staff is
able to trouble-shoot computer difficulties much better when they are contacted soon after issues
occur.
Cultural Analysis Homework (10%)
In addition to the online homework, you will engage with a cultural text each week – memes, videos,
articles, etc. These assignments are intended to get you thinking about German culture more deeply.
Late and/or sloppily-completed homework will not be accepted.
Writing Tasks (15%)
Three writing tasks over the course of the semester give you the opportunity to strengthen your
writing abilities in German in meaningful and creative ways. Here, the focus is not only on being able
to use certain linguistic forms correctly, but also on developing writing that shows an ability to create
a cohesive text and an awareness of audience within an identifiable genre. Your texts will be assessed
according to your ability to address general task requirements, engage with content material, and
use appropriately complex and accurate language. With our writing-process approach (which we will
use for the second and third tasks in this course), you have the option to turn in two versions of the
assignment. First drafts are optional and will be graded by your instructor and returned with
feedback to help you revise your work. With the second draft, you can improve the final essay grade
up to two half-grade points. If you do not want feedback, you only need to submit a final draft. A
very good revision can improve a grade from a ‘B’ to an ‘A-’; a satisfactory revision can improve a
grade from a ‘B’ to a ‘B+’; a weak revision, however, will not improve a grade. Writing tasks are due
on the date indicated on the syllabus. For each calendar day that a paper is submitted late, the grade
for the paper will be deducted 10% points.
4 Written Chapter Tests (20%)
The four chapter exams test your knowledge of and ability to discuss major themes appearing in the
chapters. Both content and language forms (i.e., grammar and vocabulary) will be assessed. Tests will
be taken on Canvas outside of class time. They will be active for an entire day and you must
complete the test before midnight (at which point access is denied). If you miss a test without having
obtained permission from the instructor in advance, you will not receive any credit for the test.
Documented medical or family emergencies, religious holidays, and military service that can be
substantiated to the satisfaction of the coordinator will be treated as exceptions.
Quizzes (10%)
To ensure regular studying of vocabulary from the textbook and other instructional materials, there
will be quizzes related to course readings and targeting key vocabulary on a regular basis. Quizzes
will be taken on Canvas outside of class time. They will be active for an entire day and you must
complete the test before midnight (at which point access is denied). If you miss a quiz without having
obtained permission from the instructor in advance, you will not receive any credit for the quiz.
                                                     3


Documented medical or family emergencies, religious holidays, and military service that can be
substantiated to the satisfaction of the coordinator will be treated as exceptions.
Oral Exam (10%)
The oral exam is designed to assess dialogic speaking abilities developed over the course of the
semester. With partners, students will prepare and act out short role-plays for topics related to the
chapters studied. Your instructor will provide information for you at a later date on the format and
content of the exam. The exam will be administered during the last week of classes.
Grading Scale:
The following grading scale will be used to determine your final course grade:
          A      93-100 %         B     83-86.9 %         C     73-76.9 %        D     63-66.9 %
          A-     90-92.9 %        B-    80-82.9 %         C-    70-72.9 %        D-    60-62.9 %
          B+     87-89.9 %        C+    77-79.9 %         D+    67-69.9 %        F    below 59.9 %
Please note: There are no incompletes given in German 612.
Studying vocabulary:
It is essential for your success in GER 612 that you study vocabulary daily and thoroughly. I
recommend the study technique that research shows to be the most effective: flashcards. Always
study vocabulary both ways: Begin with German > English, then switch to English > German. Make
sure to study genders and plurals along with the nouns, and conjugations with irregular verbs. Come
up with as many mnemonic devices as possible. Pay attention to spellings and practice
pronunciations as you go along, whether silently or aloud. Study the vocabulary items in a different
order each time, and gradually sort out the ones you have mastered. We will address some of these
strategies in the first few days of class, but make sure to seek advice at any time, if you feel your
studying of vocabulary is inefficient.
Extra Credit:
A great way to practice your German (and get extra credit) is to take part in department-sponsored
online events, including the German film series, weekly Stammtisch, and the “Germanic Studies
Summer Entertainment” events. Dates, places and times for all extra-curricular events will be
announced in class. Participation in each event counts as a 0.5% point toward your overall grade. You
can receive up to 3% points total through extra credit.
You may also participate in a research study, being conducted by Dr. Emily Krauter. She will visit our
class throughout the semester. Participating provides an additional 2% points to your final grade.
Placement Exams:
If you are new to UT and have taken German before, or if you have acquired German in any other
context (e.g., family, extensive stay in a German-speaking country, etc.), you may want to take the
placement exam/credit by examination test offered by UT’s Center for Teaching and Learning to
ensure that you are attending the appropriate course and that you can claim credit for courses. See
the schedule and register immediately at: http://ctl.utexas.edu/studenttesting/. If you have any
questions regarding placement, please contact your instructor.
Errors and mistakes
Errors and mistakes are inevitable. Your instructor fosters an atmosphere where mistakes will be
treated respectfully. Language learning requires risk-taking, and it is important for you to feel safe
and relaxed, so that you can speak up in front of the class without any anxiety, even if you are not
                                                   4


certain whether your contribution is 100% correct. Please do not hesitate to contact your instructor
if there is anything in the classroom that prevents you from speaking in class.
Questions? Comments? Concerns?
We value your feedback. If you enjoy your class, let your instructor know and tell your friends. If
there are any aspects of the class that you do not feel comfortable with, please do not hesitate to
inform your instructor. If you are not comfortable with approaching them, feel free to contact Dr.
Nick Henry (nhenry@austin.utexas.edu). As the language program director in the Department of
Germanic Studies, he will be eager to find solutions.
Your Next Course:
Students who have successfully completed GER 612 should continue their German study with GER
328 (Advanced German Grammar) or GER 331L (Advanced Conversation and Composition). You are
also encouraged to seek the guidance of the Undergraduate Advisor in your enrollment decisions (see
below)
Advising, Upper-Division German, Majoring and Minoring:
For information about majoring or minoring in German, please go to
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/germanic/undergraduate/Advising.php.
Study Abroad in Würzburg, Germany:
The Department of Germanic Studies offers a number of study abroad opportunities including a
summer program (the German and European Studies Summer Program in Würzburg) that
specifically targets language students like you. Specifically, we offer GER 330C every year, an upper-
division Composition and Conversation course for students who have successfully completed GER
612. In addition, you also can enroll in courses in literature, art history, economics, and politics in
Germany, taught in English. Up to 9 UT credits can be earned. For more information, please see our
web site (www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/germanic/StudyAbroad/Wuerzburg.php), or contact Dr.
Peter Hess (tel. 512-232-6352, phess@austin.utexas.edu).
Academic Integrity:
Please keep in mind that language learning is a long-term process and necessarily involves making
mistakes. Your instructor is there to help you along the way, but ultimately the effort must come from
you to make the experience worthwhile.
                                    University of Texas Honor Code
            The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
          leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
           expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
                                       toward peers and community.
1. Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work
     submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work, unless
     the instructor explicitly allows collaboration.
2. You are encouraged to study together and to discuss information and concepts covered in lecture
     and the sections with other students. You can give “consulting” help to or receive “consulting”
     help from such students.
3. Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student
     who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty
     for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
     disciplinary action.
                                                     5


4. During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during
     the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any
     collaborative behavior during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to
     failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
5. Using online translation packages (e.g., Google Translate) is not permissible. Unlike
     dictionaries and grammar references, such programs simply provide ONE translation, rather
     than allowing you to choose among various words/tenses, etc. to come up with the best word or
     phrase on your own. Moreover, translation programs very often produce inaccurate, incorrect
     translations, and are easy to identify. Students will learn far more by doing their own work and
     will avoid risking serious academic consequences.
Students who do not comply with University rules on scholastic integrity are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, visit
the Student Judicial Services website at deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Students with Disabilities:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Accommodations for Religious Holidays:
By UT Austin policy, students must notify their instructor of pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students:
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy.
It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in their e-mail
address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be
time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at:
https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
The class will use the course management site Canvas, accessible to each enrolled student through
their UT Direct account. E-mail reminders and updates will be sent through this site.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
If you are worried about someone who is acting strangely, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Counseling and Mental Health Center:
College life can be overwhelming. If you ever feel distressed, the Counseling & Mental Health Center
(CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric consultation, and prevention services that facilitate
                                                    6


students’ academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and well-being:
http://cmhc.utexas.edu.
Title IX and Sexual Harassment:
The University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct based on gender. As required by Title IX, the University encourages any
student or non-student who thinks that he or she has been subjected to sex discrimination, sexual
harassment (including sexual violence) or sexual misconduct by another student, member of the
faculty or staff, or campus visitor or contractor, to immediately report the incident to any of the
persons or offices listed below.
 Institutional Title IX Coordinator                 Deputy Title IX Coordinator for Students
 University Compliance Services                     Student Emergency Services
 2.206 UT Administration Building (UTA)             Office of the Dean of Students
 512-232-3992                                       4.104 Student Services Building (SSB)
                                                    512-471-5017
Students may also report incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual
violence) or sexual misconduct to any university Responsible Employee, who is then required to
promptly notify any of the above Title IX coordinators of the reported incident. Complaints or
allegations of student-on-student sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence)
or sexual misconduct will be handled by the Office of the Dean of Students. Cases of sexual violence
may also be reported to the University of Texas Police Department, the City of Austin Police
Department and other local law enforcement authorities. The Title IX Coordinators can assist
individuals with contacting these law enforcement agencies.
Inclusive Classroom
This course strives for excellence in diversity and inclusivity. I adhere to the American Association
of Colleges and Universities’ definition of inclusion as the “active, intentional, and ongoing
engagement with diversity in the curriculum.” (https://www.aacu.org/making-excellence-
inclusive). Inclusivity is crucial to both the content and dynamic of this course. I aim to create a
learning environment that welcomes and respects diverse thoughts and experiences. The study of
languages and cultures benefits from diversity and inclusivity; indeed, it hinges on an awareness
and incorporation of diversity. Not only will we consider, at times, the role of diversity in linguistic
and cultural contexts, but the diversity that students bring to class will also be seen as a resource
and strength in the communication and negotiation between cultures. All identities will be welcome
and respected (including race, gender, sexuality, class, religion, ability, and political affiliation).
When it comes to matters of diversity and inclusion, I, too, am always learning. You can come to me
with any issue to ensure that our classroom remains a positive and productive space for inclusion.
Gender Neutral Pronouns
Please do not hesitate to let your instructor know the pronouns you use. As you know, grammatical
gender plays a significant role in the German language. While no standards for gender neutral
pronouns have been established in contemporary German yet, some ideas and suggestions exist. I
will be happy to inform you to the best of my ability, and strive to create an inclusive and
welcoming classroom for everyone.
Emergency Evacuation Policy:
                                                     7


Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when
an alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please note the following policies regarding
evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
     nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during the
     first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow your instructor’s instructions.
Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
SB11:
According to SB11 (“Campus Carry”), individuals who hold a required license are eligible to carry a
concealed handgun in this classroom. UT Austin is obliged to follow SB11 to the letter and is not at
liberty to enact policies or provisions that violate it. Any changes to the law must come through the
state legislative process. Instructors may not impose a ban on concealed handguns in their
classrooms. If you consider exercising this right, please consult the relevant policies in the Handbook
of Operating Procedures (https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/campus-concealed-carry). The
open carry of handguns is not permitted anywhere on campus, including in this classroom. Anyone
who sees an openly carried handgun in this classroom or elsewhere on campus should immediately
call 911.
                                                    8


                          Kalender für Deutsch 612 – Sommer 2020
All dates and assignments are tentative and can be modified by the instructor.
1. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                      ZU HAUSE (due on       AUFGABE (due by
                                                  the day listed – if    11:59 pm on the day
                                                  MWF, due by 10am)      listed)
 Fr. 5.6    Willkommen, Kennenlernen                                     Dr. Krauter visits
            506 & 507 Wiederholung
2. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                      ZU HAUSE               AUFGABE
 Mo. 8.6    506 & 507 Wiederholung                Short Grammar
                                                  Presentation
 Di. 9.6    alman_memes2.0                        Canvas Homework
 Mi. 10.6   Lektion 9A: Die Alltagsroutine        Supersite: Kontext,
            Kommunikation                         Strukturen
            Reflexive verbs with accusative and
            dative pronouns
 Do. 11.6                                         Supersite: Strukturen,
                                                  Fotoroman, Kultur
 Fr. 12.6   Strukturen: Reciprocal verbs and      Supersite: Strukturen  Dr. Krauter visit #1
            reflexives used with prepositions
3. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                      ZU HAUSE               AUFGABE
 Mo. 15.6 Wiederholung                            Review
                                                                         QUIZ K9A
 Di. 16.6   Der Alltag in Zeiten von Corona       Canvas Homework
 Mi. 17.6   Lektion 9B: Beim Arzt                 Supersite: Kontext,
            Kommunikation,                        Fotoroman,
                                                  Strukturen (der
            Strukturen: Der Konjunktiv II &       Konjunktiv II)
            würden with the infinitive
            Einführung der 1. Schreibaufgabe
 Do. 18 .6                                        Supersite: Strukturen
                                                  (Konjunktiv II;
                                                  würden + infinitive)
                                                9


 Fr. 19.6                                                              Dr. Krauter visit #2
          Wiederholung                           Canvas: Probeprüfung
                                                                       TEST K9 (due
                                                                       Saturday)
4. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                     ZU HAUSE              AUFGABE
 Mo. 22.6 Lektion 10A: Besorgungen               Supersite: Kontext,
          Kommunikation                          Fotoroman,
                                                 Strukturen
          Strukturen: Subordinating                                    Schreiben #1
          conjunctions, adjectives as nouns,
          Futur I
 Di. 23.6 Auf geht’s nach Duisburg!              Canvas Homework
 Mi. 24.6 Wiederholung                           Supersite: Strukturen Dr. Krauter visit #3
 Do. 25.6                                        Review                QUIZ K10A
 Fr. 26.6 Lektion 10B: In der Stadt              Supersite: Kontext,
          Kommunikation                          Fotoroman,
                                                 Strukturen
          Strukturen: prepositions,
          nationality
5. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                     ZU HAUSE              AUFGABE
 Mo. 29.6 Wiederholung (K10)                     Supersite: Strukturen
          Lektion 11A: Im Büro                   Supersite: Kontext,
          Kommunikation                          Strukturen
          Strukturen: relative pronouns
 Di. 30.6                                        Canvas: Probeprüfung  TEST K10
 Mi. 1.7  Strukturen: relative pronouns, past    Supersite: Fotoroman, Dr. Krauter visit #4
          tense                                  Strukturen
 Do. 2.7                                         Supersite: Kultur,    QUIZ K11A
                                                 Strukturen
 Fr. 3.7  Lektion 11B: Berufe                    Supersite: Kontext,
          Kommunikation                          Fotoroman, Kultur
          Einführung der 2. Schreibaufgabe
6. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                     ZU HAUSE              AUFGABE
 Mo. 6.7  Strukturen: Futur II                   Supersite: Strukturen Schreiben #2 v1
                                                 (Futur II)            (optional)
 Di. 7.7  „Anekdote zur Senkung der              Canvas Homework
          Arbeitsmoral“
                                              10


 Mi. 8.7  Strukturen: adjective endings          Supersite: Strukturen
                                                 (adjective endings)
 Do. 9.7                                         Supersite: Strukturen
                                                 (adjective endings)
 Fr. 10.7 Einführung der 3. Schreibaufgabe       Canvas: Probeprüfung  Schreiben #2 v2
                                                                       (mandatory)
          Wiederholung (K11)
                                                                       TEST K11 (due
                                                                       Saturday)
7. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                     ZU HAUSE              AUFGABE
 Mo. 13.7 Lektion 12A: In der Natur              Supersite: Kontext,
          Kommunikation                          Fotoroman, Kultur,
          Strukturen: Der Konjunktiv in der      Strukturen
          Vergangenheit, das Partizip Präsens
 Di. 14.7 „Nackte Deutsche“                      Canvas Homework
 Mi. 15.7 Strukturen: Der Konjunktiv in der      Supersite: Kontext,
          Vergangenheit, das Partizip Präsens    Strukturen
 Do. 16.7                                        Review                QUIZ K12A
 Fr. 17.7 Lektion 12B: Die Umwelt                Supersite: Kontext,   Schreiben #3 v1
          Kommunikation                          Fotoroman, Kultur     (optional)
8. WOCHE
 DATUM THEMA                                     ZU HAUSE              AUFGABE
 Mo. 20.7 Der Konjunktiv I and indirect          Supersite: Strukturen Schreiben #3 v2
          speech                                 (Konjunktiv I)        (mandatory)
 Di. 21.7                                        Supersite: Strukturen
                                                 (Konjunktiv I)
 Mi. 22.7 Strukturen: Passive voice              Supersite: Strukturen
                                                 (passive)
          Wiederholung (oral exams)
 Do. 23.7                                        Supersite: Strukturen
                                                 (passive)
 Fr. 24.7 Anschließendes Gespräch zum Kurs       Canvas: Probeprüfung
          Wiederholung (K12)
9. WOCHE
 DATUM    THEMA                                                        AUFGABE
 Mo. 27.7 Mündliche Prüfung
 Di. 28.7 Mündliche Prüfung
 Mi. 29.7 TEST K12
                                              11
