Course: FR 601C
Instructor: Elizabeth Anne Mayne
Email: elizabeth.anne.mayne@gmail.com
Unique # 80990
SYLLABUS
BEFORE coming to class each day, PREPARE everything your instructor has assigned in the text,
Français interactif, and in the Canvas Modules (embedded content taken from the website
www.laits.utexas.edu/fi).
Week 1
                      Thursday-Friday                   Chapters 0-1
June 6-7
Week 2
                      Monday-Friday                     Chapter 1
June 10-14
                      *Thursday, June 13                *Exam 1 + Oral Assessment 1
Tuesday, June 11 is
last day to drop
                                                        Chapter 2
without possible
academic penalty
Week 3                Monday-Friday                     Chapter 2
June 17-21            *Thursday, June 20                *Exam 2 + Oral Assessment 2
                                                        Chapter 3
                      Monday-Friday                     Chapter 3
Week 4
                      *Thursday, June 27                *Exam 3 + Oral Assessment 3
June 24-28
                                                        Chapter 4
                      Monday-Wednesday, Friday          Chapter 4
Week 5
                      *NO CLASS Thursday, JULY 4*
July 1-5
                      *Friday, July 5                   *Exam 4 + Oral Assessment 4


Week 6                Monday-Thursday
                                                              Chapter 5
July 8-12             *NO CLASS Friday, JULY 12*
Week 7                Monday-Friday
July 15-19            *Monday, July 15                        *Exam 5 + Oral Assessment 5
                                                              Chapter 6
                      Monday-Friday
Week 8
                      *Monday, July 22                        *Exam 6 + Oral Assessment 6
July 22-26
                                                              Chapter 7
                      Monday-Tuesday                          Chapter 7/Exams/Review
Week 9                *Monday, July 29                        *Oral Exam
July 29-30            *Tuesday, July 30                       *Listening Comprehension Exam
                      August 1-2 FINAL EXAM TBA
*The FINAL EXAM date will be released by the Registrar near the middle of the semester. The French
Department does not schedule the final exam, and has no information about the final exam date until it is
released by the UT Registrar, so do not expect your instructor to know the date of the final before that this
happens. Under no condition will a student be allowed to take the final exam early, so do not purchase
any plane tickets before the Registrar publishes the final exam date. The final exam is a departmental,
uniform exam. A make-up will be offered after the regularly scheduled exam for students with verified
schedule conflicts.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Welcome to the French Intensive Language Program. French 601C is the first semester elementary French
course at the University of Texas and assumes no previous knowledge of the language. Français interactif
is a unique beginning French program developed at the University of Texas. Français interactif helps you
explore the French language and culture by following the lives of real UT students who participated in the
UT Summer Program in Lyon, France. The UT students will introduce you to their French host families,
their French university, and their lives in France. Keep in mind as you watch these students that they were
in your position only a year ago--enrolled in beginning French at UT! This program shows you that it IS
possible to learn French well enough to communicate with native speakers.
In addition to following the exploits of these UT students, you will also watch videos of native French
speakers as well as scenes of day-to-day interactions (e.g., vendors in the market, waiters at a café, children
getting ready to go to school, etc.) These video-based materials give Français interactif an authenticity
and immediacy lacking in most commercially produced textbooks.


As its name implies, Français interactif emphasizes interaction: student/teacher, student/student,
student/computer, and even student/native-speaker. The goal of these materials is in its title: interaction in
French! More specifically, the goal of this course is to improve your listening, speaking, reading and
writing skills in French. This means that you will learn useful vocabulary, grammatical structures, and
cultural information, which is embedded naturally in the videos and textbook content. The classroom focus
is on learner-centered group activities and language is naturally communicative. For a detailed list of
specific course goals, please refer to the "Introduction au Chapitre" document for each chapter in the
Canvas Modules.
Course Materials
     •    FR 601C/611C text, Français interactif available at lulu.com for around $30 + shipping (black
          and white version), delivered to your doorstep. If you prefer to not purchase the book, you can
          access the materials on your tablet in class, or you can take advantage of our free downloadable,
          printable chapter pdfs on the Français interactif website.
     •    All of the media content from the Français interactif website has been imported into the Canvas
          Modules for a more streamlined delivery. Chapters will appear one by one as we progress
          through the syllabus. In the Modules you will find activities to accompany videos, web activities,
          vocabulary with downloadable MP3 files, songs, phonetic lessons with practice exercises, links
          into Tex's French Grammar, UT French Department's on-line grammar resource which includes
          grammar explanations, self-correcting exercises, audio files in mp3 format, as well as a verb
          conjugation reference, and a verb tutor. (All video and audio podcasts are available for viewing
          and listening in iTunes v5 or higher, on MacOS X and Windows platforms. The Fi videos and
          audio files are also iPad, iPhone, and Android compatible.)
     •    Recommended
               o wordreference.com (free online dictionary)
Grading
Assignments
     •    Texercises & Testez-vous (5%)
     •    All other assigned work (vocab preps, paragraphs, all online assignments in Canvas
                                                                                                 20%
          Modules, etc.) (10%)
     •    Quizzes (5%)
     •    in each of the 3 categories above, the lowest grade will be dropped
Exams
     •    Exams 1-2 (5% each)                                                                    50%
     •    Exams 3-6 (10% each)
Oral Exam (face to face conversation with another student)                                       10%
Listening Comprehension Exam                                                                      5%
Final Exam                                                                                       15%
TOTAL                                                                                            100%


You must receive a grade of a C or higher (73% or higher) in order to continue on to FR 611C. A
grade of a C- is not sufficient to continue on to FR 611C.
Testing
Six chapter exams will be given in 601C. These will contain a variety of listening, reading, and writing
exercises. Please note exam dates indicated on the syllabus, as there are no make-ups. In the rare event of
an urgent and substantiated cause for missing an exam, instructors can accommodate students, but
students are expected to contact their instructor via email prior to the scheduled exam. If you have an
upcoming scheduled event, such as a graduate or medical school interview or participation in a University
related event, you must present documentation one week in advance. A long weekend or extended family
vacation because you have already purchased a plane ticket, is not a valid reason. The burden of proof will
be on you, so any such exception MUST be supported by documentation that can and will be validated. In
the event of a last minute emergency, illness, car accident, etc., we allow 72 hours to present
documentation.
In addition to these written exams, there will also be a listening comprehension exam, an oral exam, and a
departmental final exam. A make-up for the final exam will be available for students with verified
schedule conflicts. No student will be allowed to take the final exam prior to the date set by the University
for any reason.
For the final oral exam, which will take place at the end of the semester, you will have a conversation with
another student from a different section of FR 601 that meets at the same time as your section. You will be
evaluated by the instructor from the other section, which will result in a very objective evaluation. This
culminating activity will count as 10% of your final grade.
FINAL EXAM PROTOCOL: The FINAL EXAM date will be released by the Registrar near the middle
of the semester. Under no condition will a student be allowed to take the exam early, so do not
purchase any plane tickets before the Registrar publishes the final exam date and your instructor has
confirmed the date. The final exam is a departmental, uniform exam. Once your instructor confirms the
date and time of the final exam, check your official UTDirect Final Exam Schedule for conflicts. A make-
up will be offered after the regularly scheduled exam for students with verified schedule conflicts. A
verified schedule conflict is either a) an exam at the same time as the French exam or b) three final exams
in a 24-hour period. You must show your official UTDirect Exam Schedule to your instructor to get
approval to take the make-up no later than the last day of class, July 30. If you fail to show up for the
regularly scheduled final exam without having made prior arrangements with your instructor, you will
receive a ZERO on the final exam, even if you show up for the make-up exam. The make-up exam is not
an alternate exam, scheduled for your convenience because you decide you want an extra day to study or
because you were confused about the date. Consider this your official and only warning.


Attendance & preparation
Regular attendance, daily preparation and persistent, active participation in class are essential to your
success in learning French. This includes being ON TIME for class. You are allowed a total of 4 absences
without penalty during the semester. All absences count, even if documentation is presented. Each class
day over the summer counts as two attendance periods (1 hour each period). A penalty of 1% of your
FINAL COURSE GRADE (up to a 5% maximum deduction) will be deducted for each absence after 4 in
the semester, no exceptions. Three “tardies” will be counted as an absence. A student is tardy if they enter
the classroom after the bell has rung. If you are more than 10 minutes late for class, you will be marked as
absent. This is non-negotiable, so excuses about bus delays, the crazy Austin traffic, and alarms not going
off won’t be taken into consideration.
For students with disabilities presenting documentation at the beginning of the semester from the SSD,
special provisions and accommodations will be considered for absences. However, there is still an absence
limit, so be sure to discuss this with your instructor early on so there are no misunderstandings. Also,
please keep in mind that accommodations are not retroactive, so it is important to present proper
documentation as soon as it is available.
Although the vast majority of homework will be turned in within Canvas, your teacher will occasionally
assign specific exercises to be written out and turned in. No late homework will be accepted. If you are
unable to be in class, you are allowed to email your assignment to your instructor prior to the beginning of
the class hour that day if it is an assignment not submitted through Canvas. Otherwise, your assignment
will be considered late and you will receive a zero. Daily homework assignments can be found at the
beginning of each chapter module in the Canvas modules. You can also expect regular pop quizzes (1-2 per
chapter) to test preparation.
Appropriate use of electronic devices in class
Since a great deal of the content for this course is online, it is expected that you will often be using
electronic devices in class. However, the use of electronic devices during class time is only considered
“appropriate” by your instructor if you are consulting course materials. If you are on any website, including
social media or imessage, other than Canvas (and links from within Canvas), your attendance grade for that
day will be changed to an absence by your instructor in Canvas Attendance after class without warning.
The same applies to texting during class.
All students are expected to assist in maintaining a classroom environment that is conducive to learning. In
order to assure that all students have the opportunity to gain from time spent in class, unless otherwise
approved by the instructor, students are prohibited from engaging in any form of distraction. Inappropriate
behavior (using cellular phones for texting or other unauthorized activity, eating or drinking, tardiness,
making offensive remarks, talking out of turn, sleeping, overt inattentiveness, harassment or bullying of the
instructor or other students, etc.) shall result, minimally, in a recorded absence and/or a request to leave
class. Repeated inappropriate or disruptive behavior will be reported to the Dean of Students and can very
quickly escalate into a judicial matter.
Helpful Links:
Canvas Modules
Français interactif
Tex's French Grammar
lulu.com (to purchase Français interactif textbook)


Word reference
Verb conjugation reference
Verb conjugation practice
Course Sequencing
As you might know, the University of Texas is now offering online French courses. It is possible, although
only allowed in extenuating circumstances, to move from the face-to-face curriculum to the online
curriculum or vice versa:
FR 601 (completion with a grade of C or higher) would give you credit for FR 406 (the first semester
course of the online curriculum) and would allow you to register for FR 407 followed by 412K (the second
and third semesters of the new online curriculum). These two sequences both total 12 hours once
completed and are equivalent.
601C + 611C = 12 hours
406 + 407 + 412K = 12 hours
Computer labs
You will be required to do daily homework using the Français interactif website. Access to computers for
individual study is available in the LAITS media lab in MEZ 4.128. Liberal Arts walk-in media lab
operating hours are:
Monday-Thursday               9 a.m.- 6:45 p.m.
Friday                        9 a.m.- 4:45 p.m.
Course Supervision
If you have questions about French 601C, please consult your instructor, or the course supervisor, Dr.
Nancy Guilloteau, HRH 2.106A, 471-5511, nguilloteau@mail.utexas.edu.
The Department of French & Italian offers many services to beginning students. You will be invited to
films, le Café français, and other activities sponsored by the French Department. Your instructor will
announce these and other events throughout the semester via Canvas and in class. Bienvenue! We hope
you will enjoy learning French.
Additional Information / Please read carefully
Scholastic dishonesty: Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a zero. Scholastic
dishonesty includes any kind of cheating. In language classes, this includes the use of online translators. Be
aware that scholastic dishonesty can have far-reaching consequences, and can result in suspension or
expulsion from the University. For more information, contact the Student Judicial Services at 471- 2841, or
go http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
In order to receive full credit on assignments in FR 601C, you are expected to use only the vocabulary and
structures that have been learned in this course to date. Producing perfect, native-like paragraphs and


other works will not benefit your grade, but in fact, could result in a zero. Use of Google Translate or other
aids is considered scholastic dishonesty and will result in a zero and possible further action.
Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the
Dean of Students at 471-6259 or 471-4641, or go to http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd (Links to an
external site.)Links to an external site.
For students with disabilities presenting documentation at the beginning of the semester from the SSD,
special provisions and accommodations will be considered. Please keep in mind that accommodations are
not retroactive, so it is important to present proper documentation as soon as it is available.
Code of conduct: The dean may initiate disciplinary proceedings under subchapter 11-300 against a
student who conducts himself or herself in a manner that impedes, interferes with, or disrupts any
University teaching, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, learning, or other authorized
activity. For more information and a complete list of Student Standards of Conduct, please
consult http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi08-09/app/gi08.appc03.html#subchapter-11-300-initiation-of-
disciplinary-proceedings (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..
All students are expected to assist in maintaining a classroom environment that is conducive to learning.
Inappropriate behavior (making offensive remarks, harassment or bullying of the instructor or other
students, etc.) will be addressed by the instructor. Repeated inappropriate or disruptive behavior will be
reported to the Dean of Students and will very quickly escalate into a judicial matter.
Religious holidays: A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence. If these procedures are followed, students will not be penalized. Students are only excused for the
actual holiday, and not surrounding days. For example, if a holiday falls on a Thursday, the student will be
excused for Thursday’s absence, but not for an absence on the Friday following the holiday.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are concerned with the behavior of a classmate,
roommate, or co-worker, call BCAL at 512-232-5050 or visit
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
Emergency evacuation recommendations from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-
5767, http://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/
     •    Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
          buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
          assembling outside.
     •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
          occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
          building.
     •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
          week of class.
     •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     •    Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
          found at: utexas.edu/emergency .
Campus Carry: For detailed information related to Campus Carry, please visit the University’s official
Campus Carry homepage at https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/ .
