                                         THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                               STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number: SW n393R26                                       Instructor: Sarah McCafferty, LCSW-S
Unique Number: 88790                                            E-mail: sarah.m.mccafferty@gmail.com
Semester: Summer 2019                                           Office Room Number: SSW 3.104A
Meeting Time: Tuesday/Thursday 5:30- 8:00pm                     Office Hours: Wednesdays 4–5pm or by
Classroom: SSW 2.122                                            appointment
                        THEORIES AND METHODS OF GROUP INTERVENTION
   I.      Standardized Course Description
   The course will cover current group intervention approaches used with children, adolescents, adults, and the
   elderly across a variety of settings. Students will develop a working understanding of children, adolescents,
   adults and the elderly from diverse backgrounds, affirming and respecting their strengths and differences in
   group settings. The course is grounded in the identification, analysis, and implementation of empirically
   based intervention strategies for group work with children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly. This course
   will focus on using multiple perspectives in the advanced application of theories, models, and skills utilized
   in short- and longer-term group interventions. The framework of the course is based on social work values
   and the ethical decision-making process, as illuminated by the NASW Code of Ethics.
   II.     Standardized Course Objectives
   Upon completion of this course, student will be able to:
   1.Integrate theories and empirical research knowledge in selecting and using group work approaches with
   children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly;
   2.Demonstrate an advanced clinical knowledge of group work intervention and leadership roles and skills as
   they relate to the strengths, the processes involved in human change, and the capacities and resources of
   children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly;
   3.Adapt group work intervention models, programs, and activities for use with children, adolescents, adults,
   and the elderly to reflect an understanding of persons from diverse backgrounds, including (but not limited
   to) race, ethnicity, culture, class, gender, sexual orientation, religion/spiritual, physical or mental ability,
   developmental level, age, and national origin;
   4. Evaluate, select, and design group work programs, methods, and activities for children, adolescents,
   adults, and the elderly based upon their empirical base, practice utility, potential, range of applicability and
   limitations;
   5. Select and design group work programs, methods, and activities, and to then critically evaluate
   and analyze these group work approaches as to their effectiveness in given situations. This includes: (a) the
   adequacy of the research and knowledge base; (b) the range of applicability; (c) the value and ethical issues,
   including the student’s own value system; and (d) the policy implications involved in delivery of group
   work services to children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly;


6.Integrate and apply core and advanced group work skills and processes, including, but not limited to,
creation and maintenance of the group, resolving conflict, dealing with challenging clients, working in the
here-and-now, and fostering the therapeutic factors of group work;
7.Implement and evaluate the effectiveness of group work interventions for children, adolescents, adults and
the elderly;
8.Demonstrate the ability to tailor group work interventions for children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly
based on the context in which they are delivered;
9.Demonstrate advanced knowledge of social work values and ethical decision-making processes as they
relate to ethical dilemmas in group work with children, adolescents, adults, and the elderly.
III.     Teaching Methods
This class will be taught using a variety of teaching methods, with an emphasis on experiential learning and
exercises designed to promote self-awareness in relation to the group process. Small groups and role-plays
are designed to provide opportunities for students to develop group leadership and membership skills. Other
teaching methods include class discussions, case examples, video presentations, lectures, and guest
speakers.
IV.      Required Texts and Materials
     Required Text: Corey, G. (2016). Theory and practice of group counseling (9th ed). Boston, MA:
     Cengage Learning.
     Recommended Texts: Gitterman, A. & Shulman, L. (Eds.). (2005). Mutual Aid Groups, Vulnerable
     and Resilient Populations, and the Life Cycle (3rd ed.). New York: Columbia University Press.
     Yalom, I.D. (with Leszcz, M). (2005) The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (5th ed.). New
     York: Basic Books.
Students are expected to review:
     NASW Code of Ethics
     http://www.socialworkers.org/pubs/code/code.asp
     Texas State Board of Social Work Examiners Code of Conduct
     http://www.dshs.state.tx.us/socialwork/sw_conduct.shtm
     NASW Standards for Cultural Competence
     http://www.socialworkers.org/practice/standards/PRA-BRO-253150-CC-Standards.pdf
Additional required weekly readings and handouts are posted on Canvas and will also be made available at
Jenn’s Copy & Binding at 2200 Guadalupe Street.


V.       Course Requirements
Students will be required to complete the assignments listed below. Detailed assignment learning objectives
and instructions, including expected demonstration of content mastery and skill development will be
provided in a separate handout. All assignments will be discussed in detail in class and students are
encouraged to meet with the instructor should they have any questions about the assignments. All
assignments will be graded on depth and quality of required content, creativity and critical thinking skills,
overall professionalism and quality of writing.
                                         Assignment Summary
    Assignment                                                             Percentage               Due Date
    Class Participation                                                    20%                      Weekly
    Self-Assessment of Group Leadership Skills                             5%                       6/13
    Pop Quizzes (2 @ 5% each)                                              10%
    Take Home Mid-term Exam                                                25%                      7/2
    Learning Reflection Papers                                             15%                      6/25, 7/9, 7/23
    (3 @ 5% each)
    Small Group Experiential and Written Analysis Paper                    25%                      7/29
1. Class Participation (20% of grade)
Class participation will include preparedness for class, informed class discussion, participation in group
experience sessions, and the degree to which you take part during discussion time in class. There will be
ample opportunities for students to take part in experiential in-class and role-play exercises, both as group
members and as group facilitators. Students are encouraged to get “out of their comfort zone,” as they take
part in these exercises. In order to more completely evaluate experiential learning, group members will have
an opportunity to evaluate each other’s contributions to their group’s preparation. This will assist the
instructor in evaluating class contribution. All of these aspects will factor into class participation points.
2. Self-Assessment of Group Leadership Skills (5% of grade)
A self-assessment document will be passed on 6/11/19. This is to be turned in at the following class on
6/13/19.
3. Quizzes (10% of grade)
There will be three pop quizzes (nondisclosed dates) given across the semester but only two will count
towards your final grade. You will be able to drop your lowest of the three scores. The quizzes will be based
on the assigned readings. Anyone who is not present for a quiz will receive a score of 0% on that quiz with
no exceptions.
4. Take Home Midterm (25% of grade)
This take-home exam is designed to deepen and integrate your learning of the course content through
June 27th. Questions are related to class lectures and discussions, all assigned readings in the Corey
text, readings on Canvas (or packet), lecture and class handouts. A hard copy of the exam with 12-
point font should be turned in by the beginning of class time on July 2nd. To maximize your
learning, it is highly recommended you do this assignment over a period of time vs. in one block as
many of the questions require time for thought and reflection.


     5. Learning Reflection Papers (15% of grade)
     There will be three brief writing assignments (1-2 pages, double-spaced, 1” margins, 11-12 pt font) across
     the semester to increase students’ self-awareness, sophistication in professional use of self, evaluation of
     one’s own practice and active engagement in professional self-care. Papers are due by the beginning of class
     on the assigned dates and should be submitted to Canvas.
     6. Small Group Analysis Paper (25% of grade)
     This paper will include reflection on the group experience (both as a member and leader), an analysis of the
     group (e.g., dynamics, leadership, conflict resolution, etc…) and an integration of the readings. Additional
     instructions will be handed out in the beginning of the semester. This written analysis will be due on 7/29 at
     5:30pm and should be uploaded to Canvas.
     VI.     Grades
             94.0 and Above A
             90.0 to 93.999              A-
             87.0 to 89.999              B+
             84.0 to 86.999              B
             80.0 to 83.999              B-
             77.0 to 79.999              C+
             74.0 to 76.999              C
             70.0 to 73.999              C-
             67.0 to 69.999              D+
             64.0 to 66.999              D
             60.0 to 63.999              D-
             Below 60.0                  F
     VII.    Class Policies
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal
matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is protected by
regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this
information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality
could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance
located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
TIME MANAGEMENT. All assignments are due at the beginning of class on the date and time indicated.
Late assignments will be penalized 5% of the total percentage points allowed per day that they are late
and will only be accepted in the first week following an assignment’s due date. Contact the instructor a
minimum of 24 hours before the assignment is due if other arrangements need to be made due to an emergency.
ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION. Attendance and participation for the full class time is expected for
all students. After two absences, the student’s final grade will be lowered by one grade. Further absences
may result in the student being dropped from the course. Repeated late arrivals to class may be considered as an
absence. Classroom exercises, discussions, role plays, guest speakers and other class experiential exercises are


essential for the students’ professional learning and continued development of self-awareness. This form of
learning cannot be “made up” once missed. Students are to notify the instructor prior to class by email if they
cannot attend class due to an illness or emergency.
QUALITY OF WRITING. Students are expected to produce high quality work in terms of appearance,
writing style and content. Points will be deducted for errors, misspellings, incorrect grammar, poor
organization, repetition of information, and inferior work processing. When using information from other
sources, references and bibliography should conform to the current APA style citation. Students are encouraged
to consult with the SSW writing consultant for assistance. (http://www.utexas.edu/ssw/dccs/students/graduate-
writing-consultations/) Plagiarism is a serious violation of university rules and will be dealt with according to
university policy.
    VIII. University Policies
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers
and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects students to
act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the
class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender,
sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We
expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work also
deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would
be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations
relating to challenging issues. In this environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and
sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students
engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to course
readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the professor. The
professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments and
activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling
is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at
512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are
not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist
among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such forums, please
assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on,
uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and
prospective careers.


Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of electronic
communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived by clients,
colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which
could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this, social work
students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos
or using any language that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are obliged to block
any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should not be referred to in any
form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise
client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted
regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set
by the School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as well as
The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the university
community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies
on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site
of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to exams,
quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized duplication of the course
materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action being taken against the
student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may
be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in
further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for
the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations must
obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing
accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must miss a class,
examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, the professor will give the
student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.


TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the University
of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from discriminatory conduct
based on gender. Faculty, instructors, agency-based field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their
supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence,
or sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents
will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Deputy for the SSW, Professor
Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to obtain information.
Further information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu on
the School’s website.
 CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal
matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is protected by
regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this
information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality
could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance
located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as an
official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email for
university and course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university
informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily,
but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be
time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail address
athttp://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that involve working in
agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present some risks. Sound choices and
caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to
policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding
any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone who is acting
differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to
evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of
the following policies regarding evacuation:


    - Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
        exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    - If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of class.
    - In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    - Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
        Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
    IX.     Course Schedule
Corey = Theory & Practice of Group Counseling by Corey                 CANVAS =ALL OTHER READINGS
 Date                        Topics                  Assignment Due                         Readings
 6/6 TH    Welcome via Canvas                      Discussion Board      Class Syllabus
           (class will not meet in person)         Introduction
 6/11 TU   Therapeutic Factors of Group                                  Drumm, The Essential Power of Group Work
           Group as a Microcosm
           Overview of Various Types of Groups                           Yalom, Ch. 1 Therapeutic Factors
           Pre-Group Meeting for small groups                            Optional: Greif, G. & Ephross, P., Skills for
                                                                         Working Across Populations at Risk
 6/13 TH   History of Group Social Work            Self-Assessment of    Gitterman, A. and Shulman, L. Mutual Aid: pp:
           A Mutual Aid Approach                   Group Leadership      1-35
           Group Leadership Skills                 Skills DUE
           Concepts & Stages                                             Yalom, Ch. 2 The Therapist Working in the
                                                                         Here and Now
           In-Class Small Group #1
                                                                         Optional: Steinberg, Mutual Aid
                                                                         Furman, Bender, Rowan: The Group Work
                                                                         Tradition in Social Work
 6/18 TU   Group Leadership and Co-Leadership                            Schiller, “Not for Women Only: Relational
           Multicultural Perspective on Group Work                       Model”
           Group Dynamics and Cohesion
                                                                         Toseland & Rivas, Ch. 5 Leadership and
                                                                         Diversity pp. 149 – 157
                                                                         Burlingame, Cohesion in Group Psychotherapy
 6/20 TH   Pre-Group Work                                                Corey, Ch. 4, Early Stages in the Development
           Practical Considerations in Forming a                         of a Group
           Group
                                                                         Gumpert & Black. “Ethical Issues in Group
           Interpersonal Learning                                        Work”
           Ethical Leadership
                                                                         Optional: Yalom, Ch. 2, Interpersonal Learning
           In-Class Small Group #3
 6/25 TU   Transition & Working Stage of Group     Learning Reflection   Corey, Ch. 5, pp. 94-107
           Working Therapeutically with Conflict   due
                                                                         Wayne & Gitterman, “Offensive Behavior in
                                                   Take home midterm     Groups”
                                                   released on Canvas


                                                                   Corey, Ch. 3, “Ethical and Professional Issues in
                                                                   Group Practice”
6/27 TH Working with Children in Group                             Malekoff, Gatekeepers, Gatecrashers, and
                                                                   Gateways in Group Work with Kids: A Mystery
        Guest Speaker: Jocelyn Chamra-Barrera,                     Story
        LMSW; Bilingual Support & Kids Who
        Care Coordinator, The Christi Center                       Corey, Ch. 7, “Adlerian Group Counseling”
        In-class Small Group # 4                                   Optional: Shechtman & Gluk, “Therapeutic
        (Consultation)                                             Factors in Children’s Groups”
7/2 TU  Psychodynamic/Psychoanalytic           Take home midterm   Corey, Chapter 6: “Psychoanalytic Approach to
        Approach and Interpersonal Process     due                 Groups”
        Groups
                                                                   Optional: Kirman, “Working with Anger in
        Guest Speaker: Gianna Viola, LCSW-S                        Groups” Modern Analytic Approach
        Certified Group Psychotherapist
7/4 TH  No class- Holiday                                          No readings assigned
7/9 TU  Self-Help, Support, Psychoeducational  Learning Reflection Zastrow, Ch. 8 Self-Help Groups
        and Social Skills Groups               due
                                                                   Serlin et al., Support Groups for Women with
        In-class Small Group #5                                    Breast Cancer
                                                                   Gitterman, A. & Knight, C. Curriculum and
                                                                   Psychoeducational Groups: Opportunities and
                                                                   Challenges.
                                                                   Optional: Coates, et. al. Restorative Justice
                                                                   Circles: An Exploratory Study
7/11 TH Working with Adolescents in Group                          Tucker, Adventure Based Group Therapy
                                                                   Corey, Ch. 16, “Solution-Focused Brief Therapy
                                                                   and Motivational Interviewing in Groups”
                                                                   Optional: Harvey, A. Group Work with
                                                                   African- American Youth in the Criminal
                                                                   Justice System
7/16 TU Treatment Groups (Intensive                                Topor, et al. “Skills for Recovery: A Recovery-
        Outpatient, Inpatient and Eating                           Oriented Dual Diagnosis Group for Veterans
        Disorder groups)                                           with Serious Mental Illness and Substance
                                                                   Abuse”
        In-Class Small Group #6
                                                                   Optional: Corey, Ch. 17, “Comparisons,
        Guest Speaker: Micaela Romero,                             Contrasts, and Integration”
        LCSW, Behavioral Health Counselor,
        Seton Shoal Creek
7/18 TH Working with Older Adults in Group                         Rodio & Holmes, Lessons Learned from
                                                                   Ballroom Dancing with Older Adults
                                                                   Wilson, S. & Rice, S. Group Work with Older
                                                                   Adults
7/23 TU Expressive Arts in Group Settings      Learning Reflection Boldt & Paul. “Building a Creative Arts
        (Psychodrama, Writing, Music,          due                 Therapy Group”
        Movement, etc.)


                                                                        Corey, Chapter 8: Psychodrama in Groups
           In-Class Small Group #7
           Guest Speaker: Emily Keefer, LCSW,
           ADS, Clinical Social Work/Therapist,
           Private Practice
 7/25 TH   CBT Groups                                                   Corey, Chapter 13: Cognitive Behavioral
                                                                        Approaches to Groups
           Mindfulness-Based Groups
                                                                        Baer, R. “Mindfulness Training as a Clinical
           In-Class Final Small Group Meeting #8                        Intervention”
                                                                        Coholic, et al. Facilitating Art-based
                                                                        Mindfulness Group for Vulnerable Children
 7/30 TU   Endings in Group Work                 Small Group            Corey, Ch. 5, pp. 107-114
           Termination                           Experiential and
           Assessment                            Written Analysis due   Rebmann,Warning: There’s a lot of Yelling in
           Practice Evaluation in Groups                                Knitting”
           Review, Reflect and Celebrate                                Optional: Zastrow, Evaluation in Groups
    X.      Bibliography
Baer, R. (2003). Mindfulness Training as a Clinical Intervention: A Conceptual and Empirical Review. Clinical
       psychology: Science and practice, 10(2), 125-143.
Barsky, A. (2007). Conflict resolution for the helping professions (2nd ed.) Belmont, CA:Thomson-Brooks/Cole.
Boldt, R.W. & Paul,S. (2010). Building a Creative-Arts Therapy Group at a University Counseling Center,
       Journal of College Student Psychotherapy, 25:1, 39-52.
Burlingame, G.M., Fuhriman, A., & Johnson, J. (2001). Cohesion in group psychotherapy. Psychotherapy
       Theory Research & Practice, 38(4): 373-379.
Coholic, D., Oystrick, V., Posterero, J., & Lougheed, S. (2016). Facilitating arts-based mindfulness group
       activities with vulnerable children: An example of nondeliberative social group work practice. Social
       Work with Groups, 39(2-3),155-169.http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01609513.2015.1050751
Coates, R., Umbreit, M., & Voss, B. (2003). Restorative Justice Circles: An exploratory study. Contemporary
       Justice Review, 6(3), 265-378.
Corey, G. (2016). Theory and practice of group counseling (9th ed). Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
Corey, M.S., Corey, G. & Corey, C. (2014) Groups: Process and Practice (9th ed.) Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole
       Cengage Learning.
Drumm, K. (2006). The Essential Power of Group Work. Social Work with Groups. (29) 2-3. 17-31.
Furman, R., Bender, S., & Rowan, R. (2014). Social Work with Groups: An experiential approach to


        group work (2nd ed.) Chicago: Lycem Books.
Gitterman, A. & Knight, C. (2016) Curriculum and Psychoeducational Groups: Opportunities and
        Challenges. Social Work. 61: 103-110.
Gitterman, A. & Shulman, L. (Eds.) (2005). Mutual aid groups, vulnerable populations and the life cycle. New
        York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Greif, G. & Ephross, P. (Eds.). (2005). Group work with populations at risk (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford
        University Press.
Gumpert, J. & Black, P.N. (2006). Ethical Issues in Group Work: What Are They? How Are They Managed?,
        Social Work with Groups, 29:4, 61-74.
Harvey, A. (2011). Group Work with African-American youth in the criminal just system: A culturally
        competent model. In Greif, G.L. & Ephross. Group work with population at risk (2nd ed. pp. 264 – 282).
Kirman, J. H. (1995). Working with anger in groups: A modern analytic approach. International
        Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 45(1),303. Retrieved from
        http://ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/1308904421?accou
        ntid=7118
Malekoff, A. (2004). Group work with adolescents: Principles and practice (2nd ed.). New York, NY: The
        Guilford Press.
Rebmann, H. (2006). Warning-There's a lot of yelling in knitting. Social Work with Groups, 29(4), 5-24.
        http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/J009v29n04_02
Rodio, A., & Holmes, A. (2016). Lessons learned from ballroom dancing with older. Social Work with
        Groups,1-8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01609513.2015.1066580
Schiller, L.Y. (2007): Not for Women Only: Applying the Relational Model of Group Development with
        Vulnerable Populations, Social Work With Groups, 30:2, 11-26.
Serlin, I., Classen, C., Frances, B., & Angell, K. (2000). Symposium: Support groups for women with cancer:
        Traditional and alternative expressive approaches. The Arts in Psychotherapy, 27(2), 123-138.
Shechtman, Z. & Gluk, O. (2005). An Investigation of Therapeutic Factors in Children’s Groups, Group
        Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice. 9(2), 127-134.
Steinberg, D.M. (2010), Mutual Aid: A Contribution to Best-Practice Social Work, Social Work with Groups
        33(1): 53-68.
Topor, D.R., Grosso, D., Burt, J. & Falcon, T. (2013). Skills for Recovery: A Recovery-Oriented Dual
        Diagnosis Group for Veterans with Serious Mental Illness and Substance Abuse, Social Work with
        Groups, 36:2-3, 222-235.


Toseland, R. & Rivas, R. (2012). An introduction to group work practice (7th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Tucker, A. (2009) Adventure-Based Group Therapy to Promote Social Skills in Adolescents, Social Work with
        Groups, 32:4, 315-329.
Wayne, J. & Gitterman, A. (2004). Offensive Behavior in Groups: Challenges and Opportunities, Social Work
        with Groups, 26:2, 23-34.
Wilson, S. & Rice. S. (2011). Group work with older adults. In Greif, G.L. & Ephross. Group work with
        population at risk (2nd ed. pp. 264 – 282). New York: Oxford University Press.
Yalom, I.D. (with Leszcz, M). (2005) The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (5th ed.). New
        York: Basic Books.
Zastrow, C. (2012). Social Work with groups: A comprehensive work text. Belmont, CA:
        Brooks/Cole Publishing Co.
Helpful Websites
www.agpa.org
American Group Psychotherapy Association
www.austingroups.org
Austin Group Psychotherapy Association
http://www.aaswg.org
Association for the Advancement of Social Work with Groups
http://www.mhatexas.org/#!/get-help/
Mental Health Association of Texas
http://www.nmha.org/go/go/find_support_group
Mental Health America
www.austinaa.org
Local AA site with meetings schedule
www.cmhc.utexas.edu/g_schedule.html
UT Counseling and Mental Health Center
