UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS                                             SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE
Advanced Seminar                                                       ARC 350R, ARC386M
Battle Hall 101                                                         Thursday, 3:30-6:30
Professor Kevin Alter                                                          Spring 2019
                                 Two Hundred Words
This is an advanced seminar course exploring a range of current architectural
investigations, as manifest in specific built work and texts. It begins with a set of
contemporary buildings and texts, and aims at generating a critical dialogue within
the class.
The course intends to develop analytical and critical skills via discussion and concise
writing venues: short trenchant responses to the specific buildings and texts. The
class will examine one building each week. Students will come to class prepared
with a response of 200 words and 1 critical image. Writing is expected to be a
response to the material put forth, not explanations of any given building or text.
These responses are intended to generate conversation in class, and participation in
this critical dialogue is expected. A final presentation will take place on the last class
of the semester with an exhibition of posters generated by each member of the class.
In this final exercise, each student will provide a text of 1000 words and a pertinent
image that expands on each individual’s interest. Intended as a provocation rather
than a response, it is expected that this final exercise will require more effort than
the previous weeks’ writings.
The objective of this course is not only to expose students to a relevant body of
writing and built work, but to also develop skills in relating critical investigations to
their physical embodiment. The intention of the course is to afford the framework by
which students might begin to position their own architectural ambitions.
Particular attention will be paid to the realm of material manifestation as a critical
juncture in the formulation of architecture. In the concern for the materials of
building and the manners of construction the architect commits speculation to action:
attempts to convert intention into palpable reality. It is here that architecture is most
fully and deliberately engaged with the world and here that architecture initiates the
world's response in turn. It seems clear, however, from even casual observation that
while this subject matter may be vital it is oftentimes treated as a marginal concern.
This course begins with the assumption that this denial of Architecture's material
potential seriously undermines architecture's value in society and raises fundamental
questions about the legitimacy of our profession more generally. Students will
explore these concerns through their responses and class dialogue.
