 Fall 2018
 AMS 370
 Unique #: 31240                                AMS 370
 Class Schedule:
 Tue/Thursdays                       AMERICAN
 2-3:30 p.m.
 Prof. Cary Cordova                  DISASTERS
As the popularity of Hollywood disaster films can attest, Americans relish and romanticize the spectacle
of disaster. This course will examine “natural” and human-made disasters as key turning points in
American history. Whether fire, hurricane, toxin, or epidemic, moments of crisis frequently heighten
the visibility of race, gender, and class inequalities, as well as propel, or limit social change. This class
requires students to question what is “natural,” to analyze the relationship between class, race, gender,
and government policies, and to develop a historical understanding of disasters and American identities
and transformations.
A disaster, by virtue of its magnitude, can defy examination. By definition, “disaster” suggests
something insurmountable, unfathomable, and implicitly unavoidable. Disasters can invoke a sense of
powerlessness, or apathy, but to be clear, this is not the orientation of this class. In looking at disasters
over time, this class requires students to think critically about the interaction between human culture and
disaster and to use this understanding to think thoughtfully, and even hopefully, about responses to
contemporary “disasters.”
This class is loosely divided into two parts: spectacular and everyday disasters. Among our spectacular
disasters, we will consider the San Francisco earthquake of 1906, Hurricane Katrina, and disaster film
culture. Spectacular disasters tend to graphically illustrate our own mortality, as well as spur changes in
government intervention and policy, such as the Disaster Relief Act of 1950 and the Patriot Act of 2001,
while disaster films tend to reflect and shape our social hopes and anxieties. Everyday disasters tend to
enter our lives more silently, but no less deadly. In terms of everyday disasters, we will look at heat
waves, fires, and everyday chemicals. In setting forth this division between the spectacular and the
everyday, students are expected to consider the enormous intricacies between “disastrous” events and
human behavior.
Not surprisingly, our survey of disasters is quite selective, and cannot encompass all the issues at stake.
Rather, our objective in this class is to develop a set of questions that can launch our understanding of
how disasters have been defined over time, as well as investigate a disaster’s historical and cultural
impact through an American Studies framework. What happens when we place disasters in the center of
our understanding of American culture? What is a disaster, and what is not? How have social
inequalities framed representations of disasters? Students will gain “disaster vision,” or the ability to
recognize parallels and intersections across seemingly disparate events. At the end of the class, students
are expected to become independent scholars of disaster and will be expected to apply the tools provided
in this class to present and submit their own American Studies analysis of a disaster.


REQUIRED TEXTS:
COURSE READER: This class requires a course reader, which will be available for purchase at Jenn’s Copy
and Binding (512-482-0779).
Jenn’s is located at 2518 Guadalupe (where Guadalupe intersects with Dean Keeton, approximately two blocks
from our classroom).
Please note: The first few articles will be posted on Canvas to ensure everyone has access to the initial
readings: <https://utexas.instructure.com>.
If you have trouble accessing the Canvas system, please contact the UT helpdesk (512-475-9400).
In addition, one copy of the course reader will be placed ON RESERVE to ensure everyone’s access.
ASSIGNMENTS:
    ◼ Students are expected to do the required readings for each class in advance of attending class. Students
         also are encouraged to bring the course reader with them to class, in order to refer to the material when
         needed (or perhaps prepare for a pop quiz!).
    ◼ You are responsible for the material missed in any class. I will not respond to any email requests to
         summarize an entire class, but I will respond to in-person requests during office hours or by appointment.
         Alternatively, consult with a fellow student.
GRADING:
    ◼ Primary Source Analysis (15%) (4-5 pgs): Students will analyze a disaster through available archival
         material (documents, photographs, film, etc.).
    ◼ Disaster Film Analysis (20%) (5-6 pgs): Students will choose and analyze a “disaster film” using
         theoretical concepts developed in class.
    ◼ Today’s Disasters (10%) (2 pgs): This assignment asks students to analyze contemporary reportage of a
         disaster in relation to a class topic. In addition to writing a 2-page analysis of the source and content,
         students will present their analysis at the start of our class, on the day they are assigned.
    ◼ Group Discussion Leading (5%): As part of a larger group (about 3 students), each student will have
         one opportunity over the course of the semester to lead class discussion.
    ◼ Final Research Project (30%):
         O Research Proposal (5%)
         O Final Presentation (5%)
         O Final Paper (20%)
         O This final project challenges you to focus on a disaster, or set of disasters and analyze through the
             lens of American Studies.
             ▪ 1. Presentation on your chosen disaster(s).
             ▪ 2. Each student will write a paper (~10 pages). The paper must draw on the issues, themes, and
                  texts raised in this class, but also must reflect thoughtful, original, engaged analysis. Topics must
                  be approved by the Professor.
    ◼ Attendance & Participation: (20%): Because class participation is considered an important part of this
         class, attendance will be noted each day.
             ▪ Missing more than 3 classes is likely to negatively impact your grade.
             ▪ Missing more than 6 classes is a guaranteed zero for attendance and participation.
             ▪ I reserve the right to fail any student who misses 7 or more classes.


        o    I ask for more than just attendance. You should make an effort to participate and show me that you
             have done the reading, or are actively listening to lecture. A variety of classroom exercises will
             ensure you are up-to-date with readings and contributing to class discussion. I look for quality of
             insights shared versus sheer quantity of comments made.
        o    Tips for participation: As you read, think about what you might add to our discussion. What ideas are
             driving the reading? How is the argument supported? Consider not just your personal reaction, but
             the big picture questions and contradictions. Come to class with questions for discussion or with
             related ideas to make connections.
        o    QUIZZES: I do pop reading quizzes. They are not hard if you have done the reading. Come to class
             prepared. I do not give make-up quizzes. For quizzes, I grade using the following symbols: +
             (excellent); ✓+ (good); ✓ (acceptable); ✓- (poor); — (failed). In establishing your final grade on
             the quizzes, I will take into account your overall performance in the class and your best quiz grades.
        o    Office hours: Your professor is happy to help you do well in this class. You are encouraged to visit
             during office hours, or by appointment. Please take a few minutes to introduce yourself and express
             any questions you might have, or just say “hi.”
    ◼ EXTRA CREDIT
        o    As the semester rolls along, there may be a few opportunities for extra credit. Extra credit
             opportunities often entail attending an event or talk related to our class and submitting a short paper
             (1-2 pages) on how the content of the event relates to the content of our class. If you have an idea for
             an extra credit assignment, you are welcome to discuss it with the professor.
        o    So what is extra credit worth? Extra credit is given weight in the assessment of your participation
             grade. It is meant to help students that would like a little more recognition in this aspect of the
             grading process. It is in no way required, but it can help push students up a couple of points in their
             overall participation grade.
GRADING SCALE:
            100-93 = A                 92-90 = A-                 87-89 = B+                   84-86 = B
            80-83 = B-                 77-79 = C+                  74-76 = C                   70-73 = C-
            67-69 = D+                  64-66 = D                  60-63 = D-                   0-59 = F
FLAGS:
Independent Inquiry Flag
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you in the
process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation
of a question, problem, or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing
in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete
substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will
also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your
peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work.
Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork,
and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.


POLICIES:
CLASSROOM CONDUCT:
  ◼ In order to build the best possible learning environment, please be respectful of the professor and other
     students. Texting, browsing the Internet, talking to your friends, or other examples of disregarding
     the learning environment, are not acceptable conduct. Should you feel compelled to engage in these
     activities, you may be asked to leave the classroom.
  ◼ Please turn off and put away all the electronics – cell phones, ipads, and laptops. Failure to do so
     will impact your grade.
PAPERS AND LATE POLICY:
  ◼ All papers must be typed and proofread; careless editing will incur deductions. All assignments are due at
     the beginning of the scheduled class.
  ◼ Extensions on graded assignments will be granted only in the case of a medical or family emergency, or if
     you have official documented college business off campus. You must notify me before the due date.
     Assignments turned in late without an allowable excuse will lose one letter grade for each day past
     the due date.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY:
  ◼ Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated and any incidents of dishonesty will be reported to the Office
     of the Dean of Students and Student Judicial Services. Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited
     to, cheating, plagiarism (the unauthorized appropriation of another’s work – including from Websites – in
     one’s own written work offered for credit) and collusion (the unauthorized collaboration with another
     person in preparing college work offered for credit). These acts will be subject to serious academic
     penalty. If you are unclear about what plagiarism is, I would encourage you to visit the following
     website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
     STUDENTS WHO COMMIT PLAGIARISM ARE SUBJECT TO IMMEDIATE FAILURE OF
     THE CLASS, IN ADDITION TO FACING THE POLICIES OF THE UNIVERSITY.
ACCOMMODATION:
  ◼ Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
     accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at ssd@austin.utexas.edu, or 512-
     471-6259 (voice), or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone), as soon as possible to request an official letter
     outlining authorized accommodations. The professor and student will use this letter as a guide for
     implementing any accommodations. Students who need assistance, but do not yet have an official letter
     of support, are welcome to bring any of their concerns to the attention of the professor. Immediate
     concerns will be handled on a case by case basis, and official documentation will be required to ensure
     proper accommodations are made. See here for more info: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/using-
     accommodations/
  ◼ Religious observances: Texas Education Code 51.911 states that a student shall be excused from
     attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
     holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
     may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
     assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University


       policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so
       that arrangements can be made.
CAMPUS CARRY:
   ◼ According to Texas SB11, persons with a current legally valid Concealed Carry License may carry a legal
       handgun on public college campuses, as long as it remains concealed and on their person (private colleges
       can opt out of SB11). If anyone, including the professor, sees a handgun, however briefly, leave the
       vicinity and call 911 immediately.
   ◼ According to SB11, faculty members cannot ban the concealed carry of handguns in their classrooms, no
       matter how unsafe they or students may feel discussing complex issues with firearms present.
   ◼ Some exceptions to campus carry exist: For instance, faculty and staff can ban guns from their sole-
       occupant offices, but only if they give oral notice of this policy. Thus, in order to comply with this new
       policy, I will read the following aloud on the first day of class: “I prohibit the concealed carry of
       handguns in my office.”
Course Schedule:
Please Note: This schedule is subject to change as needed.
WEEK 1
Thursday, August 30
   ◼ Introduction
WEEK 2
Tuesday, September 4
                         ACTS OF GOD, AND OTHER SPECTACULAR DISASTERS
   ◼ THE CULTURE OF CALAMITY
             READ: Kevin Rozario, “Introduction: The Golden Age as Catastrophe,” The Culture of
                Calamity: Disaster & the Making of Modern America (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
                2007), 1-29.
Thursday, September 6
   ◼ DENATURALIZING DISASTER
             READ: Ted Steinberg, “Introduction: Hometown Blues,” Acts of God: The Unnatural History
                of Natural Disaster in America (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), xi-xxv.
             READ: Junot Díaz, “Apocalypse: What Disasters Reveal,” Boston Review, May/June 2011.
WEEK 3
Tuesday, September 11
   ◼ PORTRAYING 9/11


            READ: Véronique Bragard, Christophe Dony, and Warren Rosenberg, “Introduction,”
              Portraying 9/11: Essays on Representations in Comics, Literature, Film and Theatre
              (Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company, Inc., 2011).
            READ: Matthew J. Costello, “Spandez Agonistes: Superhero Comics Confront the War on
              Terror,” in Portraying 9/11: Essays on Representations in Comics, Literature, Film and
              Theatre, eds.,Véronique Bragard, Christophe Dony and Warren Rosenberg (Jefferson, NC:
              McFarland & Company, Inc., 2011).
            IN-CLASS ASSIGN: Presentations
Thursday, September 13
   ◼ PORTRAYING THE ATOMIC BOMB
            READ: Paul Boyer, excerpts, By the Bomb’s Early Light: American Thought and Culture at
              the Dawn of the Atomic Age (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1994 (1988).
            IN-CLASS ASSIGN: Primary Source Analysis
WEEK 4
Tuesday, September 18
   ◼ AFTER “THE BIG ONE”: THE DENIAL OF DISASTER
            READ: Ted Steinberg, Chapter 2, “Disaster as Archetype,” Acts of God: The Unnatural History
              of Natural Disaster in America (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 25-46.
            BRING: A compelling / provocative primary source (such as a historical document, or
              photograph) related to the San Francisco earthquake to class.
            Choose your source wisely, since you will have to analyze it in class. Use one of the following
              online archives:
                   • University of California Archives: https://calisphere.org/
                   • National Archives: http://www.archives.gov/research/catalog/
Thursday, September 20
                                 THE ARCHITECTURE OF DISASTER
   ◼ FINDING SHELTER
            READ: Mark Svenvold, “How Firm Is Your Foundation?” Big Weather: Chasing Tornadoes
              in the Heart of America (New York: Henry Holt & Co., 2005), 228-253.
            READ: Jim Watts, “After Oklahoma Disaster, No Urgency to Bond for Tornado Shelters,”
              The Bond Buyer, May 24, 2013.
            READ: Kevin M. Simmons and Daniel Sutter, “Tornado Shelters and the Housing Market,”
              Construction Management and Economics (November 2007) 25, 1119-1126.
            DUE: #1 STUDENT PRESENTATION / DISCUSSION LEADING
WEEK 5
Tuesday, September 25
   ◼ HURRICANES
            READ: Ted Steinberg, “Do-It-Yourself Deathscape,” and “Building for Apocalypse,” Acts of
              God: The Unnatural History of Natural Disaster in America (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
              2000), 47-75; 79-96.


Thursday, September 27
   ◼ LIFE IN THE FLOODPLAINS
           IN-CLASS FILM: FATAL FLOOD
           DUE: Primary Source Analysis Paper
WEEK 6
Tuesday, October 2
   ◼ WHEN THE LEVEES BROKE AGAIN
           READ: Manning Marable, “Seeking Higher Ground: Race, Public Policy and the Hurricane
              Katrina Crisis,” in Seeking Higher Ground: The Hurricane Katrina Crisis, Race, and Public
              Policy Reader, eds., Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke (New York: Palgrave Macmillan,
              2008), ix-xvi.
           READ: Chester Hartman and Gregory D. Squires, “The Social Construction of Disaster: New
              Orleans as the Paradigmatic American City,” in Seeking Higher Ground: The Hurricane
              Katrina Crisis, Race, and Public Policy Reader, eds., Manning Marable and Kristen Clarke (New
              York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008), 271-294.
Thursday, October 4
   ◼ SCIENCE, POLITICS, AND HURRICANES
           READ: Richard Levins, “Cuba’s Example,” Capitalism Nature Socialism, Volume 16, No. 4
              (December 2005), 5-6.
           READ: Ivor van Heerden and Mike Bryan, “Introduction,” “Is Anyone in Charge Here?” and
              “The Investigation,” The Storm: What Went Wrong and Why During Hurricane Katrina – the
              Inside Story from One Louisiana Scientist (New York: Penguin Books), 1-11; 137-152; 211-
              249.
           DUE: #2 STUDENT PRESENTATION / DISCUSSION LEADING
WEEK 7
Tuesday, October 9
   ◼ DISASTER APARTHEID
           READ: Ted Steinberg, “Disasters and Deregulation,” The Chronicle of Higher Education, July
              21, 2006.
           READ: Robert D. Bullard, “Katrina and the Second Disaster: A Twenty-Point Plan to
              Destroy Black New Orleans,” Poverty and Race, Nov/Dec 2006: 16, 6, 20-22.
              READ: Naomi Klein, “Chapter 20: Disaster Apartheid: A World of Green Zones and Red
              Zones,” The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism (NY: Picador, 2007), 513-534.
Thursday, October 11
   ◼ FROM KATRINA TO HARVEY AND MARIA
           To Be Announced
WEEK 8
Tuesday, October 16


                                         DISASTERS ON SCREEN
   ◼ IMAGINING DISASTER
           READ: Susan Sontag, “The Imagination of Disaster,” in Against Interpretation, and Other
              Essays (New York: Farrar, 1966), 209-225.
           READ: Glenn Kay and Michael Rose, “A Brief History of Disaster Movies,” in Disaster
              Movies: A Loud, Long, Explosive, Star-Studded Guide to Avalanches, Earthquakes, Floods,
              Meteors, Sinking Ships, Twisters, Viruses, Killer Bees, Nuclear Fallout, and Alien Attacks in the
              Cinema, (Chicago, IL: Mosaic Press, 2006), 1-6.
           ASSIGN: Film Analysis
Thursday, October 18
   ◼ THE RISE AND FALL OF 1970s DISASTER MOVIES
           READ: Ken Feil, “Recipes for Disaster: The Rise and Fall of the 1970s Disaster Movie,”
              Dying for a Laugh: Disaster Movies and the Camp Imagination (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan
              University Press, 2005), 1-30.
WEEK 9
Tuesday, October 23
   ◼ READING GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN 1990s DISASTER FILMS
           READ: Steven J. Zani, “Traumatic Disaster and Titanic Recuperation: Popular/Historical
              Representations of the Titanic,” Journal of Popular Film and Television, Fall 2003, vol. 31, no.
              3, 125-31.
           READ: Ken Feil, “Queering the Wreckage and Straightening Up: Camp, Stereotyping and
              the Later 1990s Disaster Cycle,” Dying for a Laugh: Disaster Movies and the Camp
              Imagination (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2005), 59-93.
           DUE: #3 STUDENT PRESENTATION / DISCUSSION LEADING
Thursday, October 25
   ◼ DISASTER MOVIES POST-9/11
           READ: Stephen Prince, “Shadows Once Removed,” Firestorm: American Film in the Age of
              Terrorism (New York: Columbia University Press, 2009), 1-16, 71-123.
           DUE: #4 STUDENT PRESENTATION / DISCUSSION LEADING
WEEK 10
Tuesday, October 30
                                         EVERYDAY DISASTERS
   ◼ (IN)VISIBLE DISASTERS
           READ: Jerry Herron, “Detroit: Disaster Deferred, Disaster in Progress,” South Atlantic
              Quarterly; Fall2007, Vol. 106 Issue 4, 663-682.
           ASSIGN: Research Paper
Thursday, November 1
   ◼ TO BE ANNOUNCED


           DUE: Film Analysis
WEEK 11
Tuesday, November 6
   ◼ WHAT THE EYES DON’T SEE: POISONED WATERS
           READ: Mona Hanna-Attisha, excerpts, What the Eyes Don’t See: A Story of Crisis, Resistance,
             and Hope in an American City (New York: One World, 2018).
           DUE: #5 STUDENT PRESENTATION / DISCUSSION LEADING
Thursday, November 8
   ◼ HEAT WAVE
           READ: Eric Klinenberg, “Prologue: The Urban Inferno,” and “Introduction: The City of
             Extremes,” Heat Wave: A Social Autopsy of Disaster in Chicago (Chicago & London: University
             of Chicago Press, 2002), 1-13; 14-36.
           DUE: RESEARCH PROPOSAL
WEEK 12
Tuesday, November 13
   ◼ WHERE IS THE FIRE?
           READ: Mike Davis, “The Case for Letting Malibu Burn,” in Ecology of Fear: Los Angeles
             and the Imagination of Disaster (New York: Vintage, 1999), 96-147.
           DUE: #6 STUDENT PRESENTATION / DISCUSSION LEADING
Thursday, November 15
   ◼ IN-CLASS FILM: Merchants of Doubt
WEEK 13
Tuesday, November 20
   ◼ A TOXIC TOUR OF AUSTIN
           READ: Andrew Busch, “Of Toxic Tours and What Makes Austin, Austin: Battles for the
             Garden, Battles for the City,” City in a Garden: Environmental Transformation and Racial
             Justice in Twentieth-Century Austin, Texas (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press,
             2017), 206-236.
           DUE: #7 STUDENT PRESENTATION / DISCUSSION LEADING
Thursday, November 22
   ◼ THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
WEEK 14
Tuesday, November 27
   ◼   STUDENT PRESENTATIONS AND PEER FEEDBACK


Thursday, November 29
   ◼ STUDENT PRESENTATIONS AND PEER FEEDBACK
WEEK 15
Tuesday, December 4
   ◼ STUDENT PRESENTATIONS & PEER FEEDBACK
Thursday, December 6
   ◼ STUDENT PRESENTATIONS & PEER FEEDBACK
   ◼ LAST CLASS / FINAL PAPER DUE
