                                        Economics 324
                              Introduction to Labor Economics
                                         Summer 2019
Instructor: Katrine Holm Reiso (katrineholmreiso@gmail.com)
Office Hours: Monday/Friday 2:30-3:30 in BRB 4.102
Teaching Assistant: Sam Stripling (samstripling@utexas.edu)
Office Hours: Wednesday/Thursday 2:30-3:30 in BRB 4.120
Course Details: Meets M/T/W/Th/F 1:00pm-2:30pm BRB 1.118
This course provides a survey of labor economics with an emphasis on policy issues.
While the course teaches the analytical tools necessary to understand how labor markets
work, it is structured around a number of prominent labor market policy issues, such as
immigration, inequality and minimum wages.
For example, some of the questions we will examine include:
       Does increasing the minimum wage increase unemployment, and thus end up
          hurting the people it is intended to help?
       Do higher levels of welfare benefits reduce work incentives?
       Do immigrants hurt the wages or employment opportunities of native workers?
       What has caused rising wage inequality in the U.S., and should we be concerned
          about it?
       Does going to school for one more year increase a worker’s earnings?
Goals of the Course: The primary goal of the course is to develop your ability to study,
analyze, and ultimately reach informed opinions about the numerous policy questions that
arise with respect to labor markets in the U.S. and other countries. To help develop this
ability, we will draw on economic models of labor markets, examine the role of labor
market institutions, and study empirical evidence on these policy issues.
After successfully completing this course, students will be able to:
     Apply and explain at an introductory level the economic models related to labor
         supply, labor demand, and labor market equilibrium
     Describe how economic theory and evidence apply to and explain trends in labor
         force participation, hours of work, and wages
     Construct, defend, and analyze important labor policies
     Demonstrate proficiency with simple quantitative and economics tools useful in
         understanding labor markets and labor market institutions
     Comprehend, assess, and critique existing empirical work in labor economics


                                               2
Textbook:       Labor Economics, seventh edition, by George J. Borjas
                (Note that older versions are also fine.)
We will systematically go through the topics covered in the textbook. Reading the
relevant chapter ahead of time will prepare you to get the most out of class.
Class Web Page:
There is a class web page on Canvas (https://canvas.utexas.edu). I will post the course
syllabus there as well as practice problems and exam solutions.
Course Requirements:
Your grade for the course will be determined by your performance on three in-class
exams. Overall course grades will be assigned using +/- grading (i.e., A,
A-, B+, B, B-, etc.). The overall course grades will be assigned to you based on your
weighted average course score and your performance relative to the rest of the class.
Exams:
All three exams will take place during regular class meetings (i.e., no exam will be held
during the final exam period). No make-up exams will be given. All exams will be
closed book. There will be no make-up exams for the in-class exams; if you have a valid
medical excuse (and a doctor’s note), I will put more weight on the other two midterms.
The exams will be held on the following dates (with the weight of each exam in the
overall course grade indicated in parentheses):
First Exam (35%): In class on Tuesday, June 18.
Second Exam (35%): In class on Monday, July 1.
Third Exam (30%): In class on Thursday, July 11.
I will post homework problems on the class Canvas page periodically and I will
subsequently post answers to these problems. Your answers to these problems will not be
collected and will not contribute directly to your grade. However, I strongly urge you to
work on the problems (before looking at the solutions) as they will be a good indicator of
kinds of questions you can expect on exams. There are also many worthwhile problems at
the end of each chapter in the textbook. Solutions to the textbook problems also will be
posted on the class Canvas page.


                                             3
Laptop Policy/Taking Notes:
To keep everyone focused on the class and on each other, laptops and all other electronic
devices are not allowed in the classroom. If you want to store all class material on your
laptop, transcribing your handwritten notes after lecture is a great a way to learn the
material.
Accommodations:
If you believe you need an accommodation for a disability, please let me or the TA know
at your earliest convenience. Some aspects of this course may be modified to facilitate
your participation and progress. As soon as you make us aware of your needs, we can
work with the Office of Services for Students with Disabilities to help us determine
appropriate accommodations.
Course Schedule
A tentative course schedule is shown below. The topics covered, the time devoted to each
topic, and the chapters covered on each midterm exam are only forecasts and may change.
If we do not maintain the pace implied by the schedule, the content of the exams will be
adjusted to reflect what we have covered.
Date             Topic or Activity                                     Reading
Thu.,    6/6     Introduction                                          Ch. 1 (+ Appendix)
Fri.,    6/7     Labor Supply                                          Ch. 2
Mon.,    6/10    Labor Supply                                          Ch. 2
Tue.,    6/11    Labor Supply                                          Ch. 2
Wed.,    6/12    Labor Supply/Labor Demand                             Ch. 2/Ch. 3
Thu.,    6/13    Labor Demand                                          Ch. 3
Fri.,    6/14    Labor Demand                                          Ch. 3
Mon.,    6/17    Labor Demand                                          Ch. 3
Tue.,    6/18    Midterm 1
Wed.,    6/19    Labor market equilibrium                              Ch. 4
Thu.,    6/20    Labor market equilibrium                              Ch. 4
Fri.,    6/21    Labor market equilibrium                              Ch. 4
Mon.,    6/24    Compensating Wage Differentials                       Ch. 5
Tue.,    6/25    Compensating Wage Differentials/Human Capital         Ch. 5/Ch.6
Wed.,    6/26    Human Capital                                         Ch.6
Thu.,    6/27    Human Capital                                         Ch.6
Fri.,    6/28    TBA
Mon.,    7/1     Midterm 2
Tue.,    7/2     Wage Structure                                        Ch.7


                                        4
Wed., 7/3  Wage Structure/Labor mobiliy   Ch.7/Ch.8
Thu., 7/4  NO CLASS – Fouth of July
Fri., 7/5  Labor mobiliy                  Ch.8
Mon., 7/8  Labor mobility                 Ch.8
Tue., 7/9  Labor market discrimination    Ch.9
Wed., 7/10 Labor market discrimination    Ch.9
Thu., 7/11 Midterm 3
