                                     Comparative	  Primate	  Development	  
                                                                     ANT	  348K	  (31723)	  
                                                                                                  Spring	  2019	  
	  
Class	  Meets:	  	  Mondays	  &	  Wednesdays,	  10:00	  –	  11:30	  AM	   	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Room	  JES	  A217A	  
                       	  
Instructor:	  Dr.	  Aaron	  Sandel	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Office:	  SAC	  5.140	  
Pronouns:	  he/him/his	                                                                                                                                                                        Office	  hours:	  Mon	  2-­‐4	  PM	  &	  by	  appt	  
Email:	  	  aaron.sandel@austin.utexas.edu	                                                                                                                                                   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
Phone:	  (512)	  471-­‐7530	                                                                                                                                                                  	  
	  
About	  Dr.	  Sandel:	  I	  study	  wild	  chimpanzees	  in	  Uganda,	  focusing	  on	  social	  behavior,	  
development,	  and	  physiology	  during	  adolescence	  and	  the	  transition	  to	  adulthood.	  
	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                	  
	  
                                                         COURSE	  DESCRIPTION	  
	  
What	  does	  it	  mean	  to	  be	  an	  adult?	  In	  the	  United	  States,	  this	  has	  become	  a	  pressing	  issue	  as	  
many	  young	  adults	  seem	  to	  be	  stuck	  in	  adolescence.	  Now	  there	  are	  self	  help	  books	  for	  
parents,	  including	  “Getting	  to	  30:	  A	  Parent's	  Guide	  to	  the	  20-­‐Something	  Years.”	  But	  humans	  
are	  not	  the	  only	  animal	  to	  take	  a	  long	  time	  to	  grow	  up.	  Primates,	  especially	  apes,	  exhibit	  
long	  periods	  of	  immaturity.	  This	  course	  will	  discuss	  primate	  development,	  focusing	  on	  
biological	  and	  social	  definitions	  of	  adolescence	  and	  adulthood.	  How	  has	  natural	  selection	  
shaped	  human	  and	  primate	  development?	  The	  focus	  of	  this	  course	  will	  be	  on	  “life	  history	  
theory,”	  which	  pertains	  to	  the	  traits	  related	  to	  growth	  and	  reproduction,	  life	  and	  death.	  At	  
what	  age	  and	  size	  do	  animals	  start	  reproducing?	  How	  many	  offspring	  do	  different	  species	  
tend	  to	  have	  at	  one	  time?	  Why	  do	  primates,	  compared	  to	  other	  mammals,	  tend	  to	  live	  long	  
and	  reproduce	  slowly?	  How	  is	  energy	  devoted	  to	  growth	  vs.	  reproduction	  over	  the	  course	  
of	  individual’s	  life?	  Through	  lecture	  and	  close	  readings	  of	  scientific	  articles,	  students	  will	  
learn	  about	  parent-­‐offspring	  conflict,	  mating	  strategies,	  mammalian	  patterns	  of	  growth,	  
and	  the	  methods	  use	  to	  study	  growth	  and	  development.	  We	  will	  grapple	  with	  some	  
questions	  that	  are	  difficult	  to	  answer.	  What	  is	  adulthood,	  what	  are	  the	  adaptive	  reasons	  for	  
delaying	  it,	  and	  why	  is	  it	  sometimes	  so	  hard	  to	  “adult”?	  
	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1	  


                                                                   ASSIGNMENTS	  
Grades	  will	  be	  based	  on	  the	  following	  components:	  
(1) Reading	  responses	  (25%)	  
             a. There	  will	  be	  11	  required	  readings	  throughout	  the	  semester.	  These	  will	  be	  
                      scientific	  articles	  and	  will	  require	  a	  careful	  reading.	  Every	  Tuesday	  by	  5pm,	  
                      every	  student	  must	  submit	  three	  (3)	  response	  questions	  based	  on	  the	  reading	  
                      for	  Wednesday.	  	  
             b. Each	  student	  will	  also	  be	  required	  to	  lead	  discussion	  for	  one	  (1)	  of	  the	  readings.	  
                      In	  class	  on	  Wednesday,	  students	  assigned	  to	  lead	  the	  discussion	  will	  provide	  a	  5-­‐
                      minute	  synthesis	  of	  the	  article	  and	  engage	  classmates	  in	  a	  discussion	  based	  on	  
                      the	  others’	  response	  questions.	  	  
(2) Two	  mid-­‐term	  exams	  (30%)	  
             a. There	  will	  be	  two	  (2)	  in-­‐class	  exams	  based	  on	  lectures,	  readings,	  and	  
                      discussions.	  The	  format	  of	  tests	  will	  be	  multiple-­‐choice	  and	  short	  answer.	  	  
(3) Assignments	  (20%)	  
             a. The	  final	  unit	  of	  the	  course	  will	  involve	  independent	  reading	  and	  compiling	  of	  
                      data	  from	  the	  published	  literature.	  This	  will	  be	  submitted	  in	  part	  as	  a	  data	  table,	  
                      and	  then	  as	  a	  poster	  on	  the	  last	  day	  of	  class.	  	  
(4) Class	  participation	  (25%)	  
             a. This	  course	  combines	  lecture	  with	  class	  discussion,	  including	  student-­‐led	  
                      discussions.	  Thus,	  attendance	  and	  active	  participation	  is	  required.	  
For	  more	  details,	  please	  see	  the	  Course	  Schedule	  below	  and	  the	  Canvas	  site.	  
	  
     Grading	  Policies	  
     	  
     Do	  not	  worry	  too	  much	  about	  grades,	  because	  often	  they	  are	  poor	  predictors	  of	  success.	  
	  
                  Grade	                  Cutoff	  
                  A	                      94%	  
                  A-­‐	                   90%	  
                  B+	                     87%	  
                  B	                      84%	  
                  B-­‐	                   80%	  
                  C+	                     77%	  
                  C	                      74%	  
                  C-­‐	                   70%	  
                  D	                      65%	  
                  F	                      <65%	  
	  
Late	  work	  
Late	   work	   will	   be	   handled	   on	   a	   case-­‐by-­‐case	   basis.	  Please	  make	  every	  effort	  to	  complete	  
assignments	  on	  time,	  as	  this	  will	  allow	  us	  to	  move	  forward	  on	  schedule.	  
	                                                                                                                                                 2	  


                                                             COURSE	  SCHEDULE	  
                                                                                	  
               	   Day	           Date	     Unit	                  Topic	                                                Assignment	  
         1	        Wed	    23-­‐Jan-­‐19	   Life	  Stages	        Human	  life	  stages	                              	  	  
         2	        Mon	    28-­‐Jan-­‐19	   	                      Chimpanzee	  Adolescence	                            	  	  
         3	        Wed	    30-­‐Jan-­‐19	   	  	                  Puberty	                                              Reading	  1	  
         4	        Mon	     4-­‐Feb-­‐19	   	  	                  Human	  growth	  &	  spurts	                       	  	  
         5	        Wed	     6-­‐Feb-­‐19	   	  	                  Mammal	  life	  stages/life	  history	             Reading	  2	  
         6	        Mon	   11-­‐Feb-­‐19	    	                      Primate	  growth	  patterns	                        	  	  
         7	        Wed	   13-­‐Feb-­‐19	    	  	                  Life	  history	  theory	                            Reading	  3	  
         8	        Mon	   18-­‐Feb-­‐19	    	  	                  Exam	  1-­‐	  Growth	  &	  Adolescence	           	  	  
         9	        Wed	   20-­‐Feb-­‐19	    Life	  history	  	   Human	  life	  history	                             Reading	  4	  
10	                Mon	   25-­‐Feb-­‐19	    	  	                  Primate	  life	  histories	                         	  	  
11	                Wed	   27-­‐Feb-­‐19	    	  	                  Age	  &	  Size	  at	  Maturity	                   Reading	  5	  
12	                Mon	    4-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  Number	  &	  Size	  of	  Offspring	               	  	  
13	                Wed	    6-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  Lifespan	  &	  Aging	                               Reading	  6	  
                                                                       Comparative	  analyses	  of	  
14	                Mon	   11-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  primates	                                             	  	  
15	                Wed	   13-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  Exam	  2-­‐	  Life	  History	  Theory	            Reading	  7	  
	  	              Mon	   18-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  No	  class:	  Spring	  Break	                      	  	  
           	  	   Wed	   20-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  No	  class:	  Spring	  Break	                      	  	  
16	                Mon	   25-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  Chimpanzee	  bone	  growth	                         	  	  
16	                Wed	   27-­‐Mar-­‐19	    	  	                  How	  to:	  Lit	  Review	                          Reading	  8	  
18	                Mon	     1-­‐Apr-­‐19	   Evolution	             Bone	  growth	  during	  adolescence	              	  	  
                                                                       Evolution	  of	  human	  growth	  
19	                Wed	     3-­‐Apr-­‐19	   	  	                  patterns	                                             Reading	  9	  
20	                Mon	     8-­‐Apr-­‐19	   	  	                  Primate	  socioecology	                              	  	  
21	                Wed	   10-­‐Apr-­‐19	    	  	                  Energy	  expenditure	                                Reading	  10	  
22	                Mon	   15-­‐Apr-­‐19	    Hypotheses	  	        Age	  at	  puberty;	  age	  at	  full	  size	   	  	  
23	                Wed	   17-­‐Apr-­‐19	    	  	                  Hypothesis	  for	  adolescence	                     Reading	  11	  
24	                Mon	   22-­‐Apr-­‐19	    Methods	               Comparative	  Database	  1	                         	  	  
25	                Wed	   24-­‐Apr-­‐19	    	  	                  Comparative	  Database	  2	                         	  	  
                                                                       Phylogenetic	  Comparative	  
26	   Mon	                29-­‐Apr-­‐19	   	  	                   Analyses	  1	                                        Due:	  Data	  table	  
                                                                       Phylogenetic	  Comparative	  
27	   Wed	                 1-­‐May-­‐19	   	  	                   Analyses	  2	                                        	  	  
                                                                       Conclusions	  on	  Primate	  
28	   Mon	                 6-­‐May-­‐19	   	  	                   Development	                                          	  	  
29	   Wed	                 8-­‐May-­‐19	   	  	                   Poster	  Session	                                    	  	  
         	  
         	  
         	                                                                                                                                           3	  


                                                                             POLICIES	  
Classroom	  Policies	  
	  
Statement	  on	  Learning	  Success	  
Your	  success	  in	  this	  class	  is	  important	  to	  me.	  We	  all	  learn	  differently.	  If	  there	  are	  aspects	  of	  this	  
course	  that	  prevent	  you	  from	  learning	  or	  exclude	  you,	  please	  let	  me	  know	  as	  soon	  as	  possible.	  
Together	  we’ll	  develop	  strategies	  to	  meet	  both	  your	  needs	  and	  the	  requirements	  of	  the	  course.	  I	  
also	  encourage	  you	  to	  reach	  out	  to	  the	  student	  resources	  available	  through	  UT.	  Many	  are	  listed	  on	  
this	  syllabus,	  but	  I	  am	  happy	  to	  connect	  you	  with	  a	  person	  or	  Center	  if	  you	  would	  like.	  
	  
Laptops	  and	  cell	  phones	  
No	  cell	  phone	  use	  in	  class.	  If	  you	  use	  a	  laptop	  in	  class	  it	  must	  only	  be	  for	  taking	  notes	  or	  referencing	  
class	  material.	  Going	  to	  other	  websites	  is	  distracting	  to	  me	  and	  to	  other	  students.	  If	  you	  cannot	  stop	  
yourself	  from	  messaging	  friends	  or	  doing	  whatever	  Facebook	  equivalent	  that	  college	  students	  do,	  
then	  you	  will	  not	  be	  allowed	  a	  laptop	  in	  class.	  
	  
Absences	  
This	  course	  relies	  on	  both	  lecture	  and	  discussions,	  so	  attendance	  is	  important.	  The	  only	  absences	  
that	  will	  be	  considered	  excused	  are	  for	  religious	  holidays	  or	  extenuating	  circumstances	  due	  to	  an	  
emergency.	  
	  
Student	  Rights	  &	  Responsibilities	  
      • You	  have	  a	  right	  to	  a	  learning	  environment	  that	  supports	  mental/physical	  wellness.	  
      • You	  have	  a	  right	  to	  respect.	  
      • You	  have	  a	  right	  to	  be	  assessed	  and	  graded	  fairly.	  
      • You	  have	  a	  right	  to	  freedom	  of	  opinion	  and	  expression.	  
      • You	  have	  a	  right	  to	  privacy	  and	  confidentiality.	  
      • You	  have	  a	  right	  to	  meaningful	  and	  equal	  participation,	  to	  self-­‐organize	  groups	  to	  improve	  
               your	  learning	  environment.	  
      • You	  have	  a	  right	  to	  learn	  in	  an	  environment	  that	  is	  welcoming	  to	  all	  people.	  No	  student	  shall	  
               be	  isolated,	  excluded	  or	  diminished	  in	  any	  way.	  
	  
With	  these	  rights	  come	  responsibilities:	  
      • You	  are	  responsible	  for	  taking	  care	  of	  yourself,	  managing	  your	  time,	  and	  communicating	  
               with	  the	  teaching	  team	  and	  with	  others	  if	  things	  start	  to	  feel	  out	  of	  control	  or	  overwhelming.	  
      • You	  are	  responsible	  for	  acting	  in	  a	  way	  that	  is	  worthy	  of	  respect	  and	  always	  respectful	  of	  
               others.	  	  
      • Your	  experience	  with	  this	  course	  is	  directly	  related	  to	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  energy	  that	  you	  
               bring	  to	  it,	  and	  your	  energy	  shapes	  the	  quality	  of	  your	  peers’	  experiences.	  
      • You	  are	  responsible	  for	  creating	  an	  inclusive	  environment	  and	  for	  speaking	  up	  when	  
               someone	  is	  excluded.	  
      • You	  are	  responsible	  for	  holding	  yourself	  accountable	  to	  these	  standards,	  holding	  each	  other	  
               to	  these	  standards,	  and	  holding	  the	  teaching	  team	  accountable	  as	  well.	  
	  
Names	  and	  Personal	  Pronouns	  
         To	  have	  a	  productive	  learning	  environment,	  it	  is	  important	  that	  I	  get	  to	  know	  you	  and	  you	  get	  
         to	  know	  your	  fellow	  students.	  This	  means	  learning	  everyone’s	  names.	  Class	  rosters	  are	  
         provided	  to	  the	  instructor	  with	  the	  student’s	  legal	  name.	  I	  will	  gladly	  honor	  your	  request	  to	  
	                                                                                                                                                                     4	  


           address	  you	  by	  a	  name	  different	  than	  what	  appears	  on	  the	  roster,	  and	  by	  your	  gender	  pronoun.	  
           Please	  advise	  me	  of	  this	  early	  in	  the	  semester.	  
           	  
University	  Policies	  
	  
Academic	  Integrity	  
            Each	  student	  in	  the	  course	  is	  expected	  to	  abide	  by	  the	  University	  of	  Texas	  Honor	  Code:	  
            “As	  a	  student	  of	  The	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin,	  I	  shall	  abide	  by	  the	  core	  values	  of	  
            the	  University	  and	  uphold	  academic	  integrity.”	  Plagiarism	  is	  taken	  very	  seriously	  at	  
            UT.	  Therefore,	  if	  you	  use	  words	  or	  ideas	  that	  are	  not	  your	  own	  (or	  that	  you	  have	  used	  in	  
            previous	  class),	  you	  must	  cite	  your	  sources.	  Otherwise	  you	  will	  be	  guilty	  of	  plagiarism	  
            and	  subject	  to	  academic	  disciplinary	  action,	  including	  failure	  of	  the	  course.	  You	  are	  
            responsible	  for	  understanding	  UT’s	  Academic	  Honesty	  and	  the	  University	   Honor	   Code	  
            which	   can	   be	   found	   at	   the	   following	   web	   address:	  
            http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php	  
	  
     Q	  Drop	  Policy	  
            If	  you	  want	  to	  drop	  a	  class	  after	  the	  12th	  class	  day,	  you’ll	  need	  to	  execute	  a	  Q	  drop	  before	  the	  
            Q-­‐drop	  deadline,	  which	  typically	  occurs	  near	  the	  middle	  of	  the	  semester.	  Under	  Texas	  law,	  
            you	  are	  only	  allowed	  six	  Q	  drops	  while	  you	  are	  in	  college	  at	  any	  public	  Texas	  institution.	  For	  
            more	  information,	  see:	  http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop	  
            	  
     University	  Resources	  for	  Students	  
     Services	  for	  Students	  with	  Disabilities	  
            This	  class	  respects	  and	  welcomes	  students	  of	  all	  backgrounds,	  identities,	  and	  abilities.	  If	  there	  
            are	   circumstances	   that	   make	   our	   learning	   environment	   and	   activities	   difficult,	   if	   you	   have	  
            medical	  information	  that	  you	  need	  to	  share	  with	  me,	  or	  if	  you	  need	  specific	  arrangements	  in	  
            case	  the	  building	  needs	  to	  be	  evacuated,	  please	  let	  me	  know.	  I	  am	  committed	  to	  creating	  an	  
            effective	   learning	   environment	   for	   all	   students,	   but	   I	   can	   only	   do	   so	   if	   you	   discuss	   your	   needs	  
            with	  me	  as	  early	  as	  possible.	  I	  promise	  to	  maintain	  the	  confidentiality	  of	  these	  discussions.	  If	  
            appropriate,	  also	  contact	  Services	  for	  Students	  with	  Disabilities,	  512-­‐471-­‐6259	  (voice)	  or	  1-­‐
            866-­‐329-­‐	  3986	  (video	  phone).	  	  http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/	  
	  
Counseling	  and	  Mental	  Health	  Center	  
            All	  of	  us	  benefit	  from	  support	  during	  times	  of	  struggle.	  There	  are	  many	  helpful	  resources	  
            available	  on	  campus	  and	  an	  important	  part	  of	  the	  college	  experience	  is	  learning	  how	  to	  ask	  for	  
            help.	  Asking	  for	  support	  sooner	  rather	  than	  later	  is	  often	  helpful.	  If	  you	  or	  anyone	  you	  know	  
            experiences	  any	  academic	  stress,	  difficult	  life	  events,	  or	  feelings	  like	  anxiety	  or	  depression,	  we	  
            strongly	  encourage	  you	  to	  seek	  support.	  	  
            http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html	  
	  
The	  Sanger	  Learning	  Center	  
            All	  students	  are	  welcome	  to	  take	  advantage	  of	  Sanger	  Center’s	  classes	  and	  workshops,	  private	  
            learning	  specialist	  appointments,	  peer	  academic	  coaching,	  and	  tutoring	  for	  more	  than	  70	  
            courses	  in	  15	  different	  subject	  areas.	  For	  more	  information,	  please	  
            visit	  	  http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc	  or	  call	  512-­‐471-­‐3614	  (JES	  A332).	  
	  
Undergraduate	  Writing	  Center:	  http://uwc.utexas.edu/	  
	                                                                                                                                                                           5	  


Libraries:	  http://www.lib.utexas.edu/	  
ITS:	  	  http://www.utexas.edu/its/	  
Student	  Emergency	  Services:	  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/	  
	  
Important	  Safety	  Information:	  
            If	  you	  have	  concerns	  about	  the	  safety	  or	  behavior	  of	  fellow	  students,	  TAs	  or	  Professors,	  
            call	  BCAL	  (the	  Behavior	  Concerns	  Advice	  Line):	  	  512-­‐232-­‐5050.	  Your	  call	  can	  be	  
            anonymous.	  	  If	  something	  doesn’t	  feel	  right	  –	  it	  probably	  isn’t.	  	  Trust	  your	  instincts	  and	  
            share	  your	  concerns.	  
	  
Title	  IX	  Reporting	  
           Title	  IX	  is	  a	  federal	  law	  that	  protects	  against	  sex	  and	  gender-­‐based	  discrimination,	  sexual	  
           harassment,	  sexual	  assault,	  sexual	  misconduct,	  dating/domestic	  violence	  and	  stalking	  at	  
           federally	  funded	  educational	  institutions.	  UT	  Austin	  is	  committed	  to	  fostering	  a	  learning	  and	  
           working	  environment	  free	  from	  discrimination	  in	  all	  its	  forms.	  When	  sexual	  misconduct	  occurs	  
           in	  our	  community,	  the	  university	  can:	  
                         1. Intervene	  to	  prevent	  harmful	  behavior	  from	  continuing	  or	  escalating.	  
                         2. Provide	  support	  and	  remedies	  to	  students	  and	  employees	  who	  have	  experienced	  
                                   harm	  or	  have	  become	  involved	  in	  a	  Title	  IX	  investigation.	  	  
                         3. Investigate	  and	  discipline	  violations	  of	  the	  university’s	  relevant	  policies.	  
                          	  	  
           Faculty	  members	  and	  certain	  staff	  members	  are	  considered	  “Responsible	  Employees”	  or	  
           “Mandatory	  Reporters,”	  which	  means	  that	  they	  are	  required	  to	  report	  violations	  of	  Title	  IX	  to	  
           the	  Title	  IX	  Coordinator.	  I	  am	  a	  Responsible	  Employee	  and	  must	  report	  any	  Title	  IX	  
           related	  incidents	  that	  are	  disclosed	  in	  writing,	  discussion,	  or	  one-­‐on-­‐one.	  Before	  talking	  with	  
           me,	  or	  with	  any	  faculty	  or	  staff	  member	  about	  a	  Title	  IX	  related	  incident,	  be	  sure	  to	  ask	  
           whether	  they	  are	  a	  responsible	  employee.	  If	  you	  want	  to	  speak	  with	  someone	  for	  support	  or	  
           remedies	  without	  making	  an	  official	  report	  to	  the	  university,	  email	  
           advocate@austin.utexas.edu	  For	  more	  information	  about	  reporting	  options	  and	  resources,	  
           visit	  titleix.utexas.edu	  or	  contact	  the	  Title	  IX	  Office	  at	  titleix@austin.utexas.edu.	  	  
	  
The	  following	  recommendations	  regarding	  emergency	  evacuation	  from	  the	  Office	  of	  Campus	  
Safety	  and	  Security,	  512-­‐471-­‐5767,	  http://www.utexas.edu/safety/	  
Occupants	  of	  buildings	  on	  The	  University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin	  campus	  are	  required	  to	  evacuate	  
buildings	  when	  a	  fire	  alarm	  is	  activated.	  Alarm	  activation	  or	  announcement	  requires	  exiting	  and	  
assembling	  outside.	  
     • Familiarize	   yourself	   with	   all	   exit	   doors	   of	   each	   classroom	   and	   building	   you	   may	   occupy.	  
            Remember	   that	   the	   nearest	   exit	   door	   may	   not	   be	   the	   one	   you	   used	   when	   entering	   the	  
            building.	  
     • Students	  requiring	  assistance	  in	  evacuation	  shall	  inform	  their	  instructor	  in	  writing	  during	  the	  
            first	  week	  of	  class.	  
     • In	   the	   event	   of	  an	   evacuation,	   follow	   the	   instruction	  of	   faculty	   or	   class	   instructors.	   Do	   not	   re-­‐
            enter	   a	   building	   unless	   given	   instructions	   by	   the	   following:	   Austin	   Fire	   Department,	   The	  
            University	  of	  Texas	  at	  Austin	  Police	  Department,	  or	  Fire	  Prevention	  Services	  office.	  
     • Link	  to	  information	  regarding	  emergency	  evacuation	  routes	  and	  emergency	  procedures	  can	  be	  
            found	  at:	  www.utexas.edu/emergency	  
	  
	                                                                                                                                                                       6	  
