                                   THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                         STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:           SW N393R               Instructor: Arlene Montgomery
Unique Number:           88765                  Email: marksak@utexas.edu
Semester:                Summer 2019            Phone: 512-480-8086(home)
Meeting Time/Place: Tuesday/Thursday            Office: Adjunct Faculty Office, SSW 3.104
                         5:30pm- 8:30pm         Office Hours: by appointment in Room
                         SSW 2.116
               CLINICAL ASSESSMENT AND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
    I. Standardized Course Description
This course will focus on the incidence, etiology, and assessment of health and mental health
issues with children, adolescents, adults, and families. The framework of the course is based on
social work values and the ethical decision- making process, as illuminated by the NASW Code
of Ethics. Students will learn models of assessment to evaluate human functioning throughout
the lifecycle. A bio-psycho-social-spiritual and cultural emphasis will be applied to the
diagnostic categories within the DSM5. Students will develop an advanced understanding of
people from diverse backgrounds, affirming, and respecting their strengths and differences. The
course is built on the identification, analysis, and implementation of empirically-based
assessment tools that have incorporated statistically valid reliability and validity studies. Major
classification systems, such as Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders and the
International Classification of Diseases, and other schemes for assessing and understanding
human behavior, will be covered.
    II. Standardized Course Objectives
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
1.      Demonstrate an in-depth understanding of biological, psychosocial, and cultural theories
on the etiology of mental health and mental illness;
2.      Demonstrate the ability to apply methods of empirically-based assessment tools and
techniques, including those developed through classificatory schemes, standardized measures,
and qualitative typologies;
3.      Demonstrate an advanced clinical knowledge of the relationship between assessment and
intervention as it relates to the strengths, capacities and resources of individuals and families;
4.      Demonstrate the ability to adapt assessment models to reflect an understanding, of
persons from diverse backgrounds, including (but not limited to) race, ethnicity, culture, class,
gender, sexual orientation, religion, physical or mental ability, age, and national origin;
5.      Critically evaluate and analyze different theoretical and assessment models as to their
efficacy in given situations. This includes: a) the adequacy of the research and knowledge base;
b) the range of applicability; c) the value and ethical issues, including the student’s own value
system, and d) the policy implications involved in assessment and delivery of services;
6.      Demonstrate an understanding of the limitations in using classification schemes in
understanding human behavior and the danger of mislabeling people, particularly those from at-
risk populations. Demonstrate advanced knowledge of social work values and the ethical
decision-making processes as they relate to ethical dilemmas in clinical assessment and practice.
1


The School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on Social Work
Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, we engage in
ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s Education Policies and
Accreditation Standards (EPAS). Several required courses in our curriculum are part of this
ongoing assessment, including this course. Below is a list of the specific Educational Policies
(EP) and Practice Behaviors (PB) that are assessed in this course. The complete EPAS can be
optioned from your Student Handbook.
    III. TEACHING METHODS
This course is designed to include a variety of teaching methodologies to achieve the expectation
of student mastery of the skills involved in the examination of social work practice as it is
supported by selected scientific findings. Readings, discussion, lecture, experiential exercise,
videos, audio CDs, case examples, and presentations are designed to enhance the learning
experience.
    IV. REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Required material: American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual
of mental disorders, Fifth edition (DSM-5). Washington, DC: Author.
Optional: Buelow, H., Hebert, S. & Buelow. S. (2000). Psychotherapist’s resources on
psychiatric medications: Issues of treatment and referral (2nd ed.) Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole.(Several copies will be in Learning Resource Center).
    V. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
    THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of
    Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
    responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
    integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
    PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
    expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time
    for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one
    another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various
    backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex,
    physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations,
    among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement
    and mutual respect. Social Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These
    issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a
    substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations
    relating to challenging issues. In this environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and
    opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless,
    the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
    professionalism.
    UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
    reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
2


  encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive
  regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are
  responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is
  needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
  Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
  POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
  networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot
  be certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work
  students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be
  seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded,
  subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional
  reputations and prospective careers.
   Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of
  electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may
  be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to
  make every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a
  professional social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to
  manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or
  using any language that could jeopardize their professional image.
  Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and
  are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
  material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information
  that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any
  way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding
  community agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the
  standards set by the Steve Hicks School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for
  Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
  Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
  practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin Steve Hicks School of Social Work
  program while in the classroom, the university community, and the broader area
  communities.
  POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
  scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
  in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
  individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
  will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the
  Student       Judicial     Services,      Office      of     the      Dean      of     Students:
  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
  USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not
  limited to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any
  unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result
  in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course
3


  materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the
  University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in
  further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading class
  materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or future
  students.
  DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
  accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
  Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
  (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student
  should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
  accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of
  any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
  information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
  RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
  pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
  If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe
  a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the
  missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
  TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of
  1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment
  that is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, instructors, agency-based
  field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated
  reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, or sexual
  misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources.
  Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Deputy
  for the SSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss
  to report incidents or to obtain information. Further information, including student resources
  related to Title IX, may also be found at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-
  programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
  CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
  here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the
  Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
  CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients,
  and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
  supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
  (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the
  educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions
  taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in
  sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
  USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
  recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are
  responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
  announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change
4


  of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at
  minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
  which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for
  updating their e-mail address at https//cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-
  student-notification-policy.
  SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
  involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
  present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It
  is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to
  agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety
  concerns.
  BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone
  who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
  phone their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
  partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
  Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas
  Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
  EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
  are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
  announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
  ·   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
      the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
  ·   If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
      of class.
  ·   In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
  ·   Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
      Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
  VI. GRADES
      94.0 and Above              A
      90.0 to 93.999              A-
      87.0 to 89.999              B+
      84.0 to 86.999              B
      80.0 to 83.999              B-
      77.0 to 79.999              C+
      74.0 to 76.999              C
      70.0 to 73.999              C-
      67.0 to 69.999              D+
      64.0 to 66.999              D
      60.0 to 63.999              D-
      Below 60.0                   F
      Evaluation based on:
      Reading assignment completion
5


        Class participation
        Class attendance
        Successful completion of assignments
    VII.     CLASS POLICIES
Policy on attendance, participation, and due dates for assignments
Students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in the class discussions by
contributing meaningful questions and discourse with fellow students and the instructor.
Readings are expected to be completed prior to class. Role will be taken; leaving class at the
break will be considered an unexcused absence unless arrangements have been made with the
instructor for the absence to be the excused. Points will be deducted from the final grade for
unexcused absences. The student is allowed one unexcused absence without penalty. Students
will not be permitted to make up work missed during unexcused absences. Late assignments will
not be accepted without penalty; some exceptions may be made by the instructor. Failure to
attend class regularly and demonstrate through class discussion that one has read the assigned
material will be considered in assigning the final grade. Use of a laptop computer should only
pertain to class and not personal matters/interests.
    VIII. COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
The assignments include the following:
worksheets (primarily done together either with fellow class-mates or in class); a group
presentation which includes a group generated handout for classmates (summary of important
points from assigned clinical articles and from the texts, emphasizing differential diagnostic
issues); a discussion of clinical issues from film clips to illustrate important points from the
assigned material and a one page reaction paper; and a 3-5 page critique addressing assessment
issues for the role play clinical interviews and 2 papers.
Panel Presentation {25% of final grade}
The DVDs are often available on-line, and many are available in the Undergraduate Library.
Instructor may provide some of the DVDs.
The class will be led in a discussion of clinical material illustrated by clips from films such as
WHAT’S EATING GILBERT GRAPE; LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, TAXI DRIVER,
FATAL ATTRACTION, AS GOOD AS IT GETS, AND SYBIL and possibly other films. Each
student panel will lead a discussion on some of the film material as they illustrate certain
technical material from the texts and other assigned material.
The role play will be of a character or characters from the films that illustrate the assessment
process of the clinical unit of attention, such as an individual or family as well as the diagnostic
entities. The role play will be conducted by a professional Clinical Social Worker; students may
volunteer to conduct the interview if they wish, but this is not a requirement.
Each panel will summarize briefly the clinical points in material assigned to their particular film
example. Each classmate will be provided with a copy of the summaries. Via Canvas or
6


otherwise. The purpose of the summary is to provide an outline for the discussion. The panel is
expected to have mastered those points in order to integrate the material in a class discussion.
Note: the assigned material from the DSM- 5 should not be outlined in detail; further instructions
will be provided on the first class day.
The group presentation should include the following:
Examples from movie illustrating
    a.   10 defenses (5%)
    b.   examples of at least 2 ethical dilemmas, as defined by NASW Code of Ethics; quote the
         ethical standard (2%)
    c.   in the assigned film material, identify ways the factors of age, class, culture, race,
         ethnicity, country of origin, language(s), educational attainment, religious back ground,
         sexual orientation, clinician value conflict and/or physical ability may influence (limit,
         compromise, or enhance) the clinical diagnostic effort and the diagnosis (4%)
    d.   the effect of trauma and economic/social oppression on the diagnostic process and on the
         diagnosis (5%)
    e.   a brief example of a research question generated by the effort to diagnosis a film figure
         (1%)
    f.   psychometric measurement tool (1%){each panel will discuss with instructor}
    g.   legal issues that might arise (1%)
    h.   differential diagnosis issues(1%)
One-page reaction paper (5%)
{the reaction paper is intended to reflect the student’s educational experience of his/her /their
own panel presentation: The reaction paper should address the student’s experience of applying
the diagnostic process to a person(s); a value, clinical, and ethical dilemma of the student’s
toward the diagnostic interview role play{re: the ethical concern, cite the ethical standard from
Code of Ethics}; and an emotional experience had by the student regarding the prospect of
diagnosing and/or interviewing the “client” in question and a defense mechanism which the
student might likely erect to cope with that emotional reaction. Reaction paper is due next class
day following the role play.
Papers
Format for Paper #1{25% of final grade} {choose 2 references from the Reference List at end of
this syllabus and/or on Canvas to support some answers to the following questions; use hand-
outs on Mental Status Exam & defense mechanisms} For this paper, the first role play
experience, the film, and written material of interview provide the clinical data. The paper will
provide an assessment of one the interviewees and speculations about the family member not
present in the family interview and is to include the following:
    a.   a brief discussion of the assessment of the client system(s) with a sample of the client’s
         interpersonal behavior and emotional processes that can either support or qualify
         inferences from the history and examination (make an inference) (4%)
    b. the following information from a mental status examination: ways the client(s)
         minimize(s) or exaggerate(s) certain aspects of the client(s) history, particular
7


        topics/questions that evoke hesitation or signs of discomfort, and the general style of
        relating (2%)
    c.  client’s ability to communicate about emotional issues with sample of behavior
        illustrating that ability (or compromised ability) (2%)
    d.  example of 1 defense mechanism typical of this “client’s” diagnosis including examples
        of the following: the coping style, the function, inferred cognition, and the diagnostic
        language (make a chart) (3%)
    e.  4 examples from the clinical interview that contained 4 of elements of a mental status
        exam (3%)
    f.  An error made by the clinician with the correction from the assigned literature (.5%)
    g.  An example of your personal reaction to the interview including a value conflict, a
        clinical concern, an ethical concern, and a counter-transference reaction (quote the ethical
        standard from NASW Code of Ethics) (.5%).
    h.  Possible diagnoses of client & younger son, including V-Codes; give criteria met with
        examples; mention the possible effect of the younger son’s mental health status on
        diagnosing the client; differential diagnosis issue(s)
Paper #2 will address a case assessment with a focus on cultural influences upon the diagnostic
process, analyzing hidden strengths which affect the diagnosis, and professional judgment,
boundary and ethical issues.
For Paper #2 {30% of final grade}, for first ½ of Paper #2, answer all questions like Paper #1
instructions(above), the diagnosis; for Paper #2, second ½, address these additional questions.
For Paper #2, use any material and/or class discussion from Like Water for Chocolate, including
the role play, and the case study on Senora Pires to inform your answers.
    a. list two strengths and two weaknesses of the assessment interview
    b. suggest a theoretical approach to address any symptom, stating why you make that choice
    c. speculate on the part of the brain which may be compromised by one of the
        symptoms/criteria exhibited (Buelow, et al.)
    d. speculate on a class of medications which might address one of the symptoms/criteria and
        briefly discuss; give the page number(s) from Buelow, et al.
    e. diagnosis: mention cultural factors affecting the diagnostic process with references; list
        criteria met with examples; list specifiers, if relevant; list possible V-Codes with
        examples; differential diagnosis issues
Grading
Per cent of final grade
30%                      Group Presentation, role play reaction paper, and summary
15%                      Role play reaction paper, see course schedule for due dates
25%                      Paper #1(due Saturday, June 29 @ 12 noon via email)
30%                      Paper #2 (first ½ due 12 noon, Friday, July 12; second ½ due at end
                         of term at midnight, Tuesday, July 30)both halves due via email
8


IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
Day              Topic             Assignment Due                 Readings
06/     Introduction to course   All choose material
04/ Begin film, What’s Eating    from Canvas
19   Gilbert Grape               related to Dxs
                                 within
                                 presentation; be
                                 prepared to make
                                 one point from it
                                 next week
06-  DSM-5 Classification(xiii-     All read Intro, 5- Valliant1(974) chart and
 09  xiiv); Gilbert Grape, con’t  17; Glossary, 817-   Montgomery (2013) Ch.2 in
                                   831; Table3, 779-   Canvas
                                     781;783-786 in
                                         DSM-5;        Defensive Functioning Scale
                                                       (807-810); Glossary (811-
                                                       813); GARF Scale (814);
                                                       SOFAS Scale (817) in
                                                       DSM-IV-TR in Canvas
                                     Neurodevelop-     Assessment tool: In Scarf,
06-                                mental Disorders    M. (1995). Intimate worlds,
 11  Gilbert Grape, cont’                 31-86        life inside the family. NY:
     Role Play                          WHODAS         Random House, from
                                   2.0(World Health    Chapter 2: The Beavers
                                      organization     Scale of Family Health and
                                        Disability     Competence: Levels 1-5)
                                       Assessment      in Canvas
                                   Schedule 2.0, 36-
                                   item version, self-
                                      administered,
                                   DSM-5, 747-748)
                                     Table 2 Parent-
                                     guardian-rated
                                      DSM-5 level1
                                      Cross-Cutting
                                   Symptom measure
                                  for child 6-17: 12
                                 domains, thresholds
                                  for further inquiry,
                                     and associated
                                   level 2 measures,
                                     DSM-5 p. 736;
                                       Depressive
                                 Disorders, 155-189,
                                      DSM-5;Post-
                                    traumatic Stress
9


                              Disorder, 271-280
06-                                               Greenberg, G. (July 2001).
 16   Film: Like Water for         Cultural       The Serotonin Surprise.
           Chocolate          Formulation 749-    Discover, 22(7). 64-69.
                               759; Glossary of
                              Cultural Concepts   Aisenberg, E. (2008).
                               of Distress 833-   Evidence-Based practice in
                                 837; Selective   mental health care to ethnic
                               Mutism,195-197;    minority communities: Has
                                 Posttraumatic    practice fallen short of its
                               Stress Disorder,   evidence? Social Work,
                                271-280; Acute    53(4), 297-306.
                               Stress Disorder,   Panel chooses 2 relevant
                               281-286; Other     articles located in Canvas.
                              Specified Trauma-
                                 and Stressor-
                              Related Disorder,
                                   289-290;
                              Depersonalization/
                                 Derealization
                              Disorder, 302-306
                                Buelow, et al.,
                               Appendix A: the
                               Nervous System
                                                  Chapter 10 Cultural issues in
06-    Like Water for                             Relational Diagnosis:
 18   Chocolate, con’t                            Hispanics in the United
                                                  States and Chapter 11
                                                  Cultural Considerations in
                                                  Diagnosis (152-170),
                                                  Florence W. Kaslow (Ed.)
                                                  Handbook of relational
                                                  diagnosis and dysfunctional
                                                  family patterns. (1996).
                                                  Canada: John Wiley and
                                                  Sons.
                                                  in Canvas
    Like Water for Chocolate,
06-           con’t           As Good as it Gets
 23         Role Play         or Fatal Attraction
10


                              writes paper on
                               Like Water for
                            Chocolate, due one
                            week after role play
06- Taxi Driver                                  Gabriel, M.A. (Summer,
25                           Schizophrenia       1992). Anniversary
                            Spectrum and         Reactions: Trauma
                            Other Psychotic      Revisited. Clinical Social
                            Disorders, 87-154;   Work Journal, 20 (2), 179-
                            Substance-related    192.
                            and Addictive
                            Disorders, 481-      The clinical and forensic
                            590; Posttraumatic   assessment of psychopathy:
                            Stress Disorder,     A practitioner’s guide. Carl
                            271-280;             B. Gacano, Ed. (2000)
                            Disruptive,
                            Impulsive-Control,
                            and Conduct          Assessment tool: PCL-R
                            Disorders, 461-      Checklist and Forensic
                            480; Bipolar and     Interview Schedule. The
                            Related Disorders,   Psychopathy Check-list
                            123-154              Revised and Screening
                                                 Version Robert H. Bodholdt,
                            Buelow, et al.,      Henry R. Richards, & Carl
                            Chapter 4,           B. Gacano.
                            Psychosis and the    All above in Canvas
                            Antipsychotics,      Panel chooses 2 relevant
                            103-132.             articles located in Canvas.
                            Clinician-Rated
                            Dimensions of
                            Psychosis Symptom
                            Severity, 743-744;
06-     Taxi Driver, cont’d
 30
                            Sybil presentation
06-      Taxi Driver, con’t group writes paper
 30          Role Play      on Taxi Driver, due
                            one week after role
                            play
11


07-    As Good as It Gets OR
 02       Fatal Attraction           Personality     Assessment tool: Yale
                                Disorders 591-644;   Brown Obsessive
                                Anxiety Disorders,   Compulsive Scale OR
                                      189-234;       Hand-outs on assessment of
                                     Obsessive-      post-partum depression;
                                  Compulsive and     Beck Depression Inventory;
                                Related Disorders,   Beck Anxiety Inventory;
                                      235-164;       Herman, J. L. & van der
                                Alternative DSM-5    Kolk, B. A. (1987).
                                      model for      Traumatic Antecedents of
                                     Personality     Borderline Personality
                                  Disorders ,761-    Disorder. In Pyschological
                                782; Buelow, et al., trauma (pp. 111-126) Bessel
                                  Anxiety and the    A. van der Kolk. USA:
                                Anxiolytics: Sleep   American Psychiatric
                                 Disorders and the   Association
                                  Hypnotics (79-
                                 102); Disruptive,   Price, S.K. (2008). Women
                                Impulsive-Control,   and reproductive loss:
                                    and Conduct      Client-Worker dialogues
                                  Disorders, 461-    designed to break the
                                 480; Personality    silence. Social Work, 53(4).
                                Disorders, 645-684   367-376.\
                                   Buelow, et al.,   Panel chooses 2 relevant
                                     Chapter 2,      articles located in Canvas
                                Depression and the
                                 Antidepressants:
                                 Bipolar Disorder
                                and Lithium, 35-78.
07-                             Like Water… writes
 07    As Good as It Gets OR        paper on As
          Fatal Attraction       Good…OR Fatal
             Role Play          Attraction, due one
                                week after role play
07/  Role play for As Good As
09/ It Gets Or Fatal Attraction
 19
12


              Depressive
            Disorders, 155-
             189; Anxiety
            Disorders, 189-
           253; Dissociative
          Disorders; Trauma-
             and Stressor-
          Related Disorders;
           Somatic Symptom
              and Related
           Disorders; Sleep-
           Wake Disorders,
                361-422
          SYBIL material for
                 07-14
07-
14  Sybil     Taxi Driver      van der Kolk, B. A. (1987).
          presentation groups  The psychological
            write paper on     consequences of
          Sybil role play, due overwhelming life
          one week after role  experiences. In
                  play         Psychological trauma.
                               Bessel A. van der Kolk
                               (Ed.). USA: American
                               Psychiatric Association, 1-
                               30.
                               Panel chooses 2 relevant
                               articles located in Canvas
                               Assessment tool: Steinberg,
                               M., Rounsaville, B., et al.,
                               (1994). Distinguishing
                               between multiple personality
                               disorder (dissociative
                               identity disorder) and
                               schizophrenia using the
                               Structured Clinical Interview
                               for DSM IV Dissociative
                               Disorders. Journal of
                               Nervous and Mental
                               Disorders, 182, 495-
                               502.(provided by instructor)
                               Buelow, et al.: Pain and
                               Analgesics
13


07/
 16            SYBIL con't
 &          Role Play on 07-23
07-
 21
 &
07-
 23
07/                                      Duty to warn;
28/                                    materials in Canvas
 &
07-
 30
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Suggested References for Clinical Assessment and Differential Diagnosis
Appleby, G.A. & Anastas, J.W. (1998). Mental health and substance abuse. In Not just
    a passing phase: Social work with gay, lesbian, and bisexual people. New York:
    Columbia University Press, 271-300.
Alverez, L.R. & Ruiz, P. (2001). Substance abuse in the Mexican American population.
    In Shulamith Lala Asheberg Straussner (Ed.) Ethnocultural cultural factors in
    substance abuse treatment. New York: The Guilford Press. (111-136).
In Paul M.G. Emmelkamp & Ellen Vedel, Evidence-based treatment for alcohol and drug abuse:
A practitioner’s guide to theory, methods, and practice. Chapter 5 Complicating Factors 157-
193. NY: Routledge.
Applegate, J. S. (1996). The good-enough social worker: Winnicott applied. In J.
    Edward & J. Sanville (Eds.), Fostering Healing and Growth: A Psychoanalytic
    social work approach (pp.77-96). Northvale New Jersey: Jason Aronson.
Antokoletz, J. C. (1993). A Psychoanalytic view of cross-cultural passages. The
    American Journal of Psychoanalysis, 53 (1), 35-54.
Bamford, K. W. (1991). Bilingual issues in mental health assessment and treatment.
     Hispanic Journal of Behavioral Sciences, 13(4), 377-390.
Bernal, G. & Scharron del Rio, M. (2001). Are empirically supported treatments valid
    for ethnic minorities? Toward an alternative approach for treatment research.
    Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 7(4), 328-342.
Brabender, V.M. & Fallon, A. (2009). Ethical hot spots of combined individual and
14


    group therapy: Applying four ethical standards. International Journal of Group
     Psychotherapy, 59(1).127-147.
Brandell, J. R. (2002). The marginalization of Psychoanalysis in academic social work.
    Psychoanalytic Social Work, 9(2), 41-50.
Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (1999). Handbook of attachment: Theory, research,
    and clinical application. New York: Guilford Press.
Comas-Diaz, & Minrath, M. (1985). Psychotherapy with ethnic minority borderline
    clients. Psychotherapy, 22(2), 418-426.
Courtois, C. A. & Ford, J.D. (Eds.). (2009). Treating complex traumatic stress disorders:
      An evidence-based guide. New York: The Guilford Press.
Damasio, A. (1999). The feeling of what happens. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and
   Company.
Dyche, L. & Zayes, L. H. (2001). Cross-cultural empathy and training the contemporary
    psychotherapist. Clinical Social Work Journal, 29(3), 245-258.
Edmond, T., Rubin, A., & Wambach, K. (1999). The effectiveness of EMDR with adult
    female survivors of childhood sexual abuse. Social Work Research, 23, 103-116.
Elson, M. (March, 1989). Kohut and Stern: Two views of infancy and early childhood.
     Smith College Studies in Social Work, 131-145.
Fenester, A. (1996). Group therapy as an effective treatment modality for people of
   color. International Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 46(3, 399-416.
Foster R.P. ((1993, April). The bilingual self. Paper presented at thirteenth annual spring
    meeting of the Division of Psychoanalysis(39) of the American Psychological
   Association, New York: NY.
Freed, A.O. (June, 1985). Linking developmental, family and life cycle theories.
     Smith College Studies in Social Work, 169-182.
Garzon, F. & Tan, S. (1992). Counseling Hispanics: Cross-cultural and Christian
    Perspectives. Journal of Psycholology and Christianity, 11(4), 378-390.
Gottlieb, M.B., Chapter 2, Some Ethical Implications of Relational Diagnoses. (1996). In
     Florence Kaslow, (Ed.) Handbook of relational diagnosis and dysfunctional family
     patterns (pp.19-34). Canada: John Wiley and Sons.
Gorkin, M. (1986). Countertransference in cross-cultural psychotherapy. The example
   of Jewish therapist and Arab Patient. Psychiatry, 49, 69-79.
15


Greenson, R. R.(1950). The mother tongue and the mother. International Journal of
     Psycho-Analysis. 31: 18-23.
Kail, B.L. & de la Rosa, M. (1998). Challenges to treating the elderly Latino substance abuser: A
not so hidden research agenda. Journal of Gerontological Social Work (The Haworth Press, Inc.)
30 (½).123-141.
Katsavdakis, K. A., Sayed, M., Bram, Al, & Brand Bartlett, A. (2001). How was this
    story told in the mother tongue? An integrative perspective. Bulletin of the
    Menninger Clinic.
Lazar, S.G. (Ed.). (2010). Psychotherapy is worth it: A comprehensive review of its cost-
    effectiveness. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Lee, C., Gavriel, H., Drummond, P., Richards, J., & Greenwald, R. (2002). Treatment of
    post-traumatic stress disorder: A comparison of stress inoculation training with
    prolounged exposure and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing. Journal of
    Clinical Psychology, 58, 1071-1089.
Lenzenweger,M.F. (2010). Schizotypy and schizophrenia: The view from experimental
       psychopathology. New York: The Guilford Press.
Masterson J.F. (2000). Chapter Three, Diagnosis—A Psychodynamic Approach to the
Borderline, Narcissistic, and Schizoid Personality Disorders (59-74). In The personality
disorders: A new look at the developmental self and object relations approach. Phoenix, Az:
Zeig, Tucker & Co. Inc., 59-74
McWilliams, N. (1994). Psychoanalytic diagnosis: Understanding personality structure in the
clinical process. New York: The Guilford Press. 1-8.
Miller, N.E., Luborsky, L., Barber, J.P., & Docherty, J.P. (Eds.). (1993). Psychodynamic
      treatment research. New York: Basic Books.
Pawlukewicz, J. (2003). World Trade Center trauma interventions: A clinical model for
     affected workers. Psychoanalytic Social Work, 79-88.
Pliszka, S.R. (1998). Co-morbidity of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder with
  psychiatric disorder: An overview. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 59, 50-58.
Main, M. & Hesse, E. (1990). Parent’s unresolved traumatic experiences are related to
     infant disorganized attachment status: Is frightened and/or frightening parental
     behavior the linking mechanism? In M. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & M.
     Cummings (Eds.). Attachment in the preschool years: Theory, research and
     intervention (pp. 161-182). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mattison, M. (2000). Ethical decision making: The person in the process. Social Work
    45(3) 201-212.
16


Mailick, M. D. (1991). Re-assessing assessment in clinical social work practice. Smith
     College Studies in Social Work, 3-19.
Masterson, J. F. (2000). Chapter one, The Role of the Mother or Primary Caretaker in the
Development of the Normal Self—25 years later. In The personality disorders: A new look at
the developmental self and object relations approach. Phoenix, AZ: Zeig, Tucker & Co., Inc., 7-
32.
Organista, K. C., Munoz, R. F., & Gonzalez, G. (1994). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for
     depression in low- income and minority medical outpatients: Descriptions of a
     program and exploratory analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 18(3), 241-
     259.
Millon, T., Krueger, R.F., & Simonsen, E. (Eds.). (2010). Contemporary directions in
       psychopathology: Scientific foundations of the DSM-V and ICD-11.
       New York: The Guilford Press.
Patterson, J., Albala, A.A., McCahill, M.E., & Edwards, T.M. (Eds.). (2010, revised).
      The therapist’s guide to psychopharmacology: Working with patients, families, and
      physicians to optimize care. New York: the Guilford Press.
Palombo, J. (1985). The treatment of neurocognitively impaired children: A Perspective
     from Self Psychology. Clinical Social Work Journal, 13, 117-128.
Post, R. M., Weiss, S. R. B., Smith, M., Li, H., & McCann, U. (1997). Kindling versus
    quenching: Implications for the evolution and treatment and posttraumatic stress
    disorder. In R. Yehuda & A. C. McFarlane (Eds.). Psychobiology of posttraumatic
    stress disorder. Annual New York Academy of Sciences, 821, 285-295.
Rauch, S.L., van der Kolk, B. A., Fisler, R.E.A., Nathaniel, M., Orr, S.P., Savage, C.R.,
     Fischman, A.F., Jeneki, M.A., & Pittman, R.K. (1996). A symptom provocation
     study of posttraumatic stress disorder using positron emission tomography and script-
     driven imagery. Archives of General Psychiatry, 53, 380-387.
Reamer, F. G. Boundary issues in social work: Managing dual relationships.
    Social Work 48(1), 121-133.
Regier, D.A., Narrow, W.E., Kuhl, E.A., & Kupfer, D.J. (Eds.). (2011). The conceptual
     evolution of DSM-5. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Rosenthal, C. (2000). Latino practice outcome research: A review of the literature.
      Smith College Studies in Social Work, 70(2)), 217-238.
Roth, A. & Fonagy, P. (Eds.). (2005). What works for whom? A critical review of
       psychotherapy research. New York: The Guilford Press.
Saari, C. (2000). The environment: Its role in psychosocial functioning and
     psychotherapy. New York: Columbia University Press.
17


Sands, R. G. (2001). Clinical social work practice in behavioral mental health.
     Needham Heights: Allyn and Bacon.
Sharpe, S. A. (2000). The ways we love: A developmental approach to treating couples.
   New York: The Guilford Press.
Shonkoff, J. P. & Phillips, D. (2000). From neurons to neighborhoods: The science of
   early childhood development. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Solomon, M. & Weiss, N. (1992). Integration of Daniel Stern’s developmental theory
    into a model of couple’s therapy. Clinical Social Work Journal, 29(4), 377-393.
Strom-Gottfried, K. (2000). Ensuring ethical practice: An examination of NASW code
    violation, 1986-97. Social Work 45(3), 251-261.
Study cites most reported ethics breaches, (1995, April). NASW News, p.4.
Sue, S. Zane, N. & Young, K. (1994). Research on psychotherapy with culturally diverse
    populations. In A.E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.). Handbook of psychotherapy and
    behavioral change (4th ed.) (pp. 783-817), New York: Wiley.
Tronik, E.Z. & Weinberg, M.K. (1997). Depressed mothers and infants: Failure to form
   dyadic states of consciousness. In L. Murray & P. J. Cooper (Eds.). Post-partum
   depression and child development (pp. 54-81). New York: Guilford Press.
van der Kolk, B.A. (2002). Beyond the talking cure: Somatic experience and subcortical
    imprints in the treatment of trauma. In F. Shipiro (Ed.).EMDR as an integrative
   psychotherapy approach: Experts of diverse orientations explore the paradigm prism
   (pp. 57-83). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association Press.
van der Kolk, B.A., McFarlane, A.C., & Weisaeth, L. (Eds.). (1996). Traumatic stress:
    The effects of overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society. New York:
    Guilford Press.
18
