                                     Drugs in Our Society
            PHM F310K (Unique #86980) and PHM F350K (Unique #86990)
                              Course Syllabus – Summer 2020
Instructor:
Sharon Rush, R.Ph.
Office: PHR 2.222F
Telephone: 232-3463
Fax: 471-3756
Email: sharon.rush@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: By appointment
            Unique #                      Meeting Time                     Room Number
87900 – PHM F310K                   MTWTF 10am to 11:30am           Online only via Zoom / WebEx
87910 – PHM F350K                   MTWTF 10am to 11:30am           Online only via Zoom / WebEx
                             COURSE SUMMARY AND FORMAT
The purpose of this course is to enhance student knowledge of the use of pharmaceuticals, the
drug distribution process and the regulatory control of pharmaceuticals so they can become
better consumers and buyers of pharmaceutical products. Topics in this course include
information on pharmaceutical development and regulation; drug distribution systems; various
categories of pharmaceuticals; and related updates on new legislation and products.
Hopefully, this information will provide you with a lifetime foundation for better health.
Students enrolled in this course have either enrolled in PHM F310K or PHM F350K. The PHM
F350K course has the significant writing component which meets the University’s writing
requirement. Students enrolled in PHM F350K are upper division students and will be
attending the same lectures and doing the same assignments as those students enrolled in
PHM F310K. Both F310K and F350K students will have writing assignments; however, PHM
F350K students will have a more intensive final writing assignment than the F310K students.
More information follows on the writing component.
This course is a hybrid course with all materials provided online in Canvas. Learning modules
will be posted on Canvas for you to review at your own pace with designated deadlines. Live
virtual discussion groups over the material will be held every Monday during the regular class
time. Additional live virtual meetings will be held for presentations, check-ins and other
course-related material. You will be expected to attend every live virtual meeting where
attendance will be taken.


                                    COURSE OBJECTIVES
1. Students will obtain information to enhance their understanding of prescription and non-
    prescription medications so that they can become more-informed consumers of those
    products.
2. Students will explore trending topics that affect our health and economy.
3. Students will obtain a basic understanding of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration drug
    approval process.
4. Students will obtain a better understanding and appreciation that all prescription and over-
    the-counter drug products have risks along with benefits.
5. Students will obtain basic knowledge of over-the-counter products and what symptoms
    they treat.
                                   STUDENT EVALUATION
PHM F310K
Total grade is composed of class attendance, two assignments and two short 3-4 page essay
papers.
 Class attendance is mandatory during live virtual sessions. Attendance = 20%
 Two assignments counting 20% each = 40% total
 Paper I = 20%
 Paper II = 20%
PHM F350K
Total grade is composed of class attendance, two assignments and two essay papers (one short
3-4 page and one long 9-10 page). This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are
designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you
can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and
receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your
peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board.
 Class attendance is mandatory during live virtual sessions. Attendance = 20%
 Two assignments counting 15% each = 30% total
 Paper I = 20%
 Paper II = 30%


Grading Scale
The grading scale for this class is the following:
         90-100% = A
         80-89% = B
         70-79% = C
         60-69% = D
         59 and below = F
                                         COURSE POLICIES
The following course policies and procedures were developed with two guiding principles in
mind: (1) to create an appropriate learning environment for students; and (2) to maintain
academic integrity for the course and the university. Students need to know what is expected
and know their responsibilities from the beginning of the course. Hopefully, this will eliminate
or reduce problems regarding teaching, student conduct, course policies and procedures.
Therefore, it is very important that you read and understand the following information.
You are students at an elite university and this course is being offered and taught by
instructors from a professional pharmacy program. All the instructors expect courteous and
professional behavior from students. Likewise, the instructors pledge to conduct the course
in a professional manner.
Attendance and Virtual Live Class Decorum
     You will be REQUIRED to attend ALL scheduled live virtual class meetings and connect on
    time. Attendance will be taken during each class time. You are responsible for ALL material
    covered in class and ALL announcements made in your absence. Since attendance accounts
    for 20% of your total grade, failure to show up for live virtual class meetings may result in
    substantial lowering of your final grade. If you are unable to attend a live virtual class
    meeting due to an illness or emergency, please contact Professor Rush as soon as possible.
    Proof or documentation of the absence may be required. An additional assignment may be
    given to the student for partial make-up for the missed live virtual class meeting time.
     Please respect your fellow students and the instructors. Excessive talking, distractions and
    noise can be troublesome. Please be aware of your background environment and noise
    coming through your microphone.
     Please let the instructor know immediately of any problem(s) which is preventing you from
    performing satisfactorily in this class.
     You will need a reliable way to connect to WebEx or Zoom meetings for this class. Have
    your equipment charged and ready to go. Be prepared to be on camera during the live
    virtual class meetings.
     All assignments will be due by 11:59pm on the date indicated on the course syllabus. All
    assignments will be submitted on Canvas as Word documents to allow for feedback directly
    on the document. Assignments not turned in by that time will be considered late. A
    penalty of 10% of total points possible will be assessed for late assignments.
     Religious holidays – University policy respects religious holidays. If you need to miss any
    required activities, discussion sections or exams for the observance of a religious holy day,


    please inform Professor Rush in writing as far in advance as possible so arrangements can
    be made to complete the required component.
Academic Integrity
 “Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties including failure of the course involved and dismissal from the University. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, fellow students, and the integrity of the University and the
College of Pharmacy, policies on scholastic dishonesty are strictly enforced."
Please refer to the Student Judicial Services website (http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/)
for the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
Academic Accommodations
“The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (471-4641 TTY).”
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking time to relax. This will help you achieve
your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You
are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of
the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than
later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life
events, or feeling anything like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek
support. You can find more information at the following website:
https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Q Drop policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you will need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.


                            WRITING COMPONENT GUIDELINES
Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center (UWC), FAC
211, 471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free,
individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a
drop-in basis. Any undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance
with any writing project. The consultants there work with students from every department on
campus, for both academic and non-academic writing. Whether you are writing a lab report, a
resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants will
be happy to work with you. Their services are not just for writing that has "problems." Getting
feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project.
Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they
provide is intended to foster independence. Each student determines how to use the
consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that
preserve the integrity of your work.
For this summer, UWC has transferred all services online in response to the COVID crisis. They
encourage you to seek out their help for writing support. Online consultations will be Monday
– Thursday from 10am to 5pm. You can make appointments with them through Symplicity or
contact them through Chat at http://uwc.utexas.edu/appointments-new/ . If they are not open
when you have a specific question, please refer to their Handouts at
http://uwc.utexas.edu/handouts/ .
   F310K students will have two short 3-4 page required writing assignments. Each paper will
    have specific guidelines and a grading rubric for students to follow. The first paper will be
    peer-reviewed on Canvas and time will be allowed for the student to make changes before
    turning in the final paper for grading. The second paper will be reviewed by the instructor
    and time will be allowed for the student to make changes before turning in the final paper
    for grading.
   F350K students will have one short 3-4 page essay plus a longer 9-10 page writing
    assignment at the end of the semester. Each paper will have specific guidelines and a
    grading rubric for students to follow. The first paper will be peer-reviewed on Canvas and
    time will be allowed for the student to make changes before turning in the final paper for
    grading. The second paper will be reviewed by the instructor and time will be allowed for
    the student to make changes before turning in the final paper for grading.
   Final versions of each paper are due by 11:59pm on the dates indicated on the course
    schedule. All papers will be submitted on Canvas as Word documents to allow for feedback
    directly on the document. Papers not turned in by that time will be considered late. A
    penalty will be assessed for late papers.
   The University considers plagiarism (presenting someone else’s work as your own) to be a
    form of scholastic dishonesty. Whenever a student quotes another person’s work, whether
    published or unpublished, that source must be acknowledged. Even if paraphrased, credit
    should be given to the person who stated the idea being used.
   Topics: The topics for each writing assignment along with specific details and grading
    rubrics will be posted on Canvas on the Assignments page.
   References format:


        We will be utilizing the American Psychological Association (APA) documentation
         style. Please refer to the following link from the Writing Center:
         http://uwc.utexas.edu/handouts/
        Access dates are required for all URLs.
        References need to be single-spaced with one space between references.
        References need to be from the year 2000 and up.
                                            TIMELINE
    NOTE: Schedule is subject to change without advance notice. All required assignments must be
                             submitted by 11:59pm on the assigned day.
 Asynchronous = This is material that you will learn on your own time by the date
                                   specified in the schedule.
 Synchronous = These will be live sessions conducted during the normal class day
 starting at 10am on designated days. Be prepared to discuss indicated material.
Date            Topic                                                Mode of Instruction
                   Introduction and assignments                     Asynchronous – View
                   Essay Writing Guide                              Canvas video modules on
                   Essay #1 Instructions                            your own
June 4 - 7         Website resources and article
                    analysis
                   Medication Adherence review and
                    exercise instructions
June 8             LIVE SESSION: Discussion of June 4                Synchronous live
                    – 7 material                                         session – check-in
                   Types of Drugs and Drug Regulation                   discussion
                   Start Medication Adherence                        Asynchronous – View
                    Exercise                                             Canvas video modules
                                                                         on your own
June 9           Drug Industry and the Drug                         Asynchronous – View
                    Approval Process                                 Canvas video modules on
                 Intro to Pharmacology                              your own
June 10          IRB and Human Studies                              Asynchronous – View
                 Upload Essay #1 in Canvas                          Canvas video modules on
                                                                     your own
June 11          Peer review of Essay #I via Canvas
June 12          COVID-19                                           Asynchronous – View
                 Outbreak simulation                                Canvas video modules on
                                                                     your own
June 15          LIVE SESSION: Discussion of June 8                  Synchronous live


               – 12 material                         session – check-in
              Vaccines                              discussion
              Essay I Due                         Asynchronous – View
                                                     Canvas video modules
                                                     on your own
June 16       Drug Development Exercise          Group Work
              Essay #2 instructions
June 17 - 18  Drug Development Exercise          Group Work
June 19       LIVE SESSION: Check-in on drug     Synchronous live session
               presentations
June 22       Drug Development Presentations     Synchronous live session
June 23       Drug Development Presentations     Synchronous live session
              Final Discussion
              Medication Adherence Exercise
               due
June 24       View ACIP Live Webinar
June 25       LIVE SESSION: COVID-19 and ACIP    Synchronous live session
               webinar discussion
              Rough draft of Essay #2 Due – 310K
               & 350K
June 29 –     Substance Use Disorders            Asynchronous – View
July 2        Mental Health                      Canvas video modules on
              Opioid Crisis                      your own
              Legal Marijuana
              2019 Texas legislature laws
              Counterfeit Drugs
              Substance Use Disorders
               assignment due
July 3        LIVE SESSION: Discussion of June   Synchronous live session
               29 – July 2 material
July 6        LIVE SESSION: Virtual visit to a   Synchronous live session
               Pharmacy – Group A                 – small group
              View Dosage Forms and Self-care
               modules before scheduled visit
July 7        LIVE SESSION: Virtual visit to a   Synchronous live session
               Pharmacy – Group B                 – small group
              View Dosage Forms and Self-care
               modules before scheduled visit


July 8  LIVE SESSION: Virtual visit to a Synchronous live session
         Pharmacy – Group C               – small group
        View Dosage Forms and Self-care
         modules before scheduled visit
July 9  LIVE SESSION: Class review       Synchronous live session
         discussion
        Essay II Due – 310K & 350K
