                                  ANS 361/ GRG 356T
  Development and Social Movement in East and Southeast Asia
Spring 2020, ANS 361/GRG 356T
Instructor: Professor Youjeong Oh
Course Website: Canvas ANS 361
Course Description
This course discusses following questions: Why are countries, cities, communities and
individuals enthusiastic about the idea of development? How do they actually practice
development? Why are East and Southeast Asian cities particularly obsessed with the idea
of development? Why does development frequently entail massive and violent
displacement, dispossession and disempowerment, despite its promises of betterment?
How has contentious politics unfolded against development-induced displacement across
diverse historical periods and geographical areas? How do you define Right to the City?
This course consists of four parts. In Part I, we will do various readings to understand the
notions of development including developmental desires, development as international
project in the post-WWII era, and the ways in which development is associated with state
building, moral economy, political performance, and accumulation regimes. Part II will
explore the development of civil society and social movement in East Asia, particularly
focusing on Sunflower Movement, Umbrella Movement, and Candlelight Movement. Part III
will cover the explanations about the mechanisms and drivers of displacement associated
with infrastructure construction, industrialization, urban redevelopment, land speculation,
and tourism development. In Part IV, we will conceptualize Right to the City, exploring
alternative right-based approaches to land, housing, infrastructure, commons and public
resources.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Requirements
    1. Required reading and class participation (10%). Students are required to come to
       class having already done the reading for the day. This is the minimum required of
       you to be in the class. All students are expected to contribute to class discussion in a
       positive, relevant, and respectful way. All readings are posted on Canvas under
       Files.
    2. Class attendance (10%). Class attendance is mandatory and will be checked
       regularly including the add/drop period. Students are allowed one absence. For
       each unexcused absence after that, your final grade will be lowered by 2 points, up
       to a maximum of 10 points. The only exception to this policy is your health
       condition. In order for an absence to be considered excused, students must bring a
                                                                                                1


        doctor’s note or a letter from student emergency center. If you come to class 5
        minutes late or leave the classroom early, it will be considered as tardiness; three
        such occasions will be regarded as a full absence.
    3. Reading Response (20%). Students pick FIVE readings and post reading responses
        about the selected readings by 8pm the day before each class day on Canvas
        under Discussions. Reading responses (around 500 words for each reading) should
        discuss main points of each assigned reading and raise your own question(s) related
        to the topic. Please sign-up for five preferred readings on Canvas under Discussions:
        Reply and mention your name and preferred dates and authors. Each posting counts
        for 4 points: quality matters and there will be 2-point deduction for late postings.
    4. Group Project I (20%). Students (in a group) are required to complete a qualitative
        and analytical project on one of the following topics: Taiwan Sunflower Movement
        (Feb. 20), Hong Kong 2014 Umbrella Movement (Mar. 3), Hong Kong 2019 Protest
        (Mar. 5), and South Korea 2017 Candlelight Movement (Mar. 12). Please sign up on
        Canvas under Pages which topic you would like to do. Detailed procedures and
        guidelines will be provided.
    5. Group Project II (20%). Students (in a group) are required to complete a qualitative
        and analytical project on one of the following topics: China Three Gorges Project
        (Mar. 31), South Korea Yongsan Disaster (Apr. 9), and India POSCO Project (Apr.21).
        Please sign up on Canvas under Pages which topic you would like to do. Detailed
        procedures and guidelines will be provided.
    6. Take-home final exam (20%). Essay questions based on the assigned readings and
        class discussions. A hardcopy of typed final paper should be submitted no later
        than May 7th (Thursday) 12:30 pm.
**In any cases you cannot make the deadlines of assignments and papers, you should give
me reasonable notice at least one week prior to the deadlines.
Grading Policy
In order to pass this class, students should fulfill and submit all requirements.
Grades are assigned as follows: 93-100 = A; 90-92.5 = A-; 86-89.5 = B+; 82-85.5 = B; 79-
81.5= B-; 76-78.5= C+; 72-75.5 = C; 69-71.5 = C-; 65-68.5 = D+; 60-64.5 = D; below 60 = F.
Not curved, no round up.
Standard and Expectation
All lectures are proprietary material. Audio or video of lectures in any forms is not
permitted.
Academic Dishonesty
Cheating and plagiarism are serious offences and will not be tolerated. Plagiarism is
representing someone else’s work as your own. This includes handing in another student’s
paper, and it includes using the words and/or ideas from a publication, the web or other
source without citation. Always cite your sources (in whatever format). Please refer to this
site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php.
                                                                                              2


University Notices and Policies
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your
disability from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester (within
first two weeks), so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam,
you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order
to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may
not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Weekly Topics and Readings
(subject to change at the discretion of the instructor).
January 21 (Tu)              Introduction
Part I: Understanding Development
January 23 (Th) Developmental Desire
Readings:
Berman, Marshall. (1982). All That IS Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity.
      (Read Chapter 1: pp. 38-79).
January 28 (Tu) Colonial Regimes and Their Legacies
Readings:
(** Required) Bernstein, Henry. (2000). Colonialism, capitalism, development. In Poverty
      and Development into the 21st Century, edited by Tim Allen and Alan Thomas. Chapter
      11.
Hall, Stuart. (1992). The West and the Rest: Discourse and Power. In Stuart Hall eds.
      Formations of Modernity. Polity.
January 30 (Th) Development as International Project
Readings:
                                                                                                                          3


Hewitt, Tom. (2000). Have a century of development. In Poverty and Development into the
    21st Century, edited by Tim Allen and Alan Thomas. Chapter 13.
February 4 (Tu) Performing Development
Readings:
Bulloch, Hannah. (2017). In Pursuit of Progress: Narratives of Development on a Philippine
    Island. University of Hawaii Press. (Read Chapter 6).
February 6 (Th) Development and Moral Economy
Readings:
Bulloch, Hannah. (2017). In Pursuit of Progress: Narratives of Development on a Philippine
    Island. University of Hawaii Press. (Read Chapter 8).
February 11 (Tu) Chinese Urbanization
Readings:
** (Required) Hsing, You-tien. (2010). The Great Urban Transformation: Politics of Land and
    Property in China. Oxford University Press. (Read Chapter 6).
Chuang, Julia. 2015. Urbanization through dispossession: survival and stratification in
    China’s new townships. The Journal of Peasant Studies 42(2): 275-294.
February 13 (Th) Chinese Urbanization and Displacement
Readings:
** (Required) Hsing, You-tien. (2010). The Great Urban Transformation: Politics of Land and
    Property in China. Oxford University Press. (Read Chapter 7).
Oliver-Smith, Anthony. (2009). Development-Forced Displacement and Resettlement: A
    Global Human Rights Crisis, in Development and Dispossession: The Crisis of Forced
    Displacement and Resettlement. School for Advanced Research Press. pp. 3-24.
Part II: Social Movement in East Asia
February 18 (Tu) Sunflower Movement: Background Reading
Readings:
Ho, Ming-sho. (2010). Understanding the trajectory of social movements in Taiwan (1980-
    2010). Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 39: 3-22.
February 20 (Th) Sunflower Movement: Student Presentation
Useful Resources:
1) Ming-sho Ho. Chapters 1-2 in Working-Class Formation in Taiwan: Fractured Solidarity in
    State-Owned Enterprises, 1945–2012 (Palgrave Macmillan 2014): 1-31
2) Ming-sho Ho. “Occupy Congress in Taiwan” Journal of East Asian Studies 15 (2015): 69-
    97
February 25 (Tu) Umbrella Movement: Background Reading
Readings:
Ortmann, Stephan. (2015). The umbrella movement and Hong Kong's protracted
    democratization process. Asian Affairs 46(1): 32-50.
                                                                                           4


February 27 (Th) Umbrella Movement: Background Reading Continued
March 3 (Tu)         Umbrella Movement: Student Presentation I (2014 Protest)
March 5 (Th)         Umbrella Movement: Student Presentation II (2019 Protest)
March 10 (Tu)        Candlelight Movement: Background Reading
Readings:
Kim, Nan. (2017). Candlelight and the Yellow Ribbon: Catalyzing Re-Democratization in
    South Korea. Japan Focus: The Asia-Pacific Journal 15(14).
March 12 (Th)       Candlelight Movement: Student Presentation
Useful Resources:
Doucette, Jamie. (2017). “The Occult of Personality: Korea’s Candlelight Protests and the
    Impeachment of Park Geun-hye.” The Journal of Asian Studies 76 (4): 851–860.
Spring Break
Part III: Development-Induced Displacement and Contentious Politics
March 24 (Tu)      Three Gorges Project: Film, Up the Yangtze, 2007.
March 26 (Th) Three Gorges Project: Background Reading
Readings:
Tilt, Bryan. (2016). Dams, Displacement, and the Moral Economy in Southwest China. In
    Carlos Rojas and Ralph A. Litzinger (eds). Ghost Protocol: Development and Displacement
    in Global China. Duke University Press. pp. 87-108.
March 31 (Tu) Three Gorges Project: Student Presentation
Useful Resources:
1) Jing, Jun. “Rural Resettlement: Past Lessons for the Three Gorges Project,” The China
    Journal, no. 38 (July 1997).
2) Steil, Shawn and Duan Yuefang. “Policies and Practice in Three Gorges Resettlement: A
    Field Account,” Forced Migration Review, 12 (January 2002), pp. 10-13.
3) Hwang, Sean-Shong, Yue Cao, and Juan Xi. 2011. “The Short-Term Social, Economic, and
    Health Impact of China’s Three Gorges Dam Project: A Prospective Study.” Social
    Indicators Research 101:73-92.
April 2 (Th)     Yongsan Disaster: Background Discussion
April 7 (Tu)     Yongsan Disaster: Background Reading
Readings:
Shin, Hyun Bang and Soo-Hyun Kim. (2016). The developmental state, speculative
    urbanisation and the politics of displacement in gentrifying Seoul. Urban Studies
    53(3):540-559.
                                                                                          5


April 9 (Th)      Yonsan Disaster: Student Presentation
Useful Resources:
1) Film: The Remnants (공동정범), 2016.
April 14 (Tu)     Yonsan Disaster: Guest Speaker Lecture
April 16 (Th) India POSCO Project: Background Reading
Readings:
Levien, Michael. (2012). The Land Question: Special Economic Zones and the Political
    Economy of Dispossession in India. Journal of Peasant Studies 39 (3-4): 933-969.
April 21 (Tu) India POSCO Project: Student Presentation
Useful Resources:
International Human Rights Clinic, ESCR-Net, The Price of Steel: Human Rights and Forced
    Evictions in the POSCO-India Project (New York, NYU School of Law, 2013).
Part IV: Development and Right to the City
April 23 (Th) Tourism Development I
Readings:
Williams, Liza Keānuenueokalani and Vernadette Vicuña Gonzalez. (2017). Indigeneity,
    sovereignty, sustainability and cultural tourism: hosts and hostages at ʻIolani Palace,
Hawai'i. Journal of Sustainable Tourism 25(5): 668-683.
April 28 (Tu) Tourism Development II
Readings:
Sirisrisak, Tiamsoon. (2015). The Urban Development and Heritage Contestation of
    Bangkok’s Chinatown. In Peter van der Veer. eds. Handbook of Religion and the Asian
    City: Aspiration and Urbanization in the Twenty-First Century. University of California
    Press. pp. 168-185.
April 30 (Th) Right to the City I
Readings:
Purcell, Mark. (2002). Excavating Lefebvre: The right to the city and its urban politics of the
    Inhabitant. GeoJournal 58: 99-108.
Samara, Tony Roshan, Shenjing He and Guo Chen. (2012). Introduction: Locating Right to
    the City in the Global South. In Tony Roshan Samara et al. (eds). Locating Right to the
    City in the Global South. Routledge. pp. 1-20.
May 5 (Tu)        Right to the City II
Readings:
Shin, Hyun Bang. 2018. “Urban movements and the genealogy of urban rights discourses:
    the case of urban protesters against redevelopment and displacement in Seoul, South
    Korea.” Annals of the American Association of Geographers 108 (2): 356-369.
                                                                                              6


Shih, Mi. 2010. Legal Geographies—Governing Through Law: Rightsbased Conflicts and
    Property Development in Shanghai. Urban Geography 31(7): 973-987.
May 7 (Th)        Wrap-up Discussions
* Final Exam Due
                                                                                   7
