                                          Psychology of Advertising
                                                    Adv 319
                                                  Spring 2020
                                                 Kahlor 06415
                                  T/Th in Jester A121A from 2 to 3:15 p.m.
Teaching Team
Dr. Lee Ann Kahlor (pronounced kay-ler)
Associate Professor, Minority Liaison
Stan Richards School of Advertising & Public Relations
Moody College of Communication
The University of Texas at Austin
512.791.5726 | kahlor@austin.utexas.edu | Office BMC 4.370
(pronouns: she/her/hers)
Kahlor office hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays 11-noon in BMC 4.370 (also available by appointment)
Teaching Assistants - See Canvas for information about your TAs
ALL COURSE MATERIALS ARE AVAILABLE ON CANVAS. STUDENTS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR STAYING UP TO
DATE WITH MATERIALS POSTED THERE.
Course Policies Presented Alphabetically
(Note: On Canvas, students are able to browse these topics as Pages – with each topic having its own
page, the content is easier to read.)
Absences
Attendance matters in this class. We will have in-class activities and you must be in class to participate.
Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence. Lecture notes from previous
days are not available from the professor. You do not need to send doctors’ notes (or the like) to us
when absent. We have built into the course structure ways to either make up or drop work regardless of
circumstance. These include:
• Automatic drop of 1 missed or low quiz grade
• Automatic drop of 1 in-class poll
• Automatic drop of 1 discussion post
• The optional final exam on May 19th to replace a missing or low in-class exam grade
Cheating, Dishonesty
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
Core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
Academic dishonesty is cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records,
and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty
includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or


an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. These are the course
guidelines and you must adhere to them. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the University. Please read at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php. (Links to
an external site.)
Among the activities that fit with the above policies are: participating in an in-class poll while not in
class (unless you have prior written approval from the professor) and looking at peers exams during
exam time.
Counseling, Mental Health
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there is support!
For immediate support:
     • Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
        3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
     • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     • CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please
        leave a message if she is unavailable
     • Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     • MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     • Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Course Instructor Survey (CIS)
These are taken in the last week of class and I will set aside class time to do ours.
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ctl/ecis/
Course Objectives, Format
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course is designed to help students understand the psychology of persuasion and consumer
behavior. It is an overview of key psychological concepts and theories as they relate to marketing,
advertising and public relations. The ultimate goal of this course is to provide an understanding of the
psychology behind advertising and public relations planning, execution, and impacts.
This course meets your 3-credit UT Core Requirement for Social and Behavioral Science (SB).
COURSE FORMAT
Lectures supplement and complement the readings by providing focus and additional insight on the
major topics. You will take weekly online quizzes via Canvas on the readings each week. Required
coursework also includes in-class polls (which will count for attendance), in- and out-of-class Canvas
discussion posts, earning 2 points for participation in research studies, and three in-class exams (see
schedule for dates).
CANVAS: Students should keep up daily with their performance in the class, pick up lecture materials,
check for other course content and new assignments, participate in quizzes and discussions and check
grades and announcements on Canvas https://utexas.instructure.com.
Discussion Posts, polls
We will collect data using Canvas polls to serve as periodic attendance. These are NOT announced ahead
of time and record geo-location, so you have to be in-class to get credit for participating. I will drop one.


I also require periodic discussion posts on Canvas. These will be responses to questions I pose to the
class. I will drop one. Sometimes they will be in class, and sometimes assigned as homework.
PLEASE NOTE: IF YOU ATTEMPT TO EARN CREDIT ON AN IN-CLASS POLL OR POST FROM OUTSIDE THE
LECTURE HALL (and the discussion is meant for in-class), THIS WILL BE CONSIDERED ACADEMIC
DISHONESTY AND SUBJECT TO THE UNIVERSITY POLICIES FOR CHEATING.
Exams
Three in-class exams are scheduled during the term. See the Canvas Calendar for the scheduled dates.
Exams will cover materials presented in class and from assigned readings. Each in-class exam will
multiple choice and cover the 1/3 of the class up to that day.
A study guide will be provided about one week prior to each in-class exam.
After the exams are graded and the grades are posted, students will be given ONE WEEK to look over
the exam during office hours. Any concerns about the grading of each test must be resolved during this
one-week period.
The only make-up option is a cumulative optional make-up exam – this policy applies to anyone who has
missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who wants to try to improve an existing exam grade.
The optional make-up exam grade will replace the lowest in-class examination only if it is higher.
Otherwise, it will not be included in the calculation of the final grade. If anyone misses a regularly
scheduled examination for any reason, then she/he must take the optional final exam. The exam is given
during our scheduled final exam time.
The optional makeup exam will be the same length as other exams and students will receive a study
guide. You will be given the same amount of time to take the exam as for an in-class exam. It will be
Tues May 19 at 9 a.m. There is no way to know now if you will want to take the optional exam, so
schedule travel at your own risk.
Grading, Grades
QUIZZES                      14%
POLLS                        14%
DISCUSSION POSTS             20%
EXAMS                        50%
RESEARCH                      2%
FINAL GRADES are NOT rounded up or down. For example, a B- is inclusive of all scores 80.000 through
83.999%.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93.999
B+ = 87-89.999
B = 84-86.999
B- = 80-83.999
C+ = 77-79.999
C = 74-76.999
C- = 70-73.999
D+ = 67-69.999
D = 64-66.999
D- = 60-63.999
Note: I do not respond the way you hope when you email me at the end of the semester about your
need for an extra .2 point to get a certain grade. Cutoffs are listed so you can work from day 1 to ensure
you are not on the edge by the end.


Identity, Discrimination
I am the Stan Richards School's Minority Liaison and I work extensively with minority and LGBTQI
students. Please lean on me as needed. I have experience helping students navigating identity-related
challenges, including racism and homophobia. To see some of the work we are doing in SRS, please visit
https://advertising.utexas.edu/about/diversity-commitment (Links to an external site.)
For other UT supports, visit:
     • The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual
         misconduct and discrimination. You can file a report of discrimination via online form, call to
         report discrimination at 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu.
     • The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing
         federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive
         federal financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination
         covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
     • The Equal Emplloyment Opportunityy Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal
         laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a
         protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in
         Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
     • Gender and sexuality support: https://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/
     • Facing Asian Stereotypes: https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/modelminority.html
     • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
Moody Writing Support
THE MOODY COLLEGE WRITING SUPPORT PROGRAM
The program, located in BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students seeking to
improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have specialists in Journalism, RTF,
CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen core writing skills in
each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-hour appointments on
our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing process.
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting
Optional Final
An optional comprehensive make-up examination will be offered at our designated final exam time; it is
a make-up option for anyone who has missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who wants to try
to improve her/his course grade. This exam will replace the lowest regular in-class examination only if it
is higher. Otherwise, it will not be counted. This is the only make-up opportunity if any test was missed
for any reason – this includes sick days, travel or emergencies. It is the same format and length as an in-
class exam and you will be given the same amount of time as you are given for in-class exams, so show
up at the starting time.
THE DATE IS TUES May 19 at 9 am
Location is TBA
Professionalism
Professionalism
Please use a respectful tone when addressing me or your peers. Remain attentive and engaged in
lecture. Arrive at class on time, do not pack up early, and stay for the entire class period (or until
dismissed). Please refrain from distracting behaviors like watching movies in class or surfing the web.


Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence. Lecture notes from previous
days are not available from the professor.
Attitude and professionalism will be considered in determining final class professionalism grade.
Quizzes
Quiz 1 is a review of the course policies.
Aside from Quiz 1, all other quizzes are available on Canvas, are timed for 10 minutes, focus only on the
book, and consist of 8 questions each.
Quizzes are due by class time on the days noted on the class schedule below.
Quizzes disappear after the deadline and are not available for future studying, so look at results
carefully.
If a quiz is accidentally left up and you take it late, it will eventually be changed to a 0.
It is suggested that you complete the readings for the week, take notes and then take the quiz.
I will drop your one lowest quiz grade – this includes forgotten quizzes, sick days, travel, emergencies or
technical failures. You have one week from the day a grade is posted to resolve disputes.
NOTE: Sometimes Canvas crashes or freezes – I am not likely available the hours right before class.
Religious Holy Days
Notify us of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day,
especially if you must miss class, an exam, assignment, or project.
Research Study Participation Requirement
Research Participation
You must earn 2 research credits via studies that will become available throughout the semester at
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.). I do not honor research points
from other departments or schools. Do not take a study more than once (e.g., to meet another class’
requirements) or the credit will be voided. You will not receive extra credit in this class for participating
in more than 2 studies, although you may have additional research requirements in other classes.
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.)
Safety Concerns
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Sexual Harassment, gender discrimination, Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff


member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Students with Accommodations
The University provides academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Please arrange to take your exams in the SSD facility.
Remind me to send the exam there before the scheduled exam date, and have them email the exam
back to me for grading.
For other accommodations, please work with your TA and I to ensure your needs are met. If we are not
meeting your needs, please contact us so that we can do so. We want to help!
Textbook, Internet Access
Solomon, Michael R. (2017), Consumer Behavior: Buying, Having and Being (12th edition), New Jersey:
Pearson-Prentice Hall. This book is available as an ebook, value edition, global edition or as a bound
hardcover. You can find it at the Co-op, Amazon, Pearson Higher Ed, and other venues, but it is vital you
buy the correct edition as chapters and their contents map directly onto our weekly quizzes. GET THE
BOOK ASAP!
Also required – you must have a way of accessing Canvas and the Internet in class – a phone or laptop
will work.
Tutoring
Sanger Learning Center provides academic support for all UT Austin students. Each year, we help more
than 20,000 students achieve their academic potential with our free services.
Our main office is located in JES (Links to an external site.) A332 and are open Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5
p.m. Tutoring, workshops, and the Public Speaking Center have extended hours.
Come in for one-on-one (Links to an external site.) or drop-in (Links to an external site.) tutoring
Improve your study skills with a learning specialist (Links to an external site.)
Meet weekly with a peer academic coach (Links to an external site.)
Get help with public speaking assignments (Links to an external site.)
Attend a workshop (Links to an external site.)
https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
COURSE CALENDAR
 Week               Topic                                                 Reading          Quiz
 1/21-23            Intro                                                 Ch. 1
 1/28-30            Consumer & Well-being                                 Ch. 2            Q1-Course info
 2/4-6              Perception                                            Ch. 3            Q2-Ch 3
 2/11-13            Learning & Memory                                     Ch. 4            Q3-Ch 4
 2/18-20            Review & EXAM 1 (2/20)
 2/25-27            Motivation & Affect                                   Ch. 5            Q4-Ch 5
 3/3-5              Self                                                  Ch. 6            Q5-Ch 6


 3/10-12          Personality, lifestyles & values                 Ch. 7      Q6-Ch 7
 Spring break
 3/24-26          Attitudes, Dec Making                            Ch. 8, 9   Q7-Ch 8-9
 3/31-4/2         Review & EXAM 2 (4/2)
 4/07-9           Buying, Groups & Social Media                    Ch. 10, 11 Q8-Ch 10-11
 4/14-16          Income & Class                                   Ch. 12     Q9-Ch 12
 4/21-23          Subcultures                                      Ch. 13     Q10-Ch 13
 4/28-30          Culture                                          Ch. 14     Q11-Ch 14
 5/5-7            Review & EXAM 3 (5/7)
Note: Review days are also “catch-up” days to cover any remaining material.
Optional Final Exam: Tuesday, May 19, 9:00 am
