Contemporary Moral Problems - PHL 304
Summer 2019
Nicole Smith
MTWTHF 1 - 2:30 PM, WAG 308
Office hours:
Tuesday/Thursday 2:30-3:30 & by appointment (WAG 321)
                                                                               A chapel in Halden
                                                                                prison in Norway.
Chances are you’ve confronted an ethical choice recently: Should I pay someone to write my
essay or do it myself? Should I refuse the plastic straw or not worry about it? Ought I give my
spare change to the homeless person or walk on by? Should I donate blood or can it wait
until next time? Should I report the harassment I witnessed or pretend it didn’t happen? By
contrast, there are many other ethical questions that you may never have explicitly
considered, but that nonetheless apply to you, such as: Should I give up a healthy organ to a
dying stranger? Is it wrong to use non-human animals as a food source? Is it permissible to
buy clothes that contribute to child labor and unsafe working conditions? A further set of
questions in ethics concerns the moral status of institutions or policies: what moral (and
legal) constraints or permissions should exist with respect to decisions related to both the
beginning of life (e.g., the ethics of abortion) and the end of life (e.g., the ethics of
euthanasia)? Is the institution of punishment justified? This course will introduce you to five
contemporary moral problems and provide you with the skills necessary for critically
evaluating proposed solutions to those problems.
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                               1


Required textbook
No textbook required for this course. All readings will be made available on Canvas.
Course requirements and grading policies
5% – first exercise
5% – second exercise
20% – 5 in-class quizzes
30% – first in-class essay
30% – second in-class essay
10% – participation
Attendance
Attendance is required. It will be tracked using Canvas. You are permitted 6 absences over
the course of the semester, beyond that one point will be deducted from your overall grade
for each class missed thereafter. Example: if at the end of the semester, your total grade is a
90, yet you’ve missed seven classes, then your final grade will be an 89 (that’s a B+ as
opposed to an A-).
Participation
Participation is required. You will be given the opportunity to participate at the beginning of
each class with a participation question. Completing this question will also track your
attendance. Answering them thoughtfully will be required for getting a B or better in this
category. You are strongly encouraged to contribute to the discussion during class time or
office hours in order to receive an A.
Quizzes
There will be quizzes on all the major topics. The purpose of the quizzes is to ensure that you
are understanding the material so that you will be prepared to write about these topics on
the in-class essay exam.
Essay exams
There will be two in-class essay exams that will test your knowledge of the material as well as
your ability to think critically about the issues you’ve learned. Your essay will be completed
on your computer and uploaded onto Canvas during class time, so don’t forget to bring
your laptop with you.
Course flag
This course carries the Ethics flag. It is designed to equip you with the skills necessary for
making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. You will be introduced to
theories, concepts, and methods that will enable you to apply ethical reasoning to real-life
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                             2


situations. You will be required to think critically about various ethical viewpoints, and, most
importantly, to reevaluate your own ethical opinions.
Content alert
This course will, at times, be emotionally demanding. We will be applying “cold” analytic
thought and reasoning to issues that may very well be relevant to you personally. Please
consider this factor when deciding whether the course is right for you.
Policies
Classroom etiquette
Laptops and other electronic devices (tablets, cell phones, etc.) are not permitted for use
during class unless you have a documented accommodation letter from Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD).
Final grade scale policy
                                100% to 94% = A                 93% to 90% = A-
 89% to 88% = B+                87% to 84% = B                  83% to 80% = B-
 79% to 78% = C+                77% to 74% = C                  73% to 70% = C-
 69% to 68% = D+                67% to 64% = D                  63% to 60% = D-
 59% and below = F
Late policy
I will permit makeups only for medical reasons, jury duty, family emergencies, or related
documented emergencies, and for observance of a religious holiday (for more information
see: <http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/>). I will do my best not to
schedule assignments that interfere with religious observance, but if such a conflict arises
please let me know as soon as possible so that we can make arrangements for you to make
up the relevant assignment. Documentation for all other excuses will be required.
Students with disabilities
Reasonable accommodation will be made for students with verifiable disabilities. Information
about disability services is located here on the following webpage:
<http://www.utexas.edu/disability/>. If you are a student with a disability, please contact
Services for Students with Disabilities and inform me of any pertinent information early on in
the semester, so that I may provide you with proper accommodations.
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                              3


Academic integrity
Absolutely no plagiarism will be tolerated. This means that your ideas and writing must be
your own. For more information on the university’s official policy on academic honesty use
the following link: <http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php>.
Emergency policy
See the information following the course schedule.
Course Schedule
 Introductory week
 Week 1: June 6th - 7th
 Thursday: No readings.
 Friday: First exercise due
 Reproductive technology
 Week 2: June 10th -14th
 Monday:
 Required reading: Nicholas Bostrom “Human Genetic Enhancements: A Transhumanist
 Perspective” (Files).
 Tuesday:
 Required reading: S. Matthew Liao “Selecting children: The ethics of reproductive genetic
 engineering” (Files).
 Wednesday: Re-read previous
 Reproductive justice
 Thursday:
 Required reading: Dorothy Roberts “Race and the New Reproduction” (Files).
 Friday:
 Required reading: Amy Berg “Abortion and Miscarriage”
 Mass incarceration
 Week 3: June 17th - 21st
 Monday:
 Required reading: Michelle Alexander “The Color of Justice” (Files).
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                        4


 Tuesday:
 Required reading: Michael Huemer “America’s Unjust Drug War” (Pages).
 Wednesday:
 Required reading: Laurie Shrage “When Prostititution is Nobody’s Business” (Pages).
 Thursday: Review day
 Friday: First in-class essay
  Immigration
 Week 4: June 24th - 28th
 Monday::
 Required reading: Shelley Wilcox “The open borders debate on immigration” (Files).
 Tuesday:
 Required reading: Michael Huemer “Is there a right to immigration?” (Pages).
 Wednesday:
 Re-read previous and listen to interview with Suketu Mehta (Pages).
 Implicit bias
 Thursday:
 Required reading: Angela Smith “Implicit Bias, Moral Agency, and Moral Responsibility”
 Friday: Re-read previous
 Eating non-human animals
 Week 5: July 1st - 5th
 Monday:
 Required reading: Sebo and Schlottmann “Moral Status” (Files).
 Tuesday:
 Required reading: Cora Diamond “Eating Meat and Eating People” (Files).
 Wednesday: Re-read previous
 Religious evil
 Thursday:
 Required reading: Daniel Kodaj “Religious Evil: The Basic Issues” (Files).
 Friday: Re-read previous
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                     5


  Concluding week
  Week 6: July 8th - 11th
  Monday:
  Required reading: TBD
  Tuesday: Review day
  Wednesday:
  Second in-class essay
  Thursday:
  Second exercise due
*The instructor reserves the right to change the course schedule with appropriate notification to
students.
Emergency procedure
The Interim Provost has asked me to share this important information about emergency procedures
with you.
Students requiring assistance during an emergency should notify me as soon as possible.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL: 512-232-5050). This is the number to call if you have concerns
about the behavior of a person.
Instructions for lock down vs. shelter in place
The directive “Lockdown” is used to protect occupants in proximity of an immediate threat by
limiting access to buildings and rooms. If no specific locations are given, all buildings should initiate
lockdown procedures. Should you discover that there is a violent or potentially violent person in
your building or area, DO NOT CONFRONT THE PERSON UNLESS THERE IS NO OTHER OPTION
TO SAVE YOUR LIFE.
If you are outside a building in lockdown:
1. DO NOT ENTER THE BUILDING. Move as far away as possible from the building under lockdown.
2. Await further instructions from law enforcement.
3. Check the university’s website and university social media sites for updates and further information
as it becomes available.
4. DO NOT CALL THE LOCATION THAT IS IN LOCKDOWN. Phone calls to anyone inside the
building that is in lockdown may endanger them.
5. DO NOT LEAVE YOUR SAFE AREA until law enforcement has opened the door.
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                                       6


If the threat is inside your building:
Follow the 5 OUTS
1. GET Out
Get OUT OF THE FACILITY if possible.
2. CALL Out
Use mobile devices to call emergency personnel at 911 or 471-4441 and provide relevant
information. High mobile phone volume may interfere with emergency communications and should
be limited to contact with emergency personnel only.
3. KEEP Out
Do not lock exterior doors. Close, lock, and barricade interior doors, if possible.
4. HIDE Out
Seek shelter in the nearest secured place, i.e. classroom or office. Turn off lights and any devices that
may indicate that the room is occupied. If you are on the first floor, close any window blinds or
curtains. Stay away from doors and try to keep out of the line of sight. Sit or lie on the floor or crouch
behind or under desks. Be as invisible as possible. BE QUIET. DO NOT respond to anyone at the
door while in lockdown mode. Law enforcement will announce themselves and release anyone in that
room when it is safe. Should the fire alarm be activated during a lockdown, wait for direction on the
building PA System or from the police before evacuating if there is no immediate danger. If there is
smoke or fire present, you may need to evacuate.
5. TAKE Out
Last resort. Use anything to distract or disable the suspect.
Shelter in place:
For weather:
1. Go to the lowest level of the building if possible.
2. Stay away from the windows.
3. Go to interior hallways and rooms.
4. Use arms to protect head and neck in a “drop and tuck” position.
5. Monitor emergency communications for specific instructions (www.utexas.edu/ emergency).
For environmental incidents (chemical, biological, or radiological releases):
1. Go inside the nearest building.
2. Close all doors, windows, and other inlets from the outside.
3. Shut down the fresh air intake or HVAC system if possible.
4. Monitor emergency communications for specific instructions (www.utexas.edu/ emergency).
Evacuation
For evacuation in your classroom or building:
1. Follow the instructions of faculty and teaching staff.
2. Exit in an orderly fashion and assemble outside at least one block from the building.
3. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by emergency personnel.
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                                      7
