                             PUBLIC COPY – Detailed Syllabus on Canvas
ANS 361/HIS 364G Spring 2019                                                       Dr. Chiu-Mi Lai
History of Food and Healing in China and Taiwan
MWF 12-1 pm
                            [All lectures, discussion and readings in English.]
Global Cultures
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with
cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Required Texts: (available at the University Co-op Bookstore)
E.N. Anderson, The Food of China (Yale, 1990)
Paul U. Unschuld, trans. Karen Reimers, What is Medicine – Western and Eastern Approaches to
          Healing (University of California Press, 2009)
Additional Readings (selections available on Canvas/Files)
Course Description
          Key Course Concepts: Well-being and healing; Food as medicine
 (No background in Chinese language, culture or history required.)
In Chinese history, food and healing shared the same set of cosmological assumptions, all of
which had to do with harmonizing the “vital energy,” “breath” or “life force” (qi 氣) of the body
with the mind. The Chinese holistic approach to the concept of “well-being” by eating, taking
medicine and engaging in healing arts, was to ensure that all of these activities created a healthy
balance. Lectures, discussion and coursework will focus on the cultural, historical, philosophical,
social, and scientific background against which the connection between food and healing has
evolved through history. The course will address how this holistic approach has manifested in
China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan today, and form the basis of final research inquiry projects,
some of which may also be applied to greater Austin and Houston locales.
          Introduction – What is the connection of food and healing in Chinese history?
          Section I – Concepts of well-being, the mind and body, “health and healing”
          Section II – History of food, connection between food and healing, food as medicine
          Section III – Healing Practices in China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan
COURSE EXPECTATIONS
This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
                                                                                                                       1


The grade for this course will be based on the following (see below for details):
      There is no written final exam.
      There is a class attendance policy.
I. 20%           Class and online discussion, participation and “preparedness” (informal
                 writing)
II. 50%          Reading and Discussion “Quizzes” (2/15, 3/13, 4/5)
III. 10%         One Oral Presentation on Section II Panels ( Food of China, 2/27-3/8)
IV. 20%          Final Research Inquiry Project and Presentation on Section III Topics (Healing
                 Practices in China, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and Greater Austin) (due 5/10)
ATTENDANCE POLICY – More than 5 unexcused absences, your final class
discussion/participation grade will result in a failing grade.
It is your responsibility to inform me regarding extenuating circumstances.
         More than 10 absences will result in a failing grade for the course.
     Religious Holidays – Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination
     schedules. If you miss an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the
     observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work
     missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of The University of
     Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior
     to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
                                                                                                2


                                 SCHEDULE OUTLINE
Weeks 1-4 (1/23)   Section I Concepts of well-being, the mind and body, “health and healing”
   DQ 1 2/15
Weeks 5-8 (2/18)    Section II History of food
     Panel Group Presentations on Food of China (Week 6: 2/27, 3/1; Week 7 3/4, 3/6, 3/8)
     DQ 2 3/13
                     [Week 9 (3/18)         Spring Break – no classes]
Weeks 10-11         Section II Connection between food and healing, Food as medicine
   DQ 3 4/5
   Field trip 4/6
Weeks 12-14 (4/8)   Section III Healing Practices in China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan
 Approval of Final Project Proposal – short proposal with list of sources due by class time
  Monday 4/15. Late proposals will result in a half grade deduction of Written Presentation
  grade of Final Project paper.
 4/19-4/26: Small group work on projects (organized by topic)
Weeks 15-16 (4/29) Oral Presentations of Final Projects
   4/29-5/8 Final Project presentations and discussion
   5/10 Writing Day – no class session; instructor available in office
      FINAL PROJECT REPORTS DUE BY 11:59 P.M. FRIDAY 5/10 ON
      CANVAS/ASSIGNMENTS. No LATE assignments will be accepted
                                                                                             3


Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is created
for each course. Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to
post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys.
You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. As with
all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions.
Notifications of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an
excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will make an
adjustment if it occurs close to the due date.
Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday
through Friday 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
The UT Library
The UT Library offers resource help and many services. The following link is for Undergraduate Students:
     Website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
The Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing to UT
undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment. Location: PCL 2.330.
           Website: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
(Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students)
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be
checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating
your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for checking
your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of the University, your e-
mail address in Canvas is your employee address.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                                                                                                                   4
