                                    Introduction to Jewish Studies
                                                  Fall 2019
                                                Hybrid Version
                                    JS 311 * ANT 310L * MES 310 * RS 313
                                38625 31050             39920            42005
                                               M-W-F 12pm-1pm
                              Dates highlighted in yellow = Meet in ​MEZ 2.124
                      All other classes livestreamed online in my Zoom meeting room:
                                        https://zoom.us/j/3202806665
                                  Instructor: Dr. Amelia Rosenberg Weinreb
                                       amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu
                                           WhatsApp: 737-781-2539
                                     Office hours scheduled upon request
                Technical support for Zoom: Dr. Mattew Russell, Faculty Innovation Center
                        matthew.russell@austin.utexas.edu​, SZB 405, 512-232-6053
                                                     * * *
1. ​Course Description
This survey course aims to expose students to major themes in Jewish Studies through guest lectures
by UT faculty who work in the field. It is recommended for motivated undergraduates in any discipline
with an intellectual curiosity about Jewish Studies, but requires no previous knowledge of Jewish
religion, ethnicity, or culture. The material in the course is not designed be comprehensive, but rather
provides a curated sample of lectures and core topics​.​ This semester, the course is organized around
three thematic units: 1) ​Exile and Diaspora, 2) Jewish Identity, and 3) Jewish Ethics. ​Students are
encouraged to consider course materials comparatively, in view of both their distinct features and their
overarching threads, and defend positions through evidence based both on lectures and the course
reader. Student discussion leaders, designated in advance, will raise questions, stimulate debate, and
integrate ideas into our collective analysis.
Hybrid version​: Note that this year’s course is hybrid. That means some of the course learning activity
has been moved online, making it possible to reduce the amount of time spent in the classroom, and
instead live-stream from your device. The weekly rhythm of the course is generally as follows:
Wednesdays and Fridays, in the classroom:​ Various faculty affiliated with Jewish Studies will visit the
classroom and deliver lectures concentrating on their period, geographical area, and field of research as


they relate to the thematic unit at hand. Dr. Tatjana Lichtenstein lichtens@austin.utexas.edu , Director
of the Schusterman Center for Jewish Studies will attend all lectures, and take attendance, but student
volunteers will be assigned to introduce each guest lecturer, a special professionalization opportunity.
Mondays, streamed online by​ logging into​ ​Zoom​ and using this link to join the class in my “Zoom
meeting room”:​ ​https://zoom.us/j/3202806665​, wherever you are comfortable, during the scheduled
class time:12pm-1pm. Mondays online are a series of lively, fast-paced, interactive meetings in which
we discuss the readings and lectures from the week prior. These discussions are led by students,
livestreamed to your device, and facilitated by Dr. Weinreb. You may livestream from any location that
is convenient for you, as long as you can focus, hear clearly, and participate fully. The dates of the
classroom lectures and activities are highlighted in yellow in the syllabus schedule below livestreamed
or self-paced lessons online are listed, but not highlighted in yellow. Note that Dr. Weinreb will also
visit three times during the semester to lead workshops and seminars in the classroom. If you have
questions about this hybrid format, please see this FAQ.
Course flags
This course carries both a ​Global Cultures​ and ​Ethics​ flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of non-U.S. Jewish groups, past and present. Courses carrying the Ethics Flag equip you with
the tools necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. Courses carrying this
flag expose you to ethical issues and to the process of applying ethical reasoning. This course exposes
students to Jewish Ethics and its application.
2. Course Reading, Materials, and Ideal Streaming Environment
Readings: ​All required readings and links to required videos are posted on as a hyperlink in the syllabus,
and also under files in Canvas.
Materials​: a) I recommend a good pair of earbuds/headphones so you can hear and concentrate
during streaming if you are streaming on your own; b) Make sure your laptop or phone is fully charged,
or in a location where you can charge during online class time. You would not want to run out of
battery in the middle of a class!; c) A clearly labelled notebook for taking hand-written notes exclusively
for this course. No computers are phones are allowed during the lectures (strictly enforced). d) A pen
that is satisfying to write with, and always easy to locate at the beginning of class.
Streaming Environment:​ a) Test out the quality and speed of your connection with Zoom in your
favorite location for streaming (e.g. dorm rooms do not always have the best receptivity/connections).
Dr. Russel or I am happy to test it out with you!); b) Make sure you are in an environment in which you
can comfortably speak out loud without feeling self-conscious or bothering others; c) When you are
leading group discussion, I recommend sitting together with your group and Zoom from the same
computer; d) Our classroom will always be available for streaming on the big screen to participate in
class together, if that is your preferred Zooming environment. We will perform a test run the first week
of class so all students are familiar with how to get online, project, and adjust settings, etc.
                                                                                                          1


Course objectives
Upon completion of the course, students will have developed the written, oral, and recall skills to be
able to:
● Articulate central themes of the Jewish experience over time
● Place course units within in a wider context of Jewish Studies as a field
● Converse, with historical and ethnographic accuracy, about a range of contemporary social issues for
Jews
● Write brief, clear, detailed essays that connect diverse lectures and readings, displaying a command
of facts and examples to support arguments
● Produce relevant notes during lectures
● Engage comfortably in discussion and debate in both the online and face-to-face seminar classroom
4. Important note on physical classroom etiquette and vibe​ ​during guest lectures:
Regular attendance in both online and live portions of the course is not only the key to your own
success as a student in this course, but also for the quality of the course as a dynamic whole. Arriving
late and leaving early disrupts guests lecturers and class flow, so make every effort to arrive to class a
few minutes early so get situated with a notebook and pen. Students will be asked to place their
phones on silent and deposit them at the front of classroom when they enter, and all course notes are
taken by hand in a notebook unless you provide a note from SSD. Please do not eat or make distracting,
crinkly snacking noises during guest lectures. Dr. Tatjana Lichtenstein will attend all guest lectures and
be available for any issues related to course administration.
5. Overview of Grade Distribution
25% Attendance and participation
15% Discussion leadership and memo
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 1:​ ​Exile and Diaspora
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 2: Jewish Identity
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 3: Jewish Ethics
7. Explanation of Grade Distribution
 ​Attendance and participation (25%)​ Students are permitted 4 absences for both classroom and online
sessions, no questions asked. After that, their total overall grade is reduced by 2% following each,
subsequent absence.​ ​In addition to being polite, attentive audience members during guest lectures,
students will be graded on their regular, active, intellectually rigorous contribution to the seminar
component of the course, and on displaying evidence of careful reading of assigned texts.
Discussion leadership and response memo (15%): ​A group of 4 students, delegated in advance,
facilitate the discussion or an activity based on their reading memos. Each student will do this ​once
during the semester. I will generally provide the group with a shared grade unless there are individuals
who contributed significantly less or more to leadership and discussion. Take the time to communicate
with fellow group members to produce a smooth, organized, meaningful dialogue. Note that the best
                                                                                                           2


practice is for discussion leaders to sit together and Zoom from a single laptop on the day of leadership.
The classroom is always open for your convenience during course hours.
How to write a reading response memo (​V+, V, V-​ evaluation)
On the day that you lead discussion with your group, ​each individual in that group​ will write a
separate, 1-page "memo" in response to the day’s reading. Completing the memo properly includes the
following steps :
a) ​Memo:​ A ​200-250​-word, clear, focused response to ​one ​of these prompts: What theme leapt out to
you? What bothered you in the reading or lecture? How was the reading or lecture related to more
general course themes, other course material and how? What content interested you most and why?
What quote stood out in your mind, and why? ​Your response must refer directly to ​both​ the week’s
lecture and reading, including page citations.
b) ​Questions:​ At the bottom of the page, ​include two questions​ for discussion, debate, or further
thought, related directly to themes in the reading. Come prepared to share your ideas in class.
c) ​Proofread and cite​: Remember, even if the assignment is short, ​write clearly and proofread as
carefully​ as you would for any graded assignment. Include page citations and a literature cited at the
bottom of the page.
D)​ Submission: Send your memo to me via email at amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu by 9pm, the
night before you lead discussion, and have a copy handy during the discussion itself.
3 short papers (20% each).​ For each of the three short papers in this course, the prompt is the same:
In 500-700 words, pose a question that can be addressed/answered by material in ​two​ of the lectures
and their readings in the unit. Please follow these requirements:
a) ​State your question clearly in​ ​bold font​. These questions should be designed to be engaging,
thought-provoking or informative.
b) ​Address your question.​ The answer can be creative, and include reflections, reactions, critical
commentaries or overviews. However, the short papers will be rigorously graded on their writing
quality, as well as their ​attention to facts, examples and details​ from two lectures and their
accompanying readings, citing page numbers
d) ​Cite all references​ following the Chicago Manual of Style, and include a literature cited section.
8.Grading
Grades in this course will be based on the following scale:
A         95-100%
          Excellent​ grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides relevant details and
          examples; draws clear and interesting connections, exceptionally original, coherent and
          well-organized; ideas clearly written/stated, outstanding classroom participation
A-        90-94
          Very good​ grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides relevant details and
          examples; draws clear connections; ideas clearly written/stated
B+         85-89%
          ​Good​ grasp of some elements above, others need work
                                                                                                        3


B         83-84%
          Satisfactory​ grasp of some elements above
B-        80-82%
          Uneven, spotty​ grasp of the elements above
C+         75-79 %
          Limited​ grasp of the above
C         73-74%
          Poor ​grasp of the above
C-         70-72%
          Very poor​ grasp of the above
D         60-69%
          Little evidence​ of grasp of material, having done readings, attended class,
          or completed assignments
F         0-59%
          No evidence​ of having done readings, attended class, or completed
          assignments, or plagiarized.
9​.​ Notes on Grading Policy and Support for Students​:
Complete written assignments on time:​ I am committed to returning assignments to you promptly so
you can benefit from my feedback while material is fresh in your mind. I do not grade papers or exams
until I have the entire printed set in front of me. For these reasons, ​I do not accept late assignments​.
Bring a hard copy at the beginning of class on the day it is due. If you anticipate a problem, or have a
history of deadline problems, meet with a consultant at the learning or writing center to help you plan
ahead.
The UT Learning Center: ​http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: ​http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Grading policy​: I am very happy to discuss how you may improve your work, and will read early drafts,
but ​I will not reconsider grades on papers​. I grade all the papers in a set to ensure that I am applying
the same standards, and I make every effort to be fair.
Plagiarism and copying​: Although this course is designed for creative, individual work and synthesis of
ideas from various sources, any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be
the student's own work. Should copying occur from another student, both the student who copied
work and the student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the
assignment.
Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
disciplinary action. Here are University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of
plagiarizing: ​http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/faculty/plagiarism/preventing.html
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
                                                                                                           4


Using office hours, getting help:​ ​I check email regularly, will usually reply to emails within 24 hours for
basic questions. Feel welcome to take advantage of office hours (by appointment).
10.University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. In this
course, that means we will all work to ensure that the discussion space is shared relatively equally
among the participants, and to maintain an atmosphere of respect for each other’s perspectives and
arguments, especially when there are strong disagreements.
Students with disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Please contact me as early in the semester as possible to let me know if you need anything to
participate fully.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, students are required to notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will certainly give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
11. Course Schedule: ​The syllabus below represents my current plans and objectives. As we go through
the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class. Such changes, communicated
clearly, are not unusual and should be expected​.
Note 3 short paper deadlines:
Paper#1 due: Wed. 10/2
Paper#2 due: Mon. 11/4
Paper#3 due: Mon. 12/2
 Date            Topics                    Reading: complete ​prior​ t​ o class            Assignments
                                    Unit 1: Introduction and Orientation
                                                                                                              5


W     Intro to the course and
8/28 its structure
Fri.  Getting used to Zoom    Watch “Lecture” 1: Simon Schama’s “The Story
8/30 technology with Dr.      of the Jews” (2014). Episodes 1 and 2.
      Matt Russell            The story of the Jews.
                              Episode 1, The beginning -
      Developing basic        Episode 2, Among believers -
      knowledge of Jewish     The Story of the Jews​ is now available online.
      HIstory                 See
                              https://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/record=b918200
                              3~S4​. (this is a link to all 5 episodes). Later
                              today each episode will have its own entry on
                              the catalog.
M 9/2 Labor Day, NO CLASS     Complete Schama, Episodes 3-5.
                              The story of the Jews. Episode 3,
                              A leap of faith -
                              The story of the Jews. Episode 4,
                              Over the rainbow -
                              The story of the Jews.
                              Episode 5, Return -
                              The Story of the Jews​ is now available online.
                              See
                              https://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/record=b918200
                              3~S4​.
                                     Unit 2: Exile and Diaspora
                                                                               6


W 9/4 Lecture 1: “The          “The Historical Background of the Caribbean
      Sephardim: Diasporas Sephardi Diaspora" (Bodian 2013)
      within a Diaspora.” with
      Dr. Miriam Bodian        Available on Canvas under “files”
F 9/6 Lecture 2: Amy Vidor on Nuit et Brouillard (​ ​Night and Fog​), dir. Alain
      Auchwitz and Algeria Resnais (1955),​ ​https://vimeo.com/189672641
                               [Dr. Vidor has requested I note students are
                               aware that the film includes images of death
                               camps]
M 9/9 Student Discussion, on .                                                   Student discussion
      Simon Schama’s 5-part,                                                     group 2: Email memo
      “The Story of the Jews,”                                                   by 9pm Sun. night
      Bodian and Vidor
W     Lecture 3: "Why Jewish   Listen to Podcast:​ “​Why American Jewish
9/11 History Matters: How a    History Matters" with Hasia Diner
      small people helps us
      ask big questions" with  https://www.jewishhistory.fm/american-jewish
      Dr. Jason Lustig         -history-with-hasia-diner/
                                                                                                     7


F 9/13 Lecture 4: Martha    Note that each of these readings are short (1
       Newman “Jews and the page or so): 1. The Chronicle of Solomon Bar
       Crusades”            Simson (Posted on Canvas)).
                            2. Letters of Bernard of Clairvaux
                            https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/prima
                            ry-texts-from-the-history-of-the-relationship/b
                            ernard-of-clairvaux​ 1146
                             3. Ephraim Ben Jacob, “The Ritual Murder
                            Accusation at Blois” 1171
                            https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/prima
                            ry-texts-from-the-history-of-the-relationship/e
                            phraim-ben-jacob-qthe-ritual-murder-accusatio
                            n-at-bloisq-may-1171
                            4. Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor “Refuting
                            Ritual Murder Accusations” 1236
                            https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/prima
                            ry-texts-from-the-history-of-the-relationship/fr
                            ederick-ii
                            5. Odo of Chateauroux, On the Jewish Talmud
                            (1247-8_
                            https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/prima
                            ry-texts-from-the-history-of-the-relationship/o
                            do-of-chateauroux-on-the-jewish-talmud-1247-
                            1248
                            6. The Black Death and the Jews 1348
                            https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/prima
                            ry-texts-from-the-history-of-the-relationship/bl
                            ack-death
M      Discuss Lectures 3-4                                                  Student discussion
9/16                                                                         group 3: Email memo
                                                                             by 9pm Sun. night
W      Lecture 5:​ ​“ The   “Galveston and Palestine: Immigration and
9/18 Galveston Movement” Ideology in the Early 20​th​ Century” (Alroey
       with Dr. Suzy Seriff 2004).
                            “When the Jews Came to Galveston” (Brawley
                            2009).
                                                                                                 8


F 9/20 Lecture 6: Itzik        “Problems and Tasks of Jewish Folklore and
       Gottesman)              Ethnology” (Patai 1946).
M      Student discussion of                                                    Student discussion
9/23 Seriff and Gottesman                                                       group 4: Email memo
                                                                                by 9pm Sun. night
Wed. Preparing for paper #1
9/25 Livestream on Zoom
Fri.   Individual paper        Sign up for individual, 10-minute consultation
9/26 consultations by appt.
M      Rosh HaShana: Getting Self-paced, pre-recorded mini lecture, no
9/30 ready for a holiday.      livestream meeting
       What do you See?
W      Discuss student papers,                                                  Paper #1 Due
10/2 Livestream on Zoom
                                       Unit 2: Jewish Identities
W      Lecture 7: “Mizrahi     “Confronting an ‘Impossible’ Identity: Poetry by
10/2 Jews and Poetry” with     Arab Jews in Israel” (Poems by Chetrit 1960 and
       Dr. Karen Grumberg      Behar 1978)
       (check on Tue)          “Revisiting Bialik: A Radical Mizrahi Reading of
                               the Jewish
                               National Poet” (Chetrit 2010).
                                                                                                    9


F 10/4 Lecture 8: “Jewish      “Moving Metaphors: Jewishness in American
       Identity in American    Modern and Postmodern Dance,” (Jackson
       Dance” with Dr.         2011).
       Rebecca Rossen
M      Student discussion of                                                Student discussion
10/7 Lecture 7 and 8                                                        group 5: Email memo
                                                                            by 9pm Sun. night
W      No class for            Self-paced, Pre-recorded mini-lecture, no
10/9 Yom Kippur: The           livestream meeting
       streets just before the
       holiest day of the
       Jewish Year. What do
       you see?
F      Lecture 8, Hebrew       "Hebrew: Eliezer Ben-Yehuda & the Revival of
10/11 Language with Sarah      Hebrew”​ ​(Fellman).
       Baker.
                               “The Past and Future of Hebrew”
                               (from ​Fair Observer​).
M      Sukkot                  Self-paced, Pre-recorded mini-lecture, no
10/13 Visiting Sukkot across livestream meeting
       the city as they are
       built and completed.
       What do you see
W      Bob Abzug “Jews in      Selections from The Atlantic
10/16 America: 1940-41”
       Dr. Bob Abzug
F      Lecture 11: Class in
10/18 the Sukkah at Hillel.
       Guest speaker: Rabi
       Trepp (check on
       Wed.)
M      Shmini Atzeret/Simhat Self-paced, Pre-recorded mini-lecture
10/20 Torah
                                                                                               10


W      Dr. Seriff, Presentation
10/22 of Internship Program
F      Round-up conversation                                                      Student discussion
10/24 Lectures 9, 10, 11                                                          group 6: Email memo
       Sukkot and Holidays                                                        by 9pm Thu. Night
       with Dr. Weinreb, in                                                       (note change in
       the classroom                                                              normal due-date).
M      Mid-semester,
10/28 slow-down, check-in,
       catch up and evaluation
       with Dr. Weinreb, in
       the classroom
W      Lecture 11: Land and     “Are Jews Indigenous to the Land of Israel?”
10/30 Identity: Are Jews        (Bellrose 2017).
       Indigenous to the land
       of Israel? ​with Dr.     “The struggle for indigenous rights extends to
       Weinreb, in the          Palestine” (Salhani 2016).
       classroom
                                “Official Definitions of Indigeneity” (a compiled
                                list).
F 11/1 Student discussion of                                                      Student discussion
       Weinreb, Preparation                                                       group 7: Email memo
       for paper #2                                                               by 9pm Thu. Night
                                                                                  (note change in
                                                                                  normal due-date).
M      Discussion of Identity                                                     Paper #2 Due
11/4
                                              Unit 3: Ethics
W      Jonathan Kaplan          Selections from the Book of Deuteronomy
11/6
                                                                                                     11


F 11/8 Jonathan Kaplan         Selections from the Book of Jonah
M      Student discussion of                                                 Student discussion
11/11 Kaplan                                                                 group 8: Email memo
                                                                             by 9pm Sun. night
W      Lecture 13 with Dr.     Watch: ​Path to Genocide:
11/13 Tatjana Lichtenstein:    https://www.ushmm.org/learn/introduction-to
       “Background on the      -the-holocaust/path-to-nazi-genocide/the-path
       Holocaust in Eastern    -to-nazi-genocide/full-film
       Europe”
F      Lecture 14 with Dr.
11/15 Tatjana Lichtenstein
       “Considering Ethical
       Dimensions of the
       Holocaust”
M      Student discussion of                                                 Student discussion
11/18 Lichtenstein                                                           group 9: Email memo
                                                                             by 9pm Sun. night
W      Lecture 15 on Exodus    Selections from the Hebrew Bible (Tanakh):
11/20 and Ethics with Dr.      Exodus. 20; Exod. 21:28-29; Exod. 21:35-36;
       Jonathan Schofer        Exod. 21:33-34; Exod. 22:4; Exod. 22:5
                               Mishnah Baba Qamma 1:1, Mishnah Sanhedrin
                               7:4 and 9:1; Mishnah Avot 1:1-4 and 2:11
F      Lecture 16 on Ethical “The Redaction of Desire,” 28-38. 45-46
11/22 Character and the        (Schofer 2003)
       Jewish Concept of the
       “Evil Impulse” with Dr.
       Jonathan Schofer
M      Student discussion of                                                 Student discussion
11/25 Schofer lectures                                                       group 10: Email
                                                                             memo by 9pm Sun.
                                                                             night
                                                                                                12


W      TG Break NO CLASS
11/27
F      TG Break NO CLASS
11/29
                          Unit 4: Closing Activities, Evaluation, Celebration
M      Overall discussion of                                                  Paper #3 Due
12/2 Ethics
W      Jewish Student Identity,
12/4 pt 1
F 12/7 Jewish Student identity,
       pt. 2
M      FINAL PARTY with food,                                                 Each student bring 1
12/9 course evaluation, unit                                                  comment or
       wrap up                                                                reflection on what
                                                                              you learned
                                                                                                   13
