The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL I
(Illumination, Acoustics & Electricity)
Unique Number: 00990 • ARC 384K & 00370 • ARI 384K
MW        10:30 to 12:00p SUT 2.114
M         07:00 to 08:00p SUT 2.114
INSTRUCTORS:
Adam Pyrek
Office: WMB 4.116A
Office hours: M 9:45 to 10:30a and by appointment
Telephone:
Email: aapyrek@utexas.edu (Include ECI in the subject)
Charles Di Piazza
Office: BTL 114A
Office hours: W 12:00 to 1:00p and by appointment
Telephone:
Email: cdp@austin.utexas.edu (Include ECI in the subject)
Teaching Assistant:                                                                  London Bridge Station | Grimshaw Architects | Photo: S. Sonner
Ken Sneed
Office hours: by appointment
Email: kensneed@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION
The core topics of Environmental Control I consist of Illumination, Acoustics, and Electricity. (This course complements
EC II: Thermal environment, water systems and management, vertical transportation, fire protection.)
Each core topic will be covered by first exploring its fundamental principles such as physics of light, sight and hearing.
Consequently the topics will be closely examined individually, as well as in relation to the other topics covered during
this semester, and when relevant, in EC II. An example of this would be the relationship between daylighting and
thermal comfort, or acoustics and natural ventilation. Throughout the semester, the content of the lectures will also
be put into context that will include site and urban factors, climate and culture, energy and environment, and
codes.
Beyond learning about today’s industry standard systems and methods, students will become familiar with alternative
ways that can allow them to go beyond fulfilling basic project and code requirements.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
The objective of this course is for graduate students to acquire an understanding of the technical material that will
allow them to become effective designers and project team-leaders. Following this survey, students should be able
to use critical thinking in order to push the selection and application of environmental control systems beyond what is
typically offered by the industry. The acquired knowledge and skills in this course should ultimately lead to more
design autonomy; a more seamless integration of systems; improved occupant comfort; and better performing and
more environmentally sensitive projects.
Some of the specific objectives of this course are for students to be able to:
     •    Have an in-depth understanding of lighting and architectural acoustic fundamentals
     •    Perform fundamental calculations relating to illumination and acoustics
    Course Syllabus • ARC 384K: Environmental Control I • Spring 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek & Charles Di Piazza • page 1 of 7


     •    Be familiar with the technical terminology needed for effective interdisciplinary communication
     •    Recognize the importance of occupant behavior in the design of daylighting and electrical illumination
     •    Have a critical understanding of the role of analytical tools (physical and digital) relating to the topics
          covered
     •    Have a basic understanding of utilization of electricity in buildings (principles, materials, systems, renewable
          technologies)
     •    Have a basic understanding of signal systems (security, communication, control and automation)
NAAB CRITERIA
National Architectural Accrediting Board “requires an accredited program to produce graduates who: are
competent in a range of intellectual, spatial, technical, and interpersonal skills; understand the historical, socio-
cultural, and environmental context of architecture; are able to solve architectural design problems, including the
integration of technical systems and health and safety requirements; and comprehend architects' roles and
responsibilities in society.”
The Student Performance Criteria as categorized under the NAAB Educational Realms that are addressed during the
EC I course are listed here:
Primary: A.3. Investigative Skills, B.6. Environmental Systems (daylighting, solar systems, lighting systems, and acoustics),
B.3. Codes and Regulations, B.9. Building Service Systems (lighting, electrical, communication, security), C.2.
Integrated Evaluations and Decision-Making Design Process, C.3. Integrative Design, D.2. Project Management
Secondary: A.1. Professional Communication Skills, A.2. Design Thinking Skills, A.3. Investigative Skills, B.4. Technical
Documentation, A.4. Architectural Design Skills, A.8. Cultural Diversity, B.1. Pre-Design, B.2. Site Design, C.1. Research,
B.7. Building Envelope Systems and Assemblies, B.8. Building Materials and Assemblies, B.10. Financial Considerations,
D.1. Stakeholder Roles in Architecture, D.4. Legal Responsibilities, D.5. Professional Conduct.
For more information reference: www.naab.org
FORMAT AND PROCEDURES
The course will consist of five complementary components: Lectures, Lab Sessions, Assigned Reading, Field Trips and
Assignments/Tests. All components will cover and mutually reinforce the same subjects, but will focus on different
aspects (theoretical, quantitative, hands-on, etc.). Effort will also be made to relate and integrate this course to the
students’ current studio work. The structured time for this semester will consist of 1-1/2 lecture hours twice per week
and a 1 hour lab once per week. Required field trips with the class and the instructor will take place during the
semester. Guest speakers may be invited in order to share their expert view and experience on specific topics.
The Canvas course management software will be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, etc. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help
Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
https://canvas.utexas.edu/
PREREQUISITE
Graduate standing and consent of the graduate adviser.
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
Schedule may be adjusted during the semester due to coordination with guest lecturers and/or trips. If the schedule
is changed, students will be notified and the updated schedule will be posted on Canvas.
                                         < SEE NEXT PAGE FOR THE TENTATIVE SCHEDULE>
    Course Syllabus • ARC 384K: Environmental Control I • Spring 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek & Charles Di Piazza • page 2 of 7


                                                 TENTATIVE SCHEDULE:
 DATE                    ACTIVITY                                                   TOPIC
23-Jan               INTRO/LECTURE             Course Introduction
28-Jan                   LECTURE               Lighting Fundamentals: Physics of Light
30-Jan                   LECTURE               Acoustics: Introduction & Fundamentals
 4-Feb                   LECTURE               Lighting Fundamentals: Light and Sight
 6-Feb                   LECTURE               Acoustics: Sound in Enclosed Spaces
11-Feb                   LECTURE               Lighting Fundamentals: Quantity & Quality of Light
13-Feb                   LECTURE               Acoustics: Building Noise Control
18-Feb                   LECTURE               Lighting Fundamentals: Color
20-Feb                   LECTURE               Acoustics: Building Noise Control
25-Feb                   LECTURE               Daylighting: Introduction
27-Feb            Field Trip/Guest Lec.        Guest Speaker and/or Site Visit
 4-Mar                   LECTURE               Daylighting: Site and Building Form Strategies
 6-Mar            Field Trip/Guest Lec.        Guest Speaker and/or Site Visit
11-Mar                   LECTURE               Daylighting: Aperture Strategies
13-Mar                   LECTURE               Light Sources
18-Mar                  NO CLASS               SPRING BREAK
20-Mar                  NO CLASS               SPRING BREAK
25-Mar                   LECTURE               Daylighting: Aperture Strategies
27-Mar                   LECTURE               Electricity
 1-Apr                   LECTURE               Artificial Lighting - Introduction & Light Fixtures
 3-Apr                   LECTURE               Electricity (Inc. Renewable Energy Tech.)
 8-Apr                   LECTURE               Artificial Lighting - Introduction & Light Fixtures
10-Apr                   LECTURE               Signal Systems
15-Apr                   LECTURE               Artificial Lighting - Applications
17-Apr            Field Trip/Guest Lec.        Guest Speaker and/or Site Visit
22-Apr                   LECTURE               Artificial Lighting - Applications
24-Apr                   LECTURE               Daylight / Artificial Lighting Integration
29-Apr                    Review               Review
1-May                    LECTURE               Daylight / Artificial Lighting Integration
6-May                 LIGHT FIXTURE            Light Fixture Show and Discussion
8-May                    No Class              Studio Reviews
 Course Syllabus • ARC 384K: Environmental Control I • Spring 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek & Charles Di Piazza • page 3 of 7


EVALUATION CRITERIA
GRADED WORK
Students will be evaluated on the following work:
ASSIGNMENTS                                  50.0% (#1-15%; #2-20%; #3-15%)
LAB WORK                                     15%
QUIZZES                                      15%
EXAM (Questions and Calculations)            10.0%
EXAM (Written Short Answers)                 10.0%
Bonus point may be earned by students for exemplary work or class participation at the instructor’s discretion.
ASSIGNMENTS, QUIZZES, AND EXAM
There will be (3) group assignments during the semester (teams will be defined by the instructor):
   • Assignment #1 - Existing Space Acoustical Analysis
   • Assignment #2 - Existing Space Daylighting Study (including Daylight Physical Model)
   • Assignment #3 - Luminaire Design and Construction
All assignments will be listed on Canvas with the final due dates. All completed assignments will be submitted
digitally via Canvas (by midnight on the due date). Do not email assignments as attachments! Due dates are
tentative and may be adjusted in order to allow for coordination with students' studio work. Teams will be assigned
by the instructor.
Quizzes will be administered using the Canvas Student App (See below), and may be giving anytime during class
time.
There will be two comprehensive exams at the end of the semester (covering assigned reading, lecture material,
field trips, labs and class discussions)
GRADING CRITERIA
A Grade Work:
     •    Has a concept that is innovative and original
     •    Is comprehensive and very well developed
     •    Shows in-depth understanding of the subject matter including the assigned text
     •    Includes exemplary supporting figures, graphs and/or models
     •    Is well written and well supported by cited references
B Grade Work:
     •    Has a concept that is strong
     •    Is comprehensive and developed
     •    Shows understanding of the subject matter including the assigned text
     •    Includes appropriate supporting figures, graphs and/or models
     •    Is well written and well supported by cited references
C Grade Work:
     •    Has a concept
     •    Is developed
     •    Shows understanding of the subject matter
     •    Has adequate figures, graphs and/or models
     •    Is well written with and is supported by cited references
D Grade Work:
     •    Fulfills some of the assignment requirements
     •    Is not developed
     •    Shows some understanding of the subject matter
     •    Has inadequate figures, graphs and/or models
     •    Is not written well and has too few relevant cited references
F Grade Work:
     •    Does not fulfill the assignment requirements
     •    Is not developed
     •    Does not show understanding of the subject matter
     •    Has no relevant figures, graphs and/or models
     •    Is not written well. Has no relevant references or references are not cited
Each of the 5 categories is worth 20%. Use Modern Language Association (MLA) format for citations. Assignments
without citations will not receive a passing grade.
    Course Syllabus • ARC 384K: Environmental Control I • Spring 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek & Charles Di Piazza • page 4 of 7


FINAL GRADE CRITERIA
A         93.33
A-        90
B+        86.67
B         83.33
B-        80
C+        76.67
C         73.33
C-        70
D+        66.67
D         63.33
D-        60
F         0
LAB WORK
Lab sessions will be held during the scheduled time on Monday nights. Some of the lab assignments will be graded
and will account for 15% of the semester’s grade. Many of the labs will complement a graded assignment. Students
should be able to complete the work during the scheduled time.
DEADLINES
Each student may hand in ONE assignment (7) calendar days late ONCE during the semester. Subsequently,
assignments will be reduced by 5% for each school day that they are late. Credit for work turned in late due to non-
scholastic reasons should be discussed with the instructor before the due date. Agreed-upon proof of the reason
needs to be provided by the student.
ATTENDANCE, PARTICIPATION, AND EQUIPMENT
Students are required to attend and participate in all lectures. Attendance may be taken at any time. Students
need to notify the instructor in advance by email if they cannot attend a lecture. Absent students must complete
the assigned reading and familiarize themselves with the content of the missed lecture. Three (3) unexcused
absences (not due to illness, or to authorized University activities) will result in a deduction of a letter-grade from the
student’s final grade. Students need to attend labs, many of which will contribute to a graded assignment, or will
count toward a lab grade.
Students are expected to fully participate during class and labs, and need to bring a calculator, pencil/pen and
paper in order to perform quick calculations when required. (Calculator: Any type will do, and does not need to be
scientific. Phone with a calculator will do. Laptops don’t count).
Students need to bring to class a device that is capable of running the Canvas Student app. This can be a phone or
tablet with an internet connection. Contact the instructor if you are not able to do so. Students are not to use
electronic devices such as laptops, tablets or phones during the lecturers without prior approval from the instructor
(except when required for quizzes or as calculators).
ASKING FOR ASSISTANCE
Each student is expected to ask for assistance when needed. This can take place right after class, or students may
schedule additional time to meet with the instructor or the TA at a later date, preferably during office hours.
   Course Syllabus • ARC 384K: Environmental Control I • Spring 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek & Charles Di Piazza • page 5 of 7


TEXTS
REQUIRED TEXTS:
Grondzik, Walter T.; Kwok, Alison G.; Stein Benjamin; Reynolds, John S. Mechanical and Electrical Equipment for
Buildings, 12th Edition. Wiley, 2014.
Tanizaki, Junichiro. In Praise of Shadows. Leete’s Island Books, 1977.
Required reading for a lecture will be assigned at the end of the previous lecture. Additional reading may be
assigned at that time. Check Canvas each week for required readings.
RECOMMENDED TEXTS:
These texts are held on reserve at the Architecture and Planning Library, or available as an Electronic Resource through the UT
Library:
Addington, D. Michelle. Smart Materials and New Technologies: For the Architecture and Design Professions. Amsterdam : Boston :
Architectural Press, 2005.
Allen, Edward; Iano, Joseph. The Architect's Studio Companion: Rules of Thumb for Preliminary Design. 4th Edition. Wiley, 2006.
Bachman, Leonard R. Integrated Buildings: The Systems Basis of Architecture. New York : J. Wiley & Sons, 2003.
Bradshaw, Vaughn. Building Control Systems, 2nd Edition. New York : Wiley, 1993.
Daniels, Klaus. The Technology of Ecological Building. Birkhauser, 1995.
Daniels, Klaus. Low-Tech, Light-Tech, High-Tech. Birkhauser, 1998.
Egan, M. David. Architectural Acoustics. New York : McGraw-Hill, 1988.
Egan, David M. Concepts in Architectural Lighting. McGraw-Hill, 1983.
Lechner, Norbert. Heating, Cooling, and Lighting: Sustainable Design Methods for Architects, 3rd Edition. Wiley, 2009.
Long, M. Architectural Acoustics. Elsevier Academic Press New York, 2005
Mendler, Sandra. The HOK Guidebook to Sustainable Design. Hoboken, N.J. : J. Wiley, 2006.
Moore, Fuller. Concepts and Practice of Architectural Daylighting. New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1985.
Phillips, Derek. Daylighting : Natural Light in Architecture. Amsterdam : Elsevier, 2004.
Rush, Richard D. The Building Systems Integration Handbook. New York : Wiley, 1986.
Watson, Donald, Climatic Design: Energy-Efficient Building Principles and Practice. New York ; St. Louis : McGraw-Hill, 1983.
OTHER RESOURCES:
ILLUMINATING ENGINEERING SOCIETY:
www.ies.org
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF ACOUSTICAL CONSULTANTS:
www.ncac.com
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY (EERE):
www.eere.energy.gov
WINDOWS AND DAYLIGHTING GROUP, LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY:
windows.lbl.gov
ENERGY STAR (A joint program of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Energy):
www.energystar.gov
THE COMMITTEE ON THE ENVIRONMENT (COTE)
network.aia.org/CommitteeontheEnvironment/Home
THE HESCHONG MAHONE GROUP, INC.
www.h-m-g.com/downloads/Daylighting/order_daylighting.htm
DAYLIGHTING PATTERN GUIDE (New Buildings Institute in partnership with the University of Idaho and University of Washington)
patternguide.advancedbuildings.net
    Course Syllabus • ARC 384K: Environmental Control I • Spring 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek & Charles Di Piazza • page 6 of 7


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fair-ness, and respect toward peers and community.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, visit the Student Judicial Services web site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone).
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
         Please notify the instructor as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
          (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
          conversion, etc.).
         Please notify the instructor as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations of any
          kind are required. For field trips, advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the
          given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
         Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
          reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
CLASS WEB SITES AND STUDENT PRIVACY
Web-based, password-protected class sites will be associated with all academic courses taught at the University.
Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available within these sites.
Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In
addition, electronic class rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in
these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room
1. For information on restricting directory information, see the General Information Catalog or go to:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
By UT Austin policy, the student must notify the instructor of pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, she/he will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
           Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit
               door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
           If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
           In the event of an evacuation, follow instructions of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
    Course Syllabus • ARC 384K: Environmental Control I • Spring 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek & Charles Di Piazza • page 7 of 7
