                         International Advertising (ADV 334, Unique# 05895)
                                            T/TH 12:30 PM – 2:00 PM
                                                       GSB 2.126
Note: The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor may be
necessary.
 Instructor: Yongwoog Andrew Jeon                                           TA: Lei (Emma) Jingchao
 Office: BMC 4.322                                                          Office: Station 12, BMC 4th Floor
 Email: yongwoog@utexas.edu                                                 Email: emma.l@utexas.edu
 Office hours: Mon 10 am - 1 pm and by Appointment                          Office hours: TBD
                “Globalization is the process by which markets integrate worldwide.”
                                          Michael Spence (an economist)
                                        “Global is shallow, the local deep”
                                          Ulf Hannerz (an anthropologist)
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is designed for students to understand persuasive communication strategies for
international markets. Markets are no longer bound with their physical locations thanks to the
rapid development of communication technologies. Or are they? To successfully address the
global market, marketers and advertisers need to fully understand “local” challenges coming
“deep” from cultural, economic, regulatory, and competitive differences. Based on theoretical
and practical understanding of the dynamic interplay between global and the local forces,
students will acquire theoretical as well as practical understandings of how to accomplish global
marketing communication goals. Thus, the core objective of this class is to develop an ability to
analyze and map out persuasive communication strategies that are effective in international
markets.
COURSE FORMAT
This course consists of lectures, in-class activities, two exams, and the final project (i.e., a
combination of an individual and team assignment). Also, students will have an opportunity to
apply what they learn to real-world examples via the final project. There will be additional
materials that are available on Canvas.
EXPECTATIONS
Students are expected to attend all lectures and actively participate in the in-class discussions.
Please note that any undocumented absence will not be excused. Students are expected to arrive
to class on time and to stay for the entire class period (or until dismissed). Random arrivals and
exits are unprofessional and distracting. Students are responsible for any information missed
during an absence from class. NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED.
REQUIRED TEXTBOOK
Mueller, Barbara (2017), Dynamics of International Advertising (3rd Ed.), New York: Peter
Lang Publishing Co.
Note: Additional readings may be posted, so be sure to check Canvas frequently.


EXAMS
There will be two in-class exams during the regularly scheduled class period. Exams are
designed to evaluate students’ understanding of core concepts or ideas covered in the lectures,
the textbook, class discussions, and in-class activities.
The optional comprehensive final exam will be offered as a make-up option for anyone who has
missed one of the two in-class exams and for anyone who wants to improve their course grade.
The final exam will replace the lowest regular in-class exam only if it is higher. Otherwise, it
will not be included in the calculation of the final grade. You must take the final exam if you
have not taken one of the regularly scheduled in-class tests. The specific time/date and the
location will be announced.
ATTENDANCE (IN-CLASS ACTIVITIES)
There will be an undetermined number of in-class activities (in-class exercise or quiz). These
assignments are designed to help students keep up with the pace of the class and to improve their
understanding of the course material. These activities will be distributed and completed during
the class time. The in-class activities cannot be made up unless the instructor excuses the absence
in advance. If you are absent and have a valid excuse (i.e., serious illness or family emergency),
you must bring the appropriate documentation on your first day back.
FINAL PROJECT (INDIVIDUAL ASSIGNMENT AND TEAM ASSIGNMENT)
The final project is designed for students to put into practice what they learn and their own
innovative thoughts about international advertising strategies. The final project consists of two
parts. The first part is an individual assignment (solely by you) that requires you to write a
business-style recommendation for the persuasive communication strategies of a US company. In
this recommendation, you need to analyze the markets in foreign countries or any market outside
of the US. Based on this analysis, you need to recommend persuasive communication strategies.
You can analyze the same non-US market as the one for your team assignment; but your
recommendation of the strategies should be for a different US-company and a different product
category. Also, please note that your performance in the team assignment will be assessed as
part of your individual assignment (5% of your individual assignment grade). Detailed rubric for
the individual assignment will be provided when the assignment is announced.
Second, in the team assignment, you will collaborate with your peers in preparing a business-
style presentation. To persuade consumers in foreign markets, you need to effectively persuade
the CEO of the brand first. With your team members, you will prepare the presentation slides,
and during class, your group will present your project. The quality of both the contents of the
project and the way in which you (as a group) verbally present your project will be evaluated.
Two classes will be dedicated to a discussion of the formats of this project, grading criteria, and
real-world samples of the international advertising strategy project. Also, by the time the project
is initiated, I will hold extra office hours for you to discuss the progress of your project. Your
team need to submit a short progress report in order to make sure that the project is on the right
track.


RESEARCH PARTICIPATION
To enhance students’ understanding in the marketing and advertising research processes and
methods, you need to participate in FOUR research studies. You can find information regarding
opportunities to participate in research on the Advertising Research Participation Pool website at
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool where you can also sign up for studies as well. Note
that you will not receive extra credit in this class for participating in more than four studies.
Also, you cannot earn extra credit if you take a study more than once. If you don’t want to
participate in the studies, please contact me to discuss alternative extra credit opportunities
before Thanksgiving (Thursday, Nov 22).
COURSE EVALUATION
Your grade in this class will be based on:
 Attendance (In-class exercise & quizzes)             10 %
 Two Exams (each 18%)                                 36 %
 Research Participation (4)                           4%
 Final Project
      Individual Assignment                           25 %
                                                      *5 % assessed from Team Assignment
      Team Assignment                                 25 %
                                                      *5% assessed based on the interim progress
                                                      report.
 Total                                                100 %
The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
A= 94-100, A-=90-93, B+=87-89, B=84-86, B-=80-83, C+=77-79, C-=70-73, D+=67-69, D=64-
66, D-=60-63. *Grades will not be rounded up or down. For example, an A- is inclusive of all
scores 90.000 through 93.999%.
GLOBAL CULTURES FLAG
This course is designated with the Global Cultures flag. That is, in this course, students will
explore the practices, beliefs, and histories of various non-U.S. cultural groups with the goal of
encouraging students to reflect on their own cultural experiences within a global context.
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HORNOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor.


By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the
future demands of a workcareer. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
Please notify me in advance of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Student with Disability at 512.471.6259 (voice) or 512.232.2937(video phone), or at
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in
advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence.
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance
DEADLINE & STANDARDS
Enlisting aid from anyone outside the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
and will be dealt with accordingly .


COURSE SCHEDULE
Below is a tentative course outline. If any change occurs, it will be announced on Canvas and
you will be held responsible for such changes. Extra readings will be announced in advance and
be available on Canvas.
  Week        Dates                                Topic                               Reading
 W1
            Aug 30       Course Introduction
 W2         Sep 4        Growth of International Advertising I                      Ch.1
            Sep 6        Growth of International Advertising II
 W3         Sep 11       The International Marketing Mix I                          Ch. 2
            Sep 13       The International Marketing Mix II
 W4         Sep 18       The International Advertising Environment I                Ch. 3
            Sep 20       The International Advertising Environment II
 W5         Sep 25       Exam Review/Guest Lecture
            Sep 27       Exam
 W6         Oct 2        The Cultural Environment I                                 Ch. 4
            Oct 4        The Cultural Environment II
 W7         Oct 9        Controlling International Advertising I                    Ch. 5
            Oct 11       Controlling International Advertising II
 W8         Oct 16       Creative Strategy and Execution I                          Ch. 6
            Oct 18       Creative Strategy and Execution II
 W9         Oct 23       Exam Review/ Guest Lecture
            Oct 25       Exam
 W10        Oct 30       Advertising Media in the International Arena I             Ch. 7
            Nov 1        Advertising Media in the International Arena II
                         *Individual and Team Assignments will be available
                         from today.
 W11        Nov 6        Digital Advertising for International Markets I            Ch.9/10
            Nov 8        Digital Advertising for International Markets II
 W12        Nov 13       Regulation & Ethics in International Markets I             Extra
            Nov 15       Regulation & Ethics in International Markets II            reading
                         (Final)Individual Assignment Due at 11:59PM.
 W13        Nov 20       The Project Week (A Model Business Report) I               Extra
                         (Final)Interim Progress Report Due at 11:59PM.            reading
            Nov 22       Thanksgiving
 W14        Nov 27       The Project Week (Format and Presentation) II              -
            Nov 29       Guest Lecture
 W15        Dec 4        (Final) Group Presentation in Class                       -
            Dec 6        (Final) Group Presentation in Class                      -
                         (Final) Group Presentation Slides Due at 11:59PM.
