                       Advanced Practicum, EDP W384V / W194, Unique # 73930/73949
                             Practicum in Counseling, EDP W384Q, Unique # 73925
                                                    Summer 2020
Instructor:                             Mike C. Parent, Ph.D. Texas Licensed Psychologist #37009
Group Supervision:                      Wednesdays, 4-7
Group Supervision Room:                 Scheduled via Microsoft Teams
Phone numbers                           Cell: 352-642-2404 (for emergencies, personal cell—don’t give out!)
Course Purpose:
The purpose of this practicum is to broaden and deepen your competencies as a therapist and as a professional.
Learning Objectives
  1. Students will apply ethical principles and guidelines of the profession and the state of Texas in the
      practice of psychology.
  2. Students will apply theories and method to the practice of psychology.
  3. Students will integrate science into the practice of psychology.
  4. Students will gain knowledge, experience, and skills related to diversity issues in the practice of
      psychology.
  5. Students will develop theoretical orientation and case conceptualization skills.
  6. Students will further their understanding of themselves as individuals, and gain an awareness of how this
      affects their work as counseling psychologists.
  7. Students will gain efficacy, confidence, and competence as therapists.
Developmental Objectives
For students who are completing their first year in practicum, the developmental objectives are to:
  1. Achieve novice therapist skill. Novices have limited knowledge and understanding of (a) how to analyze
      problems and of (b) intervention skills and the processes and techniques of implementing them. They
      learn general principles or specific techniques to use, but the student’s beginning level of experience
      limits the flexible use of these skills. Novices do not yet recognize patterns, and do not differentiate well
      between important and unimportant details; they do not have filled-in cognitive maps of how, for
      example, a given patient may move from where he/she is to a place of better functioning.
  2. Begin development of intermediate level skills in a few domains. Psychology students at the intermediate
      level of competence have coped with enough real situations to recognize some important recurring
      meaningful situational components, based on prior experience in actual situations. Generalization of
      diagnostic and interventional skills to new situations and patients is limited, and support is needed to
      guide performance.
  For students beyond their first year in practicum, the developmental objectives are to:
  1. Achieve intermediate therapist skill. Psychology students at the intermediate level of competence have
      coped with enough real situations to recognize some important recurring meaningful situational
      components, based on prior experience in actual situations. Generalization of diagnostic and
      interventional skills to new situations and patients is limited, and support is needed to guide performance.
  2. Begin development of advanced level skills in a few domains. At this level, the student can see his or her
      actions in terms of long-range goals or plans of which he or she is consciously aware. For the psychologist
      at this level of competence, a plan establishes a perspective, and the plan is based on considerable
      conscious, abstract, analytic contemplation of the problem (including review of scholarly/research
      literature as needed). The conscious, deliberate planning that is characteristic of this skill level helps
      achieve efficiency and organization. At this level, the psychologist is less flexible in these areas than the
      proficient psychologist [the next level of competence] but does have a feeling of mastery and the ability to
      cope with and manage many contingencies of clinical work. Recognition of overall patterns, of a set of
      possible diagnoses and/or treatment processes and outcomes for a given case, are taking shape.
Achieving Objectives
Students will meet the above objectives in the following ways. Additional opportunities to meet the objectives
may also be available.
  1. Students will review ethical guidelines for the state of Texas and the profession, and explore ethical
      decision-making.
  2. Students will demonstrate their use of theoretical orientations and interventions in supervision and case
      presentations.
  3. Students will demonstrate use of research and empirically supported treatment in their case consultations
      and supervision.
  4. Students will incorporate cultural context into their therapy work, and describe cultural dynamics in
      supervision.
  5. Students will articulate their theoretical approaches to clinical work in supervision, and explore new


       modes of conceptualizing and intervening.
   6. Students will self-reflect, in supervision, on how they as individuals affect case dynamics.
   7. Students will identify specific areas of efficacy, confidence, and competence, and identify opportunities to
       reach those goals.
Methods for assessing satisfactory attainment of these learning objectives
I will evaluate attainment of the learning objectives through students’ development and attainment of
milestones.
                                                 Course Components
Supervision
We will meet weekly. Be on time. Part of this time will be spent discussing specific therapy cases and issues.
Appendix 1 lists the format that discussion of specific cases will follow. There will also be an opportunity for
unstructured, general discussion of thematic issues (e.g., dealing with termination, working with specific
populations or presenting concerns) each day. The instructor will keep track of who presents clients in both
group supervision and may call on people to present to ensure even distribution of case discussions among
group members. Attendance is required. If significant medical concerns prevent your coming to group
supervision, you must notify me as soon as possible. We will make up the group supervision hours with
additional hours of individual supervision, ASAP. Repeated lateness or failure to attend group
supervision constitutes a violation of ethical practice. Please take responsibility for bringing in client
material, or material about the practice of psychology in general, to discuss.
Professional Development Goals
All students will develop specific professional development plans. Appendix 2 lists the requirements for this
assignment.
Reading Reaction Papers
Every second week, a specific topic will be covered in class. Prior to the start of class, students will submit a
document that lists three “reactions” that can take the form of further exploration of a topic, critique, or other
substantive reaction. The reactions can be focused on any of the papers (e.g., three substantial reactions to one
paper are fine, or one to each of the three).
                                                       Grading
1. Development of goals and attainment of weekly milestones.
         10 x 10        =       100
2. Reading reaction papers.
         5x6            =       30
81 and above = pass.
                                       Professionalism in the Practicum Sites
Ethical Behavior
All students are expected to behave ethically in their work with patients. Behavior that is a direct violation of
ethical behavior, such as a student beginning a sexual relationship with a client, a student seeing a client with
whom he or she has had a past sexual relationship, or violations of confidentiality (e.g., talking openly in public
about an identifiable client) will result in termination from the practicum and additional consequences within
the doctoral program, potentially including termination from the program. Note that attendance in supervision is
considered an aspect of ethical behavior, and a pattern of being late for or missing supervision will result in
penalties potentially including termination from the practicum.
Responsible Clinical Practice Pertaining to Client Homicide, Suicide, and Abuse of a Vulnerable Person
All students are expected to engage in responsible clinical practice with regard to risk to others, risks to clients,
and risk to vulnerable populations. Students are first required to explain the limits of confidentiality to all
clients. Students are expected to appropriately assess these factors and to consult with a faculty member if there
is any risk of harm to self, immediate danger to others, or the safety of a vulnerable person is at risk. Students
should consult if they are unsure of processes (e.g., assessing or reporting potential child abuse risk). Students
are expected to comply with supervisor directives about assessment of these risks (such as completing a suicide
risk assessment). A pattern of failure to explain the limits of confidentiality, assess, consult, or report as
appropriate may result in termination from the practicum.
                                                      Evaluation
Grading
This is a Pass/Fail course. Your acquisition of skills should be commensurate with your level of training in the
program. I expect each student to be open to the learning process and to work with clients and colleagues in an
ethical manner. Note that I consider “ethical work” to include timely completion of professional documentation
and regular and timely attendance at supervision meetings.


Students with Disabilities
Any student who, because of a disability, may require special arrangements in order to meet the course
requirements should contact the instructor as soon as possible to make any necessary arrangements. Students
should present appropriate verification from Student Disability Services during the instructor’s office
hours. Please note instructors are not allowed to provide classroom accommodations to a student until
appropriate verification from Student Disability Services has been provided. For additional information, you
may contact the Student Disability Services office at 335 West Hall or 806-742-2405.
Religious Holidays
Excused absences are allowed for religious holidays (see Texas Tech Operation Procedure 30.16). Please see
me as soon as possible if this applies to you so we can reschedule anything that may need to be moved.


                                                    Appendix 1
                                  Format for group supervision case discussion
                 Based on the Wilbur, Roberts-Wilbur, Hart, Morris, and Betz (1994) model
Step 1. Request for assistance. The presenter will state what assistance they are requesting from the group.
The presenter will provide a brief outline of the case dynamics (about 5-10 minutes). In all cases, video (~5
minutes) will also be shown, ideally of specific behaviors related to the request for assistance, though showing a
“slice” of therapy interaction is also acceptable. The supervisee will restate what it is that they are finding
troubling, puzzling, confusing, novel, etc., about this case.
Step 2. Question period. The group members will ask the presenter for information in addition to what the
presenter offered in Step 1. These questions should be intended to obtain additional information or clarify
misunderstandings or miscommunications (e.g., “Does the client have a job?”, “Does the client live with his/her
parents?”). Questions should not be veiled suggestions (e.g., “Why didn’t you…”, “Don’t you think…”).
Questions will come, one at a time, from one group member at a time, with an opportunity for the presenter to
respond between each question. This will proceed until no questions are left or time constraints require the
group supervisor to end the question period.
Step 3. Feedback and consultation. Group members respond to the information provided in steps 1 and 2.
Group members present their responses to the situation and what they might do. First person is used by group
members, e.g., not “Why don’t you…” but rather, “If this were my client, I would…” Feedback should be
framed in terms of empirically supported and theory-driven approaches to treatment, and should be specific
about actions, behaviors, and what the intended plan of action would look like in therapy. Ownership is to be
taken by the speaker for recognizing what aspects of their own developmental pathway prompt them to be
drawn to their stated approach. During this step, the presenter will remain silent and listen to all the feedback.
Step 4. Reflection and response statement. The presenter is expected to take a moment to process the
feedback. The presenter will then reflect, in general, on how the feedback felt to them. The presenter should
minimize comments such as “I tried that, but…” or “I did something like that, but….” During the presenter’s
reflection and response the other group members will listen without comment. The presenter will state what
aspects of what suggestions and feedback were helpful, or not helpful, and why they were beneficial, or not.
Step 5. Discussion. The supervisor will summarize the interaction, react to feedback offered, and process group
dynamics. The supervisees will provide their responses to the supervisor input.


                                                    Appendix 2
                                        Guidelines for Professional Goals
Given the brevity of the time for which I am your supervisor, your only assignment in this class will be the
development and attainment of professional goals.
Students will develop one to three professional goals in the first supervision session, and they will be finalized
by the end of that session. As instructor I may modify your goals or add new goals based on your performance
in the practicum. Goals are due in your first supervision session, and will be submitted to the discussion
board.
Goals must be clear and operationalized.
“Be a better therapist” is a bad goal.
“Implement three identifiably CBT interventions each session, with every patient” or “reflect content or
meaning four times in the first fifteen minutes of my sessions with patients” are better goals.
“Be a better multicultural therapist” is a bad goal.
“Discuss the intersection of one relevant identity (e.g., SES, race, gender, sexual orientation) with the
presenting concerns of all of clients in week 1” is a better goal.
Goals must list the behavior you want to engage in, the frequency of engagement, and the timeline in which
the goal behavior will occur. The behavior must be measurable, observable behavior (not “thinking about”
or “considering” things). You will be asked to demonstrate engaging in the behaviors via tape (as applicable).
Goals that have shorter time frames or that may be practically limited (e.g., the multicultural example above)
should then have subgoals to allow the goal to be pursued across semester II.
e.g.,
Week 1: Discuss the intersection of identities (e.g,. SES, race, gender, sexual orientation) with the presenting
concerns of all of the clients.
Week 2: Return to and sustain for at least ten minutes a more detailed examination of the ways identity affects
the presenting concern with the patients for whom it was applicable.
Week 3: Process with clients with whom multicultural issues were discussed how that discussion affected them
and their perception of the therapeutic relationship.
Week 4: Incorporate the identity into a therapy homework assignment.
Goals should be specifically addressable in class. For example, if a goal is to learn an intervention, a weekly
goal should be to present what you have learned to the class.
Goals that involve complex processes should generally have supporting goals. E.g., Implementing CBT
interventions requires knowledge of CBT. A good foundational goal might be to read a CBT manual in Week 1
and start implementing in Week 2.
Positive goals (starting a behavior) are generally preferable. Negative goals (stopping a behavior) must be
accompanied by a corresponding new behavior.
Goals are more often met when they are shared. Students will share therapy goals with the supervision class.
Do not have goals that are beyond your control. For example, you should not have a goal of something
related to work with a transgender client, as you cannot know if you will get a transgender client (exception: if


you are at a site where the subject of the goal is a major population and you will almost certainly get someone
from whatever the goal group is).
In supervision, students will describe the progress they have made toward their goals, or impediments to their
progress if they did not achieve their goal.
For evaluation, students and I will review their goals and their progress. Students will evaluate their
performance and I will also provide evaluation.
At least one goal must address social justice or multicultural counseling. This is broadly defined for the
purpose of this class, and might include topics such as race, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, or others.


Specific Topics and Readings by Date.
Ethics- Wed, June 17
Domenech Rodríguez, M. M., Erickson Cornish, J. A., Thomas, J. T., Forrest, L., Anderson, A., & Bow, J. N.
(2014). Ethics education in professional psychology: A survey of American Psychological Association
accredited programs. Training and Education in Professional Psychology, 8(4), 241.
Lannin, D. G., & Scott, N. A. (2013). Social networking ethics: Developing best practices for the new small
world. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 44(3), 135.
Sugarman, J. (2015). Neoliberalism and psychological ethics. Journal of theoretical and Philosophical
Psychology, 35(2), 103.
Telehealth - Wed, July 1
Dart, E. H., Whipple, H. M., Pasqua, J. L., & Furlow, C. M. (2016). Legal, regulatory, and ethical issues in
telehealth technology. In Computer-assisted and web-based innovations in psychology, special education, and
health (pp. 339-363). Academic Press.
Glueckauf, R. L., Maheu, M. M., Drude, K. P., Wells, B. A., Wang, Y., Gustafson, D. J., & Nelson, E. L.
(2018). Survey of psychologists’ telebehavioral health practices: Technology use, ethical issues, and training
needs. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 49(3), 205.
McCord, C. E., Saenz, J. J., Armstrong, T. W., & Elliott, T. R. (2015). Training the next generation of
counseling psychologists in the practice of telepsychology. Counselling Psychology Quarterly, 28(3), 324-344.
Social justice – Wed, July 15
Louis, W. R., Mavor, K. I., La Macchia, S. T., & Amiot, C. E. (2014). Social justice and psychology: What is,
and what should be. Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 34(1), 14.
Motulsky, S. L., Gere, S. H., Saleem, R., & Trantham, S. M. (2014). Teaching social justice in counseling
psychology. The Counseling Psychologist, 42(8), 1058-1083.
Moradi, B., & Grzanka, P. R. (2017). Using intersectionality responsibly: Toward critical epistemology,
structural analysis, and social justice activism. Journal of counseling psychology, 64(5), 500.
Professional Identity – Wed, July 29
DeKruyf, L., Auger, R. W., & Trice-Black, S. (2013). The role of school counselors in meeting students’ mental
health needs: Examining issues of professional identity. Professional School Counseling, 16(5),
2156759X0001600502.
Liddell, D. L., Wilson, M. E., Pasquesi, K., Hirschy, A. S., & Boyle, K. M. (2014). Development of
professional identity through socialization in graduate school. Journal of Student Affairs Research and
Practice, 51(1), 69-84.
Mellin, E. A., Hunt, B., & Nichols, L. M. (2011). Counselor professional identity: Findings and implications for
counseling and interprofessional collaboration. Journal of Counseling & Development, 89(2), 140-147.
Empirically based treatment – Wed, Aug 12


Cardemil, E. V. (2010). Cultural adaptations to empirically supported treatments: A research agenda. The
Scientific Review of Mental Health Practice, 7(2), 8-21.
Duncan, B. L., & Reese, R. J. (2012). Empirically Supported Treatments, Evidence‐Based Treatments, and
Evidence‐Based Practice. Handbook of Psychology, Second Edition, 8.
Rousseau, D. M., & Gunia, B. C. (2016). Evidence-based practice: The psychology of EBP
implementation. Annual Review of Psychology, 67, 667-692.
