                          THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                              DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS
                              Summer 2019 (Second Session)
                  Development Problems and Policies in Latin America
 ECO-S355; Unique #80435; [URB S351 (Topic 1 Unique #81470); LAS 355 (Topic 1
                                       Unique #82260)]
             Class meets at JGB 2.202 (Jackson Geological Sciences Blg)
                                  MTWTHF: 11:30am- 1pm
Instructor: Dr. Alejandro Ibarra
Instructor’s Email: aibarra@itesm.mx; aibarra@austin.utexas.edu
Office hours and place: Ibarra’s are by appointment, BRB (2.102C), additional to 9-10am
daily.
 TA Adriano Valladao, email adrianovpr@utexas.edu
Office hours and office number pending
Introduction to the Course:
Today’s world seems more uncertain than only a year ago. This fact and its consequences
will guide the initial framework for our seminar on Latin American Development and Policy
Problems.
This is an intensive course that frames Latin American economic analysis under
uncertainty into four main areas: macroeconomic policy towards stable economic growth;
international liberalization; and institutional reforms and deregulation in sectors towards
development; finally we will address policy priorities in both the US and internally across
Latin American governments.
The global economy has recently set challenges for governance, competitiveness,
infrastructure, and capital investment in the region. An analysis of economic models can
explain some of the ‘best’ and ‘worst’ practices in economic policy-making and resulting
total factor productivity and “advance.” Weaknesses have appeared during 2017-19
related to fiscal, monetary, and exchange rate interventions, but also from institutions
unable to promote stability, and problems in infrastructure. The US Trump administration
also has set challenges for Latin America’s development.
We will follow an economic viewpoint with a theory-based analysis, complemented by a
political economy approach, and application and critical thinking this summer of theories
of development and concerns by international institutions.
Objectives:
This seminar is intended as a discussion and short essay driven seminar, so you will have
to add to the discussion. We will also address the diverse cultures of LAC economies, to
add to the interest on Latin America.
                                                1


After laying the uncertainty issues for LAC (a first reading from the IADB), a
macroeconomic foundation and reviewing theories of development, I will devote the
second part of the course to the analysis of the dynamics of economic opening, in
comparison with objectives of US present trade policy in the region. I intend to also
address emerging issues, such as social policy and concerns about infrastructure in the
Hemisphere that has impeded stronger growth. We will apply some of the main theories
of international trade, factor mobility, institutional change, sectoral analyses, and other
theoretical approaches in economics.
Expectations:
Materials change every year to reflect major contributions in the literature on the different
topics. I will combine theory-based articles with empirical ones. I require students to find
other readings that cover analytical approaches and ways to quantify relationships of
variables (the economics and econometric views), discussion issues (the political
economy and political science views), and the dynamics of international relations
(institutional and historical views). You will also have to apply the main themes to specific
countries.
Daily lectures are dedicated to laying the theoretical and topical ground, point out main
analytical approaches, present some country-specific examples, and raise the academic
interest on the issues. I will also share my experience in dealing with many Latin American
governments, agencies, and private firms in the Western Hemisphere, so I will try to add
flavor to the discussion by reflecting on culture, social ways and values in various countries
(with an economist’s point of view).
I expect students to actively participate in the discussion. I will choose students at random
in each session to summarize the readings and make critical and theoretically based
comments on the assigned readings, and also from other readings. Contributions will
have a grading value, so I expect that you keep updated reading all the mats, i.e. be “on
your toes!”
Grading basis and Method of Evaluation:
Session discussions and contributions are worth 30% of the final grade. Not showing up
in class means losing points. To have full credit on this, I expect everyone to at least 5
oral participations during the course that contribute in theory, empirical findings, and/or
country or sector cases. I often call for volunteers to comment and extend knowledge
before picking up names at random in each session.
Additionally, 30% is assigned for team presentations on each Friday (except the first
Friday of class), on the topics we cover before and up to that period (weekly themes).
They must entail additional knowledge to share, applied to a sector and/ or country. They
will be done in groups no larger than 4 members, depending on the size of the class. I
will promote work in teams for this activity, and sharing of experiences and knowledge
among all of us. Form your teams by Friday of the first week (July 19).
NOTE: We will have your presentations on July 26, August 2, and August 9, and
August 16.
                                                2


Also, every Wednesday I will give you an individual assignment for researching and writing
a short report, due each Monday at the beginning of class (Fifth week excluded). You will
do 4 such short reports, that I will assign 40% of the final grade. There will not be a midterm
or a final exam, so consider these four short research assignments, your term exams. The
due dates for them are July 22, 29, August 5, and 12.
         SUMMARY:
         Research papers/ essays                                40%
         Individual participation                               30%
         Friday Group Presentations/Discussions                 30%
         Total                                                  100%
A letter grade will be assigned to you based on your weighted average course score as
shown here, and relative to the performance of the rest of the class. I will use the system
with plus and minuses.
Note that for students with disabilities, UT has the Services for Students with Disabilities.
Texts:
For each part (and week), materials are assigned (use your syllabus as an agenda). All
materials are located in the Canvas page of the course as pdf files, ready for all that are
officially registered.
                                               3


                          Schedule of Topics and Assignments
Note: Except for the first session, you are expected to have read daily and weekly
materials as we progress in the course.
FIRST PART: MACRO, FINANCIAL, AND OPEN ECONOMY PROBLEMS
WEEK ONE (July 15-19)
1) Latin America Today: Summary of Economic Successes, Crises, and Challenges
   (Is the US implicitly setting the agenda? Or the EU? Asia? Or own?)
   Check my Introductory ppt presentation (Monday)
   ECLAC (2018), “Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the
    Caribbean (138 pages); read executive summary and Chapter 1 (15 pages), and skim
    the rest with many tables and graphs (Tuesday).
   Read IADB (2019), Latin American Economic Report: Building Opportunities for
    Growth in a Challenging World (Tuesday- Wednesday)
  IMF (2019), “World Economic Outlook,” (April); read Chapter 1 (54 pages), check tables
   and graphs, and skim the headers and topics of the rest: 302 pages, (Wednesday).
   Note:            internet         site           is         very             interactive:
   https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2019/03/28/world-economic-outlook-
   april-2019#Chapter%201
  Banerjee, A. (2004), “Theories of Economic Development,” 17 pages, (Thursday).
   Discussion of economic development hurdles, from Todaro & Smith (2012), Ch. 2 & 3
    (p. 39-132), (Thursday).
   WEF (2018), “The Global Competitiveness Report 2018, read Ch. 1 and 2 (36 pages),
    and skim the rest (Friday).
   Sources of economic data for Latin America in-class exercise (Friday).
WEEK TWO (July 22-26)
2) Review of Macro Models for Small Open Economies and External Shocks
 Han, Fei (2014), “Measuring External Risks for Peru: Insights from a Macroeconomic
   Model for a Small Open and Partially Dollarized Economy,” IMF wp 14/161,” 24 pages
   (Monday)
 Amiti, M., and D.E. Weinstein (2011), “Exports and Financial Shocks,” 36 pages
   (Tuesday)
 Benally and Gapguli (2007), “Financial Linkages between the United States and Latin
   America- Evidence from Daily Data,” 37 pages (Wednesday)
 Chuliá, H., M. Guillén & J. Uribe (2017), Spillovers from the United States to Latin
   America and G7 Stock Markets: A VAR Quantile Analysis, 15 pages (Wednesday)
 Ibarra, A. (2006), “The Feldstein Horioka Regularity in Mexico’s capacity for saving and
   investing.” 22 pages (Thursday)
                                            4


 Drakos, A.A., G.P. Kouretas, S.S. Stavroyannis, & L. Zarangas (2017), “Is the
    Feldstein-Horioka Puzzle still with US? National Saving-Investment Dynamics and
    International Capital Mobility: A Panel Data Analysis across EU Member Countries,”
    Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money, Vol. 47. (Thursday),
    12 pages
 FIRST GROUPS’ PRESENTATIONS (topics of weeks one and two) Friday
WEEK THREE (July 29-August 2)
3) Country Risk, Doing Business, and Indexes Applied to LAC
 Cáceres, C. and Rodriguez-Bastos, F. (2016), “Understanding Corporate
    Vulnerabilities in Latin America,” IMF wp 16/80, 34 pages (Monday)
 Edwards, S. (2015), “Sovereign Default, Debt Restructuring, and Recovery Rates: Was
    the Argentinian Haircut Excessive,” NBER wp, 40 pages (Tuesday)
 Ahuja, A., M. Syed, and K. Wiseman (2017), “Assessing Country Risk- Selected
    Approaches- Reference Note,” IMF 28 pages (Wednesday)
 AS/ COA (Americas Society/ Council of the Americas (2018), A Guide to Elections in
    Latin America 2018 (Thursday), in https://www.as-coa.org/content/guide-2018-latin-
    american-elections
 Jones, G., and R. Comunale (2018), “Business, Governments, and Political Risk in
    South Asia and Latin America since 1970,” 51 pages (Thursday)
 SECOND GROUPS’ PRESENTATIONS (topics extended/ applied from week 3) Friday
WEEK FOUR (August 5- 9)
4) Intra-Industry Specialization and Government’s Readiness for Structural Change
in LAC
    Leung, J.R. (2016), “Bilateral vertical specialization between the U.S. and its trade
     partners — before and after the free trade agreements” 20 pages, (Monday)
    Clark, Fullerton, and Burdorf (2004), “Intra- Industry Trade between the United States
     and Mexico 1993-1998, 18 pages (Tuesday)
    Zhou, M., G. Wu & H. Xu (2016), “Structure and Formation of Top Networks in
     International Trade,” 13 pages, (Wednesday)
    Feenstra, R.C (1992), “How costly is protectionism? “ Journal of Economic
     Perspectives (Thursday)
     Baldwin, R. (2016), “The World Trade Organization and the Future of
      Multilateralism,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter, 21 pages (Thursday)
    THIRD GROUPS’ PRESENTATIONS (Topics extended/ applied from week 4) Friday
WEEK FIVE (August 12-16)
5) Arguments on Hub-Spoke and the Widening of Regionalism; the discussion on
Multilateralism vs. Regionalism, and Trade Agreements
                                               5


 USTR (2019), “The United States- -Mexico-Canada Agreement,” (Monday) in
  https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/united-states-mexico-
  canada-agreement
 Blecker, R.A., J.C. Moreno-Bird, and I. Salat (2017), “Trumping the NAFTA
  Renegotiation: An Alternative Policy Framework for Mexican-US Cooperation and
  Economic Convergence,” 36 pages (Monday).
 Zeng, K. (2010), “Multilateral versus Bilateral and Regional Trade Liberalization:
  Explaining China’s pursuit of FTAs,” 19 pages (Tuesday)
 Sheldon, I., W. McGuire, and D.C.K. Chow (2018), “The Revival of Economic
  Nationalism and the Global Trading System,” 25 pages (Tuesday)
 Svensson, S. (2005), “Eight Questions about Corruption,” JEP, 56 pages (Wednesday).
 Hanson G. and McIntosh (2016), Is the Mediterranean the New Rio Grande? US and
  EU Immigration Pressures in the Long Run (Thursday)
 Data and visuals on migration flows from ECLAC (Thursday) in
  https://repositorio.cepal.org/bitstream/handle/11362/44288/1/S1801071_en.pdf
 FOURTH GROUPS’ PRESENTATIONS (Topics extended from week 5) Friday
                                             6
