                      Tocqueville and Today
                GOV 312L Issues and Policies in American Government
                                       Summer 2019
Unique # 81790
MTWTHF 11:30am-1:00pm
Location: Calhoun 100
 Professor: Dana Stauffer                   Teaching Assistant:
 danastauffer@austin.utexas.edu             Samuel Mead
 tel. 512-232-1448
This course examines American democracy in its origins, its evolution, its strengths and
weaknesses, and its enduring character. We will read primary texts from the American
colonial period, the American Founding, the pre-Civil-war period, the Progressive era,
and the late twentieth century. The first half of the course will be devoted to Alexis de
Tocqueville’s classic work Democracy in America, one of the most famous books ever
written on American politics. Written in the 1830s, the work takes up questions and
themes that continue to resonate almost two centuries later. Tocqueville was interested
in analyzing American democracy from all angles. His work is a mix of sociology,
history, and moral psychology, as well as political science. Key themes of our
examination will be: the relationship between religion and politics, the relationship
between American materialism (and America’s economic life more generally) to its
politics, and the meaning of American equality. We will also take up Tocqueville’s
wide-ranging observations on American morality, family life, and the relations between
the sexes, as they relate to American democracy. In the second half of the course, we
will read authors who challenge Tocqueville’s key arguments, or take his assertions in a
new direction, and we will consider how well his predictions have been borne out.
This course satisfies the second half of the legislative requirement in Government.
Grading and Requirements:
 Midterm Exam: 40%
 Final Exam: 50%
 Pop Quizzes: 10%
ATTTENDANCE IS REQUIRED AND AFFECTS YOUR GRADE. SEE BELOW.
I DO use plus and minus grades as follows: 92.5 and up = A, 89.5 and up = A-, 86.5
and up is a B+, 82.5 and up = B, and so on. Attendance is required and affects your
grade: see below.
Required Texts:
                                                                                          1


1. A COURSE READER, available at Jenn’s Copying and Binding, 2518 Guadalupe St.,
        at the corner of Guadalupe and Dean Keeton, tel. 482-0779.
2. Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville, Volume I. Translated by Arthur
Goldhammer and edited by Olivier Zunz. Library of America. 2012.
3. Democracy in America by Alexis de Tocqueville, Volume II. Translated by Arthur
Goldhammer and edited by Olivier Zunz. Library of America. 2012.
There are many editions of Democracy in America. The Mansfield & Winthrop
translation, published by the University of Chicago Press, is a good alternative to the
Goldhammer translation. The Vintage Classics edition, translated by Phillips Bradley, is
a good translation, but, in Volume I, its chapters are numbered differently from other
editions. If you use that edition, the assignments will be very confusing for several
classes. Whatever you do, don’t get an ABRIDGED copy of Democracy in America.
“Abridged” means that parts have been left out.
Some of the readings in the COURSE READER are available online, but SOME ARE
NOT. I strongly urge you to buy the reader, to simplify your life.
Exams: The midterm exam will be an in-class, blue book essay exam. The final exam
will include quote identifications, short answers, and a comprehensive essay. For both
the midterm and the final exams, I will post information about the themes that the essay
questions will cover a few days before the exam, and you will have more than one essay
question to choose from. You will need to bring a blue exam book to both the midterm
and the final.
To encourage students to keep up with the readings, I will give an unspecified number
of pop quizzes. These quizzes will consist of basic questions that should not be
especially difficult for those who have done the reading. Makeup quizzes will not be
given. However, I will drop your lowest quiz grade. Many of the quizzes will include
one or two extra credit questions to reward careful reading.
Attendance is an important part of your overall performance in the course. Frequently I
will take attendance by calling out 20 or so names at the beginning, or at the end, of
class. If you are late and miss roll, you will be marked absent. If you miss a quiz, you
will be marked absent. If I take roll at the end of class and you have left early, you will
be marked absent. Students with THREE or more unexcused absences will be docked
a letter grade for the course (that is, from a B+ to a C+, for example).
Communication:
If you have an attendance or quiz issue, EMAIL THE TA. You are welcome to CC me
on the email, but I will assume that you have also emailed the TA. The TA is in charge
of record keeping and of responding to emails of this nature. DO NOT RELY ON ME
TO FORWARD YOUR EMAIL TO THE TA. If for some reason the TA is not equipped
to handle your issue, then email me.
                                                                                            2


Class participation is not required, but it is encouraged, and those who make frequent,
meaningful contributions to class discussions will receive an extra point added to their
final grade.
Computer Policy: Laptops, e-readers, and computers of any kind are not allowed in
class. If you use an e-reader to read the texts, look on with a classmate in class. Cell
phones should be silent and put away, out of sight.
Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities may request appropriate
academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Notification of a need for disability accommodations must be given to the professor
at least 7 days prior to a paper due date or exam. To receive accommodations, you
need to submit to me an official accommodation letter from the SSD office.
Notice regarding accommodations for religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you
must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Please notify both me and the TA.
Emergency Evacuation Policy: In the event of a fire or other emergency, it may be
necessary to evacuate a building rapidly. Upon the activation of a fire alarm or the
announcement of an emergency in a university building, all occupants of the building
are required to evacuate and assemble outside. Once evacuated, no one may re-enter
the building without instruction to do so from the Austin Fire Department, University
of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Students should familiarize themselves with all the exit doors of each room and
building they occupy at the university, and should remember that the nearest exit
routes may not be the same as the way they typically enter buildings. Students
requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructors in writing during the
first week of class. Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
procedures can be found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Academic Honesty: In all of your work for this course, you are expected to know and to
adhere to University of Texas policies regarding academic honesty and integrity.
Plagiarism, cheating, or any other form of academic dishonesty will result in a grade of
F for the course. Here is a link to the university honor code:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/undergraduate/introduction/#honorcode
                                                                                         3


                                 Course Schedule
 June 6     Introduction to the course and to Democracy in America
 June 7     Vol. 1, Part One, Chapter 3
 June 10    Vol. 1, Part One, Chapters 2 and 4
 June 11    Vol. 1, Part One, Chapter 5, pp. 66-78; Brutus I and Centinel I
 June 12    Federalist 10 and 51
 June 13    Vol. 1, Part One, Chapter 8, pp. 179-185;
            Vol. 1, Part Two, Chapter 2 and Chapter 6, selections
 June 14     Vol. 1, Part Two, Chapters 7 and 8
 June 17    Vol. 1, Part Two, Chapters 9 and 10, selections
 June 18    Vol. 2, Part Two, Chapters 1-7
 June 19    Vol. 2, Part Two, Chapters 8-12
 June 20    Vol. 2 Part Two, Chapters 13-18
 June 21    Vol. 2, Part Two, Chapters 19-20; Part Three, Chapters 9-12
 June 24    Vol. 2, Part Four, Chapters 1-3 and 6-8
 June 25    Review
 June 26    Exam
 June 27    Herman Melville, “Poor Man’s Pudding and Rich Man’s Crumbs”
 June 28    Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Declaration of Sentiments and
            Speech at Seneca Falls, 1848
 July 1     Mill, On Liberty, Chapter 1
 July 2     On Liberty, Chapter 3
 July 3      Theodore Roosevelt, “Citizenship in a Republic”
 July 5     Robert Putnam, “Bowling Alone”; “Still Bowling Alone?”
 July 8     Tom Wolfe, “Two Young Men Who Went West”
 July 9     Michael Sandel, What Money Can’t Buy, selections
 July 10    Roberto Stefan Foa and Yascha Mounk, “The Danger of
            Deconsolidation: The Democratic Disconnect” and updates
 July 11    Review
Final Exam: Friday, July 12, 9AM-12PM
Location To Be Announced
                                                                            4
