                                  “Viva La Mujer” by Jesus Barraza & Melanie Cervantes
  MAS 311 (40525) (AMS 315, SOC308D, WGS301) ETHNICITY & GENDER: LA CHICANA
  Syllabus                                                        Fall 2018
Instructor: Dr. Lilia Raquel Rosas
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Among the many catalysts that centralized the narratives of Chicanas into the discourse the U.S.
Southwest/Mexican Borderlands, the 1971 La Conferencia de Mujeres por la Raza in Houston inspired
how Chicanas/Xicanas, xicanindias, mestizas, indigenous, Mexican American, and brown women defined
themselves, asserted their roles and identities, and shared their stories. This course privileges the stories,
struggles, contestations, imaginations, writings, and accomplishments of Chicanas in the United States in
the mid-twentieth and early twentieth-first centuries. Through a close examination of literature, and
attention to historical and theoretical materials, we will create a growing understanding of the significance
of gender, sexuality, race, ethnicity, class, language, spirituality, and citizenship in affecting the daily lives
and social worlds of Chicanas. By end of the semester, we will also gain a complex insight into the
importance of how Chicana feminism, Xicanisma, intersectionality, migration, borders, and community
are formative in the Chicana experience(s).
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will improve their analytical abilities through reading, writing, presenting, and discussing class
materials and related literature. As a course within the curriculum of MALS, students will learn about the
complexities of the experiences of Chicanas/Xicanas, xicanindias, mestizas, indigenous, Mexican
American, and brown women. Ultimately, they will learn to think critically, and develop and defend original
arguments, investigate topics within of the scope of Chicana Studies and they will be able to:


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                           Fall 2018                                                    2
Course Goals:
    1. Achieve a basic understanding of key concepts, theories, and methods in Chicana feminist
         thought(s).
    2. Analyze a diverse range of texts that portray the experiences, perspectives, and expressions of
         Chicanas or Mexican American women.
    3. Identify and discuss the significance of these diverse experiences, perspectives, and expressions
         that exist among Chicanas.
    4. Use and prioritize the analytical lenses of gender and sexuality, along with race, ethnicity, class,
         religion, region, language, and so on, to understand the identity formations, subjectivities, and the
         multiple oppressions confronted by Chicanas or Mexican American women.
This course carries 1-flag:
Cultural Diversity in the United States: Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect
a substantia portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
This course meets core curriculum requirement for Social & Behavioral Science (I).
COMMUNICATION & CLASSROOM SUCCESS
Please feel free to email me since this is the best and most effective way to contact me. I check it frequently,
so email me whenever you have questions or concerns. I also strongly encourage you to talk to me during
office hours, before or after class, or make an appointment with me if you have any questions, comments,
or other issues.
In my experience, students who stop by to talk, email, or communicate frequently, attend class regularly,
participate in the classroom discussion, and complete the assigned readings, and all assignments tend to
be more successful in the class. Similarly, I will email you regularly with reminders, instructions, and late
breaking information. Last, if I ever cancel class, Canvas is how you will know it, so please check messages
daily.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Assigned books and course materials (available at University Coop Bookstore or the bookstore of your
choice) to purchase or rent:
                    Anzaldúa, Gloria.                                   Cisneros, Sandra. Woman Hollering
    Required:
                             Borderlands/La Frontera:                            Creek and Other Stories.
                             The New Mestiza. 25th                               Reprint. New York: Vintage
                             Anniversary ed. San                                 Books, 2002.
                             Francisco: Aunt Lute
                             Books, 2012.
                    Grise, Virginia. Your Healing Is                    Serros, Michele M. How to Be a
                             Killing Me. Pittsburgh:                             Chicana Role Model. Oxnard,
                             Plays Inverse Press,                                Calif: Triple M Press, 2011.
                             2017.
Additional articles and chapter excerpts will be made available on CANVAS or via an online link. Readings
and handouts distributed in class and/or via Canvas during the course of the semester will become also
part of your required readings.


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                            Fall 2018                                                      3
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Attendance: Attendance is required and repeated absences will be noted by detrimentally impacting your
participation grade. When missing class, you must provide a valid reason for your absence with appropriate
documentation. This policy does not include absences due to university-related activities (sports,
conferences), or to serious medical issues (severe illness) or death in the immediate family, which are
excused and not deducted (with documentation). Three (3) or more unexcused or “no contact “absences
will result in the overall grade reduction of full letter grade (10%).
Class Participation: Come prepared and on time to class. This includes that you bring the appropriate
reading(s) and course materials, and complete the assigned reading. Make sure when you read, you
read actively. Consider questions such as the following while you read, which may also help with your
regular journaling assignment: What is the argument or purpose of this work or chapter? What kind of
issue(s) are the authors addressing? Why is this reading significant? How can I highlight a significant
point(s) in the class discussion through a specific example(s)? What questions or issues does the reading
cause me to reflect about in my own understanding?
Assignments will include:
Attendance and Participation: Be ready to attend, discuss, and engage in class actively. This is explained
more fully under “Attendance” and “Class Participation,” in the syllabus (see above).
Reading Journal: You also will be responsible for maintaining a reading journal throughout the semester
that you will create and keep up on Canvas. This will be a place to reflect on select assigned reading for
that class/week day and offer your thoughts for class colleagues to consider as well. The purpose of the
journal is to cultivate a practice of active, critical, and evaluative reading, which ultimately will be beneficial
in your development as a researcher and writer.
Letter to a Chicana Feminista: In a 1-2-page letter, you will express your thoughts on the path she has
created, the value of her work, and how we will build on her legacy.
Critical Essay: Through a prompt provided by the instructor, you will write 4-6-page critical essay where
you will engage in a close reading of select readings thus far to explore relevant themes and other significant
topics.
Co-curricular Event Reflection: Throughout the semester, you will have the opportunity to attend one UT
(or outside) lecture, event, or film to be determined as the semester progresses. It must intersect with the
class description and you must provide a brief synopsis of the event and, most importantly, an explanation
of the connection between the event and our discussions in this class.
Group Presentation: You will organize, collaborate, and deliver a group presentation covering one of the
selected present-day or contemporary U.S. social justice themes inspired by the texts at the end of the
semester. I organize the groups but do my best to place you in your preferred group. Still, I may arbitrarily
assign you to a group.
Final Project: In this final project, you will have several options: 1) You may conduct an oral history and
write a critical account of a local or homegrown Chicana feminista, thinker, writer, community leader, or
activist; 2) You will write a handbook to being a role model inspired by Michelle Serros’s work; OR 3) You
will write your own manifesto/a modeled after Virginia Grise’s text.


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                          Fall 2018                                                     4
The grade distribution for each requirement/assignment will be as follows and none are negotiable:
              • Attendance and Participation                   15%
              • Reading Journal                                10%
              • Letter to a Chicana Feminista                  5%
              • Critical Essay                                 20%
              • Co-curricular Event Reflection                 5%
              • Group Presentation                             20%
              • Final Project                                  25%
Class Expectations: Learning Principle: This course uses the principle of collaborative learning or seminar
format. In other words, I believe the classroom is a place of mutual respect and shared learning. In
addition, it is a place where everyone’s informed or well-thought comments will be valued. This means
we are here to learn from each other. I expect you to participate by listening, making comments,
responding to your classmates, and asking questions. In turn, I will facilitate, direct, summarize, and clarify
the discussion. Participation means more than just coming to class and hoping that you can get the answers
from the instructor or the students who talk a lot. Collaborative learning means that it is your responsibility
to share your own considered perspective on the assigned reading, assignment, or topic. In turn, the class
will be structured to make sure that your views will enhance our understanding of the purpose of each
class discussion.
Common Courtesy: Overall, you are also expected to conduct yourself appropriately by turning off your
cell phones and other electronic devices or safely securing them in a pocket, purse, backpack, or book bag
with the ringer/tones turned off. Texting or “secret surfing/chatting” on computers (other devices) in
our classroom (Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest, Instagram, Snapchat, WhatsApp, Hulu, Netflix, etc.)
is also not allowed. While these may seem like minor infractions, they contribute to a disrespectful and
unprofessional classroom environment that interferes with the work all of us are trying to accomplish
together.
COURSE POLICIES
Statement on Learning Success: Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations
because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we will develop strategies to meet both your needs
and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
through UT Austin. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or
Center if you would like.
Grading: The final course grade will be assigned based on the completion of the course requirements
within the semester and will adhere the following grading scale:
           Grade            Cutoff
           A                94%
           A-               90%
           B+               87%
           B                84%
           B-               80%
           C+               77%
           C                74%
           C-               70%
           D                65%
           F                <65%


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                         Fall 2018                                                       5
Assignment Guidelines and Late Work: I will distribute detailed guidelines as we approach certain assignments
such as the essays, final project, and presentation. All assigned work is due on the due date, and is submitted
via Canvas.
Please do not count on uploading/submitting your assignments via Canvas right before the class meeting
time. Inevitably, the computer labs are crowded or servers fail when you are in such a rush, and these are
not valid excuses for late assignments.
Late assignments will be penalized one-half grade (5 points) if turned in within 48 hours of the due date,
and one full grade (10 points) if turned in within one calendar week of the due date. After that, they will
be penalized 15 points everyday. I also reserve the right to grade these papers until the end of the semester.
Late papers will only be accepted without penalty if you negotiate an alternative due date with me at
least 48 hours prior to the due date and turn in the paper within a week of the original deadline. Likewise,
it is up to my discretion to decide which circumstances constitute the need for an alternative due date.
Otherwise, late papers will be penalized according to the aforementioned guidelines.
Student Rights & Responsibilities:
      • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
      • You have a right to respect.
      • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
      • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
      • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
      • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
          learning environment.
      • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
          isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
         teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. •
         Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
         and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
         excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
         these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to
individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name.
I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and
by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may
make appropriate changes to my records.


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                          Fall 2018                                                   6
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity: Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words
or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor
Code         which         can       be       found        at      the      following       web      address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students: Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes
students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if
you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss
your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If
appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
(video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating
well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle.
You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the
college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often
helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety      or       depression,       we      strongly      encourage      you      to    seek     support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use
the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome
to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Other resources include:
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                        Fall 2018                                                      7
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
          become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Emergency Evacuation: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ state:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
     •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
          week of class.
     •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
          found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                         Fall 2018                                                         8
                                             COURSE SCHEDULE
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive
the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
 Date                          Topics/Items Due
                                  WEEK ONE: LA CHICANA GENEALOGIES
 Wednesday, 29 August          Introductions and Course Syllabus
 Friday, 31 August             • Reading: Gloria Anzaldúa, “Speaking in Tongues” in This Bridge Called My
                               Back, 165-174 (Canvas)
                               “The Combahee River Collective: A Black Feminist Statement,” in This
                               Bridge Called My Back, pp. 210-218 (Canvas)
                                  WEEK TWO: LA CHICANA GENEALOGIES
 Monday, 3 September           Labor Day: No Classes
 Wednesday, 5 September • Reading: Chela Sandoval, “U.S. Third World Feminism: The Theory and
                               Method of Oppositional Consciousness in the Postmodern World’”
                               Genders 10 (Spring 1991), 1-24 (Canvas)
                               Cherríe Moraga, “Still Loving in the (Still) War Years/2009: on Keeping
                               Queer Queer,” in A Xicana Codex of Changing Consciousness
                               Writings, 2000–2010, pp. 175-191 (Canvas)
 Friday, 7 September           • Reading: Ana Castillo, “Introduction” in Massacre of the Dreamers: Essays on
                               Xicanisma, pp. 1-16 (Canvas)
                               Reading Journal Due
                                  WEEK THREE: VISIONS OF FEMINISMOS
 Monday, 10 September          • Reading: Maylei Blackwell, Chapter 2: “Chicana Insurgencies: Stories of
                               Transformation, Youth Rebellion, and Campus Organizing” in ¡Chicana
                               Power!: Contested Histories of Feminism in the Chicano Movement, pp. 43-90
                               (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 12 September • Reading: Castillo, Chapter 1: “A Countryless Woman: The Early
                               Feminista, in in Massacre of the Dreamers: Essays on Xicanisma, pp. 17-37
                               (Canvas)
 Friday, 14 September          • Reading: Martha Cotera, Chapter 8: “Our Feminist Heritage”
                               Elizabeth Martinez, Chapter 18: “Viva La Chicana and All Brave Women
                               of La Causa”
                               Anna NietoGomez, Chapter 21: “La Feminista”
                               Beatriz Pesquera and Denise Segura, Chapter 81: “There is no Going Back:
                               Chicanas and Feminism”
                               All articles in Chicana Feminist Thought: The Basic Historical Writings (Canvas):
                               https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                               com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=1679194#
                               Reading Journal Due
                                  WEEK FOUR: BURDENS OF MENTORSHIP
 Monday, 17 September          • Reading: Serros, How to Be a Chicana Role Model., Role Model Rules 1-2
                               Letter to a Chicana Feminista Due


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                    Fall 2018                                                   9
 Wednesday, 19 September • Reading: Serros, How to Be a Chicana Role Model., Role Model Rules 3-4
 Friday, 21 September     • Reading: Serros, How to Be a Chicana Role Model., Role Model Rules 6-7
                          Reading Journal Due
                             WEEK FIVE: BURDENS OF MENTORSHIP
 Monday, 24 September     • Reading: Serros, How to Be a Chicana Role Model., Role Model Rules 8-9
 Wednesday, 26 September • Reading: Serros, How to Be a Chicana Role Model., Role Model Rules 10-11
 Friday, 28 September     • Reading: Serros, How to Be a Chicana Role Model., Role Model Rules 12-13
                          Reading Journal Due
                   WEEK SIX: PLURALITIES WITHIN NARRATIVES OF (ME)XICANAS
 Monday, 1 October        • Reading: Cisneros, Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories
                          Limited sample available here: https://samples.overdrive.com/woman-
                          hollering-creek?.epub-sample.overdrive.com
 Wednesday, 3 October     • Reading: Cisneros, Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories
 Friday, 5 October        • Reading: Cisneros, Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories
                          Reading Journal Due
                 WEEK SEVEN: PLURALITIES WITHIN NARRATIVES OF (ME)XICANAS
 Monday, 8 October        • Reading: Cisneros, Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories
 Wednesday, 10 October    • Reading: Cisneros, Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories
 Friday, 12 October       • Reading: Cisneros, Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories
                          Reading Journal Due
                       WEEK EIGHT: QUEERING RE-VISIONS OF AZTLÁN
 Monday, 15 October       • Reading: Anzaldúa, Borderlands/La Frontera, Chapter 1: “The Homeland,
                          Aztlán/El otro México” (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 17 October    • Reading: Anzaldúa, Borderlands/La Frontera, Chapter 2: “Movimientos de
                          rebeldiá y las culturas que traicionan” (Canvas)
                          Reading Journal Due
 Friday, 19 October       Peer Review of Critical Essay
      WEEK NINE: QUEERING AND RECUPERATING THE BORDERLANDS AND INDIGENEITY
 Monday, 22 October       • Reading: Anzaldúa, Borderlands/La Frontera, Chapter 3: “Entering into the
                          Serpent” (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 24 October    • Reading: Borderlands/La Frontera, Chapter 4: “La herencia de
                          Coatlicue/The Coatlicue State” (Canvas)
                          Reading Journal Due
 Friday, 26 October       • Reading: Anzaldúa, Borderlands/La Frontera, Chapter 5: “How to Tame a
                          Wild Tongue” (Canvas)
                          Critical Essay Due
      WEEK TEN: QUEERING AND RECUPERATING THE BORDERLANDS AND INDIGENEITY
 Monday, 29 October       • Reading: Anzaldúa, Borderlands/La Frontera, Chapter 6: “Tlilli, Tlapalli/
                          The Path of the Red and Black Ink” (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 31 October    • Reading: Anzaldúa, Borderlands/La Frontera, Chapter 7: “La conciencia de
                          la mestiza /Towards a New Consciousness” (Canvas)
 Friday, 2 November       Class visit to the GLORIA EVANGELINA ANZALDÚA PAPERS,
                          Benson Latin American Collection, Sid Richardson Hall 1.108 on the first
                          floor. Here is the link to the library map:
                          http://www.lib.utexas.edu/about/librarymap/benson.html.
                          Reading Journal Due
                       WEEK ELEVEN: DESDE LAS CALLES A LIBERACIÓN
 Monday, 5 November       • Reading: Grise, Your Healing is Killing Me


MAS 311 (40525): ROSAS                        Fall 2018                       10
 Wednesday, 7 November        • Reading: Grise, Your Healing is Killing Me
 Monday, 9 November           • Reading: Grise, Your Healing is Killing Me
                              Reading Journal Due
          WEEK TWELVE: RECLAMATION OF GREAT TURTLE ISLAND IN THE 21ST CENTURY
 Monday, 12 November          Author Visit (to be confirmed)
 Wednesday, 14 November • Reading: St. Sucia (reading to be assigned):
                              https://stsucia.bigcartel.com/category/zines
 Friday, 16 November          • Reading: St. Sucia (reading to be assigned)
                              https://stsucia.bigcartel.com/category/zines
                                               WEEK THIRTEEN
 Monday, 19 November          Final Project Check-In
 Wednesday, 21 November Thanksgiving Break: No Classes Meet
 Friday, 23 November          Thanksgiving Break: No Classes Meet
                                              WEEK FOURTEEN
 Monday, 26 November          Final Project Workday
 Wednesday, 28 November Final Project Feedback Day
 Friday, 30 November          Group Presentations Preparation Day
                                                WEEK FIFTEEN
 Monday, 3 December           Group Presentations
 Wednesday, 5 December Group Presentations
 Friday, 7 December           Group Presentations
                                               WEEK SIXTEEN
 Monday, 10 December          Group Presentations
    Final Exam: __________________
               Final Project Due
               Final day for Co-curricular Event Reflection Submission
