                              Introduction to Asian American Studies
                                        T, R 2:00pm – 3:30pm
                                              UTC 3.132
Professor: Eric Tang
erictang@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Mondays 2pm – 4pm in BEL 220L & Fridays 2pm – 4pm in GWB 3.316
Course Description:
This course offers students an introduction to the main political events and processes that
define the Asian experience in the United States, from the mid-19th century to the present. In so
doing, it will also trace important theoretical concepts of race as they relate to the formation of a
distinct Asian American political, cultural and social identity. The class covers four broad
historical periods: First Waves: Asian immigration during the nineteenth century; Watershed:
World War II and ‘silent’ decade of the 1950s; New Waves: post-1965 immigration and the rise
of the Asian American Movement; The Global era: 1985 – present. Across each of these
epochs, the course will examine some recurring, cross-cutting themes such as: the relationship
between Western “intervention” and migration; the gendering of Asian Americans, anti-Asian
violence; labor and the ethnic economy; war.
Course Requirements:
Weekly Quizzes:                  20%
Exam 1(3/5):                     20%
Research Assignment (4/2):       20%
Participation:                   15%
Exam 2 (5/7):                    25%
                                       COURSE GUIDELINES
Weekly Quizzes: Every other Thursday, beginning the second week of class (1/30), there will
be a short quiz on the reading assignments and related themes for that week. These quizzes
are designed to test your comprehension of fundamental concepts and may take a variety of
forms, from multiple choice to short answers. Note: With advanced notice, take home quizzes,
short response assignments and small creative projects may be substituted for a weekly quiz.
Your lowest quiz/response grade will be dropped.
Midterm and Final: Students will take an in-class midterm and final exam to assess their
progress in the course. These exams will include multiple choice, short answer and short
essay questions related to class readings, discussions, screenings and other classroom
materials. The final will be non-cumulative, but will require students to draw from knowledge
gained in the first half of the course. Key term lists will be provided before each exam.
                                                                                                     1


Research Assignment: Students will be required to research a specific issue/question related
to the course. For example: “How does President Donald Trump’s ‘Muslim Ban’ resonate with
the history of Asian exclusion from the United States?” The research product can take on
several forms. Details on this assignment forthcoming.
Participation: Class Participation is a grade that must be earned. For a high grade, you must
be an active participant. This means consistently asking and answering questions, and listening
attentively and respectfully to the instructor and to your classmates. This also means keeping
up with class readings, screenings and assignments and coming to class prepared to engage.
Cultural Diversity Flag: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United
States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and
richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of U.S. cultural groups that have experienced persistent marginalization.
Course Reading Material:
Required Texts. (available at the Coop)
Erika Lee, The Making of Asian America: A History
Ocean Vuong, On Earth We are Briefly Gorgeous
Additional articles and book excerpts will be posted to Canvas as pdfs.
Recommended texts:
Jean Yu-wen Shen and Thomas C. Chen ed., Asian American Studies Now: A Critical Reader.
Karen L. Ishizuka, Serve the People: Making Asia America in the Long Sixties
Course Schedule
Week 1: Introduction to the Course
1/21: Course overview.
1/23: The racial formation of Asian Americans
        - Lee, Introduction
        - Omi and Winant, excerpt from Racial Formation in the United States (pdf on Canvas)
Week 2: Chinese Immigration and Exclusion
1/28: Lee, Chapters 1-2
1/30: Lee, Chapters 3 -4
Week 3: Early Japanese and Korean Immigration: Labor, Repression and Resistance
2/4: Japanese Immigration
        - Lee, Chapter 5
        - “Ozawa v. United States” from The American Journal of International Law (pdf on
        Canvas)
2/6: Korean Immigration.
        - Lee Chapter 6
                                                                                                  2


Week 4: Gendered Routes
2/11: Gary Okihiro, “Re-centering Women” from Margins and Mainstreams (pdf on Canvas)
2/13: Lili M. Kim, “Redefining Boundaries of Traditional Gender Roles” (pdf on Canvas)
Week 5: South Asian Migration
2/18: Lee, Chapter 7
2/20: Vijay Prashad, excerpt from The Karma of Brown Folk (pdf on Canvas)
Week 6: Filipino Migration and US Empire
2/25: Lee, Chapter 8
2/27: Stanley Karnow, excerpt from In Our Image: America’s Empire in the Philippines (pdf on
Canvas)
Week 7: Undocumented Immigration of Asian Americans
3/3: Lee, Chapter 9
3/5: Exam 1
Week 8: World War II and Japanese American Internment
3/10: Lee, Chapter 10
3/12: Lee, Chapter 11
SPRING BREAK (3/16-3/21)
Week 9: The Cold War and the “Model Minority”
View Documentary Film: Film: Amy Chen, “The Chinatown Files”
3/24: Lee, Chapter 12
3/26: Robert Lee, “The Cold War Roots of the ‘Model Minority’”(pdf on Canvas)
Week 10: Post-1965 Immigration and Globalization
3/31: Lee, Chapter 13
4/2: Helen Zia, “Detroit Blues” RESEARCH ASSIGNMENT DUE
Week 11: The Asian American Movement
4/7: Karen L. Ishizuka, excerpt from Serve the People: Making Asia America in the Long Sixties
(pdf on Canvas)
4/9: Glenn Omatsu, “The Four Prisons and the Movements of Liberation” (pdf on Canvas)
Week 12. Refugees and the Legacies of War
4/14: Lee, Chapter 14; On Earth We are Briefly Gorgeous
4/16: Lee, Chapter 15; On Earth We are Briefly Gorgeous
Week 13: Postindustial Urban America
                                                                                              3


View Documentary film: “Eating Welfare”
4/21: Eric Tang, “Collateral Damage: Southeast Asian Poverty in the United States” (pdf on
Canvas); On Earth We are Briefly Gorgeous
4/23: Lisa Lowe, “Work, Immigration, Gender: Asian ‘American’ Women” (pdf on Canvas); On
Earth We are Briefly Gorgeous
Week 14. Asian Americans and the 21st Century
4/28: Lee, Chapter 16
4/30: Lee, Chapter 17 and Epilogue
Week 15: Course wrap up.
5/5: Summation
5/7: Exam 2 (non-cumulative)
                                                                                           4
