AET 316C: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith                    Spring 2020
                                                   Spring2020
          AET 316C: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity – Unique # 20750
                               Tuesday/Thursday 11:00am – 12:30pm PAC 3.204
Instructor: Matthew R. Smith
Office Hours: by appointment
Email: matt.smith@austin.utexas.edu
TA: Bill Rios
TA Email: wmr469@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course is a lecture / lab course designed to introduce students to the basic concepts, methods,
and systems utilized in the field of Live Entertainment. The primary focus is to explore core
technologies and illuminate how each area of work within projection, lighting and interactivity relates
and is connected to others. Through a mixture of lectures and lab classes the students will be
introduced to the tools and techniques prevalent in four specific applications of Live Entertainment:
projection, conventional & intelligent lighting, 3-D previsualization, and interactive & generative
imagery. Topics include the historical landmarks of interactive performance, projection system
design, media servers, common signal and data formats, imagery creation for live performance, and
current trends in live event technology. Student activities include: programming lights, controlling
media servers, and designing a previsualized projection system.
LEARNING OUTCOMES:
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
• apply principles and elements of design;
• create and implement original design ideas;
• effectively troubleshoot a lighting system;
• critically examine projection techniques
COURSE MATERIALS:
•   8GB maximum USB drive
•   Pencil
•   1 – notebook (small or medium in size, easily accessible for note taking and may be used during
    quizzes)
COURSE PROJECTS:
• Quizzes (10%): A total of 5 quizzes will be administered throughout the semester.
•   Project 1 (20%): QLab – performance – Eurydice
•   Project 2 (15%): Capture – lighting previsualization
•   Project 3 (20%): Hog 4 – performance – design to audio
•   Project 4 (15%): disguise – content creation
•   Project 5 (20%): disguise – performance – 3D projection mapping
•   This course DOES NOT have a final exam.


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith                      Spring 2020
If you submit your assignment late it will not be reviewed in class.
All work is due as specified in the assignment listed in canvas. Work not completed prior to the
canvas deadline will be considered late.
Any work turned in late, regardless of the excuse, will result in a grade reduction of one full letter for
each calendar date it is late (an A would become a B and so on).
In summary:
Every assignment has a due date and time.
I do accept work after the due date, however, assignments automatically lose one full letter
grade for every calendar date submitted late and they will not be reviewed in class.
Any work turned in more than 4 calendar days late will receive an automatic F. If you are having difficulty
completing your work on time, please speak to me privately prior to the deadline, so we may discuss a
possible arrangement.
                       All assignments will be graded within 7 days of submission date.
Grading Scheme
A- Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work must be completed
on time and with a very high quality of demonstrated skill and technique. There is an evidence of
significant development across all dimensions of learning. The result at this level demonstrates activity
that goes significantly beyond the required course work in one or more areas.
B- Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work must be completed on
time with consistently high quality in course work. There is an evidence of marked development
across all dimensions of learning.
C- Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with generally
good quality in course work. There is evidence of some development across all dimensions of
learning.
D- Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work completed,
with inconsistent quality in course work. The evidence of development across all dimensions of
learning is unclear.
F- Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned work completed,
or very low quality in course work. Development evidence is not available.
Please Note: If you are concerned about your grade – check in with us regularly so that we can
determine where you’re at, and what might need to be done to correct any problems. Do not wait
until the end of the semester!
                                              Page 2


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith                       Spring 2020
ATTENDANCE:
ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Being a professional requires a habit of discipline and rigor.
Professionals in the arts achieve at the highest level when they work with determination and
dedication to detail. Your attention to attendance and lecture information gathering is an important
element of establishing professional standards and practices. The course lectures and discussions will
involve a significant amount of information that will not be available in any other form (textbook,
handouts); therefore, regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of the class.
If you need to miss class for legitimate reasons it is your responsibility to contact me directly with this
information. Sending a message by way of another student of an impending absence does not
constitute a legitimate notification.
For each unexcused absence after your first three, your final grade will be lowered by one letter
grade. Seven unexcused absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
Please be on time for class. If you are more than 5 minutes late for class you will be counted as
tardy. Every two instances you are tardy will be counted as one time absent.
Privacy
What we say about each other’s work during this class should remain constructive and in the
classroom. It will not be published on a personal website or posted on social networks. Please
respect each other’s work.
Resources
PLAI Lab Hours:
Monday – Friday: 5:00pm – 10:00pm
Saturday:           8:00am – 12:00pm
reference online:
www.figure53.com
www.highend.com
www.disguise.one
UTIM Wiki
CLASS CALENDAR
Instructor reserves the right to adjust the calendar to fit the needs of the class.
Week 1:
  Tuesday: January 21st
  -Introduction
  -Syllabus overview
  -Tour of PLAI Lab
Week 1:
  Thursday: January 23rd
  -QLab overview (interface, audition window, screens vs surfaces, mapping)
  -½" scale model box overview
                                             Page 3


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith                      Spring 2020
Week 2:
 Tuesday: January 28th
 -QLab continued (cue lists, auto-continue & auto-follow, effects, fades, audio)
 -Projection Equipment in detail (projectors, playback machine, signal distribution)
Week 2:
 Thursday: January 30th
 -Projection Equipment in detail (projection surfaces, mounting & rigging hardware)
 -Eurydice discussion
Week 3:
 Tuesday: February 4th
 -Projection Design overview (role of designer, engineer, programmer, operator)
 -Samples of projection designs shown (Matt)
 -Projection Engineering overview (projection plot, section, system diagram & equipment list)
 -Samples shown (Matt)
 -Discussion: how to choose a playback system
Week 3:
 Thursday: February 6th
 -Sample ½" model box setup
 -QLab Q&A (specific ideas or challenges)
 -QLab continued (sample work from Matt)
 -in-class workday
 -content creation specific questions
Week 4:
 Tuesday: February 11th
 -QLab Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
 -in-class workday
 -content creation specific questions
Week 4:
 Thursday: February 13th
 -lighting equipment in detail (conventional vs moving lights, data distribution, lighting consoles)
 -lighting terms in detail (DMX, ArtNet, universe, address, patching, channels, etc.)
Week 5:
 Tuesday: February 18th
 -*DUE – Project 1* - in-class presentations begin
 -Lighting Design overview (role of designer, electrician, programmer)
 -PLAI Lab light plot overview
 -Capture overview
Week 5:
 Thursday: February 20th
 -Project 1 - in-class presentations continued
 -Hog 4 PC overview (console layout, windows, fixture library)
 -Full Boar 4 overview & participation
                                            Page 4


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith          Spring 2020
Week 6:
 Tuesday: February 25th
 -Project 1 - in-class presentations continued
Week 6:
 Thursday: February 27th
 -Project 1 - in-class presentations continued
Week 7:
 Tuesday: March 3rd
 -Hog 4 PC continued (patching, user numbers, programmer, Capture connectivity)
Week 7:
 Thursday: March 5th
 -Hog 4 PC continued (recording cues, playback, editing existing cues)
Week 8:
 Tuesday: March 10th
 -*DUE – Project 2* - online submission
 -Hog 4 programming tips & tricks
 -Hog 4 Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
 -in-class workday
Week 8:
 Thursday: March 12th
 -Hog 4 programming tips & tricks
 -Hog 4 Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
 -in-class workday
Week 9:
 Tuesday: March 17th
 -SPRING BREAK, no class
Week 9:
 Thursday: March 19th
 -SPRING BREAK, no class
Week 10:
 Tuesday: March 24th
 -in-class workday
Week 10:
 Thursday: March 26th
 -*DUE – Project 3* - in-class presentations
                                            Page 5


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith   Spring 2020
Week 11:
 Tuesday: March 31st
 -Project 3 - in-class presentations continued
Week 11:
 Thursday: April 2nd
 -disguise overview (interface, timeline, menus, scenes)
 -disguise continued (props, screens, projectors, cues, play variations)
Week 12:
 Tuesday: April 7th
 -content creation
 -Adobe After Effects
 -Adobe Photoshop
Week 12:
 Thursday: April 9th
 -content creation utilizing a UV map
 -content creation Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
Week 13:
 Tuesday: April 14th
 -disguise continued (projector calibration, UV maps, schematic vs lux)
Week 13:
 Thursday: April 16th
 -in-class workday (content creation)
 -practice projector calibration
 -disguise Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
Week 14:
 Tuesday: April 21st
 -*DUE – Project 4* - online submission
 -in-class workday
 -disguise Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
Week 14:
 Thursday: April 23rd
 -in-class workday
 -practice projector calibration
 -disguise Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
                                            Page 6


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith                     Spring 2020
Week 15:
 Tuesday: April 28th
 -in-class workday
 -practice projector calibration
 - disguise Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
Week 15:
 Thursday: April 30th
 -in-class workday
 -practice projector calibration
 - disguise Q&A (1 on 1 with Matt or Bill on a per project basis)
Week 16:
 Tuesday: May 5th
 -*DUE – Project 5* - in-class presentations
Week 16:
 Thursday: May 7th
 -Project 5 - in-class presentations continued
                 POLICIES OF THIS COURSE AND THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
     • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
                                             Page 7


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith                     Spring 2020
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in
his or her official e-mail address (do so at
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned to
the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication.
Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be
considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
       “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
       of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student,
by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their
writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
                                              Page 8


AET 316: Foundations of Projection, Lighting and Interactivity / Smith                      Spring 2020
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation,
and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal
growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
          first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                             Page 9
