              ‫ﻗﺴﻢ اﻟﺪراﺳﺎت اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬                                                   ‫ﺟﺎﻣﻌﺔ ﺗﻜﺴﺎس ﻓﻲ أوﺳﺘﻦ‬
                             ‫اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ ‪ 531‬ك )اﻟﺴﻨﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺜﺔ‪/‬اﻟﻔﺼﻞ اﻷول(‬
                                                ‫ﺧﺮﯾﻒ ‪2018‬‬
                                                                                           ‫اﻷﺳﺘﺎذة‪ :‬ﻏﺎدة ﺣﺴﯿﻦ‬
                                                                                         ‫اﻟﻤﻜﺘﺐ ﺳﺎﻋﺎت اﻟﻤﻜﺘﺐ‪:‬‬
                                                                                                ‫اﻟﺜﻼﺛﺎء واﻟﺨﻤﯿﺲ‬
                                                                             ‫‪ghadamohamad@utexas.edu‬‬
                                                                              ‫‪ -1‬اﻟﻜﺘﺐ واﻟﻤﻮاد اﻟﺪراﺳﯿﺔ‪:‬‬
                                       ‫أ‪" -‬اﻟﻜﺘﺎب ﻓﻲ ﺗﻌﻠﻢ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ"‪ ،‬اﻟﺠﺰء اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ اﻟﻄﺒﻌﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺜﺔ‬
                      ‫ب‪" -‬اﻟﻜﺘﺎب ﻓﻲ ﺗﻌﻠﻢ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ" اﻟﺠﺰء اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ اﻟﻄﺒﻌﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻧﯿﺔ ﻣﻊ اﻟـ دي ﻓﻲ دي‬
             ‫ت‪ -‬ﻗﺎﻣﻮس ﻋﺮﺑﻲ‪-‬اﻧﻜﻠﯿﺰي )‪(Wehr, H. A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic‬‬
                                     ‫‪alkitaabtextbook.com‬‬      ‫اﻟﺘﺴﺠﯿﻞ ﻓﻲ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ اﻟﻜﺘﺎب‪:‬‬          ‫ث‪-‬‬
                                                                            ‫‪ -2‬أھﺪاف ھﺬا اﻟﻔﺼﻞ اﻟﺪراﺳﻲ‬
  ‫ھﺪﻓﻨﺎ اﻟﻌﺎم ﻓﻲ ھﺬا اﻟﻔﺼﻞ اﻟﺪراﺳﻲ ھﻮ ﺗﺤﻘﯿﻖ ﺗﻘﺪم ﻛﺒﯿﺮ ﻓﻲ ﻗﺪراﺗﻨﺎ ﺑﺎﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ ﺣﺘﻰ ﻧﺴﺘﻄﯿﻊ‬
        ‫اﻟﻮﺻﻮل ﻓﻲ ﻧﮭﺎﯾﺔ اﻟﺴﻨﺔ ‪ ،‬إن ﺷﺎء ﷲ‪ ،‬إﻟﻰ ﺑﺪاﯾﺎت اﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮى اﻟﻤﺘﻘﺪم ﻓﻲ ﺟﻤﯿﻊ اﻟﻤﮭﺎرات‪ ،‬اﻟﻤﺤﺎدﺛﺔ‬
  ‫واﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ واﻟﻘﺮاءة واﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع واﻟﻤﻌﺮﻓﺔ اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﯿﺔ‪ .‬وﺳﯿﻜﻮن اﻟﺘﺮﻛﯿﺰ اﻟﻜﺒﯿﺮ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻤﻔﺮدات‪ ،‬ﻷﻧﮭﺎ ﺳﺘﺴﺎﻋﺪﻧﺎ‬
‫ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﻨﺎول ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت ﻣﮭﻤﺔ وﻣﺨﺘﻠﻔﺔ‪ ،‬ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ إﻟﻰ اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ‪ ،‬ﺣﺘﻰ ﻧﺘﻌﺮف إﻟﻰ اﻟﺘﻨﻮع اﻟﻤﻮﺟﻮد ﻓﻲ اﻟﮭﻮﯾﺔ‬
                                                         ‫واﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺘﯿﻦ‪ ،‬ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ إﻟﻰ اﻟﺪﻗﺔ اﻟﻠﻐﻮﯾﺔ‪.‬‬
                                                                              ‫أﻣﺎ أھﺪاﻓﻨﺎ اﻟﺨﺎﺻﺔ ﻓﮭﻲ ‪:‬‬
      ‫‪ (1‬ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﺤﺎدﺛﺔ‪ :‬ﺳﻨﻌﻤﻞ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻜﻼم ﻓﻲ ﻣﻮاﺿﯿﻊ ﻣﺨﺘﻠﻔﺔ‪ ،‬وﺳﻨﺮﻛﺰ ﺑﺸﻜﻞ ﻛﺒﯿﺮ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺘﻌﺒﯿﺮ ﻋﻦ‬
   ‫أﻓﻜﺎرﻧﺎ وآراﺋﻨﺎ ﺑﻤﻔﺮدات وﺗﻌﺒﯿﺮات ﻣﻨﺎﺳﺒﺔ ﻟﮭﺬه اﻟﻤﻌﺎﻧﻲ‪ ،‬ﻣﻔﺮدات اﻟﺼﻒ اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺚ وﻟﯿﺲ ﻣﻔﺮدات اﻟﺼﻒ‬
                                                                                 ‫اﻷول واﻟﺼﻒ اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ‪.‬‬
 ‫‪ (2‬ﻓﻲ اﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع‪ :‬ﺳﻨﻘﻮم ﺑﺎﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع إﻟﻰ ﻧﺼﻮص ﺣﻘﯿﻘﯿﺔ ﺗﺘﻨﺎول ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت ﺛﻘﺎﻓﯿﺔ ﻣﮭﻤﺔ‪ ،‬وﺳﻨﺴﺘﻤﺮ ﻓﻲ‬
  ‫اﻟﻌﻤﻞ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع اﻟﺪﻗﯿﻖ ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻰ اﻟﻌﻤﻞ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻔﮭﻢ اﻟﻌﺎم واﺳﺘﺮاﺗﯿﺠﯿﺎت اﻟﺘﺨﻤﯿﻦ‪ ،‬واﻟﻘﺪرة ﻋﻠﻰ‬
                                                                         ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع اﻟﻰ ﻧﺼﻮص طﻮﯾﻠﺔ‪.‬‬
       ‫‪ (3‬ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘﺮاءة‪ :‬ﺳﻨﺴﺘﻤﺮ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻌﻤﻞ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﻄﻮﯾﺮ اﺳﺘﺮاﺗﯿﺠﯿﺎت اﻟﻘﺮاءة‪ ،‬وﺳﻨﻘﺮأ ﻧﺼﻮﺻﺎ وﻣﻘﺎﻻت‬
          ‫ﻣﺘﻨ ّﻮﻋﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻣﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت اﺟﺘﻤﺎﻋﯿﺔ وﺗﺎرﯾﺨﯿﺔ وأدﺑﯿﺔ‪ .‬وﺳﺘﺘﻄﻠﺐ ﻗﺮاءة ھﺬه اﻟﻨﺼﻮص واﻟﻤﻘﺎﻻت‬
                    ‫اﺳﺘﺮاﺗﯿﺠﯿﺎت ﻣﺘﻘﺪﻣﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺘﺨﻤﯿﻦ وﺗﻮظﯿﻒ اﻟﻘﻮاﻋﺪ ﻟﻔﮭﻢ أﻛﺒﺮ ﻗﺪر ﻣﻤﻜﻦ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻨﺺ‪.‬‬
                                                     ‫]‪[1‬‬


     ‫‪ (4‬ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ‪ :‬ﻟﯿﺴﺖ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ ﻓﻲ ھﺬا اﻟﺼﻒ ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺔ ﺟﻤﻞ ﺻﺤﯿﺤﺔ ﻓﻘﻂ ‪ ،‬وﻟﻜﻨﮭﺎ اﻟﺘﻌﺒﯿﺮ ﻋﻦ اﻵراء‬
  ‫واﻷﻓﻜﺎر ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت اﻟﻤﮭﻤﺔ‪ ،‬وﻟﺬﻟﻚ ﻓﺈن اﻟﻌﻤﻞ ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ ﻣﻦ أھﻢ اﻟﻨﺸﺎطﺎت اﻟﺘﻲ ﺳﻨﻘﻮم ﺑﮭﺎ ﻓﻲ‬
    ‫ھﺬا اﻟﻔﺼﻞ‪ .‬وﺳﻨﻌﻤﻞ ﺑﺸﻜﻞ ﺧﺎص ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﻨﻈﯿﻢ اﻷﻓﻜﺎر ﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ‪ ،‬وﺗﺴﺎﻋﺪﻧﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ ذﻟﻚ أدوات اﻟﺮﱠﺑﻂ‬
                                                                                           ‫‪.connectors‬‬
      ‫‪ (5‬ﻓﻲ اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ‪ :‬ھﺪﻓﻨﺎ ﺧﻼل ھﺬا اﻟﻔﺼﻞ ھﻮ أن ﻧﻮﺳّﻊ ﻣﻌﺮﻓﺘﻨﺎ ﺑﺎﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ وﺧﺼﻮﺻﺎ اﻟﺠﻮاﻧﺐ‬
 ‫اﻟﺘﺎرﯾﺨﯿﺔ واﻻﺟﺘﻤﺎﻋﯿﺔ واﻷدﺑﯿﺔ ﻣﻨﮭﺎ‪ .‬وﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻰ ذﻟﻚ‪ ،‬ﺳﻨﺒﺤﺚ ﻋﻦ اﻟﺘﻨﻮع اﻟﻤﻮﺟﻮد ﻓﻲ ھﺬه اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ‬
                                                                 ‫وﻧﺤﺎول أن ﻧﺒﺘﻌﺪ ﻋﻦ اﻟﺘﺒﺴﯿﻂ واﻟﺘﻌﻤﯿﻢ‪.‬‬
                                                                    ‫‪ -3‬اﻟﺘﻮﻗّﻌﺎت ‪ expectations‬ﻣﻦ اﻟﻄﻼب‪:‬‬
‫• اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد اﻟﻜﺎﻣﻞ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺒﯿﺖ ﻗﺒﻞ ﻛﻞ ﺻﻒ واﻟﺤﻀﻮر إﻟﯿﮫ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻮﻋﺪ واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ ﻓﯿﮫ ﺑﺸﻜﻞ ﻓﺎﻋﻞ‪.‬‬
                               ‫• ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺔ اﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت ﺑﺄﺣﺴﻦ ﺷﻜﻞ ﻣﻤﻜﻦ وﺗﻘﺪﯾﻤﮭﺎ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻮﻋﺪ اﻟﻤﺤ ّﺪد‪.‬‬
  ‫• اﻟﻜﻼم ﺑﺎﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ ﻓﻘﻂ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺼﻒ‪ .‬ﻏﺮﻓﺔ اﻟﺼﻒ ھﻲ ﻏﺮﻓﺔ ﻋﺮﺑﯿﺔ‪ .‬وﻣﻦ ﻻ ﯾﻠﺘﺰم ﺑﺎﻟﻜﻼم ﺑﺎﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬
                                                                         ‫ﻓﮭﺬا اﻟﺼﻒ ﻟﯿﺲ ﻣﻨﺎﺳﺒﺎ ﻟﮫ‪.‬‬
             ‫• اﺳﺘﺨﺪام اﻟﻜﻠﻤﺎت اﻟﺠﺪﯾﺪة واﻟﻘﻮاﻋﺪ اﻟﻤﻨﺎﺳﺒﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت وﻓﻲ اﻟﻜﻼم داﺧﻞ اﻟﺼﻒ‪.‬‬
 ‫• اﺣﺘﺮام ﺟﻤﯿﻊ اﻟﻄﻼب اﻵﺧﺮﯾﻦ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺼﻒ وذﻟﻚ ﻋﻦ طﺮﯾﻖ اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد اﻟﺠﯿﺪ واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ اﻟﻔﻌﺎﻟﺔ‪.‬‬
                  ‫• اﺣﻀﺎر ﺣﻮاﺳﯿﺒﻜﻢ اﻟﺸﺨﺼﯿﺔ )ﻻب ﺗﻮﺑﺎﺗﻜﻢ ( ﻣﻊ اﻟﺴﻤﺎﻋﺎت إﻟﻰ ﻏﺮﻓﺔ اﻟﺼﻒ‪.‬‬
                                    ‫وﻣﻦ ﺣﻖ اﻟﻄﻼب أن ﯾﺘﻮﻗّﻌﻮا ﻧﻔﺲ اﻷﺷﯿﺎء ﻣﻦ أﺳﺎﺗﺬة اﻟﺼﻒ طﺒﻌﺎ!‬
                                                                                            ‫‪ -4‬اﻟﺪرﺟﺔ اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﯿﺔ‬
      ‫‪%20‬‬                       ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد واﻟﺤﻀﻮر واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ اﻟﻔﻌﺎﻟﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻛﻞ ﻧﺸﺎطﺎت اﻟﺼﻒ‬              ‫•‬
      ‫‪%20‬‬                                                                              ‫اﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت‬   ‫•‬
      ‫‪%20‬‬                                           ‫اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺎت اﻟﻄﻮﯾﻠﺔ )أرﺑﻊ ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺎت( وﺗﺼﺤﯿﺤﮭﺎ‬       ‫•‬
      ‫‪% 5‬‬                                                                        ‫ﻣﺸﺮوع اﻟﻘﺮاءة‬    ‫•‬
      ‫‪%15‬‬                                            ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت اﻟﻘﺼﯿﺮة ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻔﺮدات واﻟﻘﻮاﻋﺪ‬       ‫•‬
      ‫‪%15‬‬                                      ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﻲ‪) - :‬اﻟﻘﺮاءة واﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع واﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ(‬     ‫•‬
      ‫‪% 5‬‬                      ‫‪) -‬اﻟﻜﻼم‪ :‬ﺗﺴﺠﯿﻞ ﻧﮭﺎﺋﻲ ﻋﻦ ﻣﺸﺮوع اﻟﻘﺮاءة(‬
                                                                              ‫اﻟﺪرﺟﺔ اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﯿﺔ ﺑﺎﻟﺘﻔﺎﺻﯿﻞ‪:‬‬
                                         ‫‪% 20‬‬       ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد واﻟﺤﻀﻮر واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻛﻞ ﻧﺸﺎطﺎت اﻟﺼﻒ‬
   ‫•‬    ‫‪Attendance and active participation in class are essential to your doing well in the class and‬‬
        ‫‪improving your Arabic proficiency. Please be on time and in “Arabic mode” at the start of class. As‬‬
        ‫‪soon as you enter the classroom, you should speak only in Arabic. English is not permitted in‬‬
        ‫‪the classroom except by permission of the instructor. Use of English without permission will‬‬
        ‫‪lower your participation grade by at least 1 point for the day.‬‬
        ‫‪Please do not chew gum in class. Drinks are permitted. If you must eat food in class, you are‬‬
        ‫‪J.‬اﺗﻔﻀﻠﻮا ‪expected to behave in a culturally appropriate manner by saying to everyone‬‬
                                                       ‫]‪[2‬‬


You will get a daily participation grade of 0 to 5 in each class. Full credit (5/5) is earned when you
     i.   are ready to begin all class sessions on time,
    ii.   are well prepared (meaning you have studied the assigned material well, listened to assigned
          materials, learned the new vocabulary, read the grammar explanations carefully, and done the
          homework drills based on these explanations before coming to class),
   iii.   participate actively when working as a whole class and in groups,
   iv.    speak only in Arabic in class,
    v.    Make maximum use of pair/group work time by staying on task and challenging yourselves to
          get the most out of each activity.
•   Than no class time. However, chronic lateness will result in a zero participation grade.
•   If you have temporary issues and couldn’t complete your homework and preparation on a particular
    day, we would still rather have you in class so that you get the benefit of listening and practicing.
    However, please let us know this at the start of class so that we can plan group work accordingly.
    Coming to class unprepared will result in a lowered participation grade, but honesty will be
    rewarded, as long as the lack of preparation happens only once or twice during the semester, and
    dishonesty will be punished.
•   Your lowest 3 grades for attendance and participation will be dropped for purposes of grade
    calculation. Please do your best to inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as possible
    before the class you will miss. This helps considerably in planning for daily class activities. More
    than 10 absences – whatever the reason – will result in an “F” for the course.
•   The use of electronic devices is not permitted in class except in activities designated by the
    instructor.
                                                                                        % 20         ‫اﻟﻮاﺟﺐ‬
To prepare for the learning that takes place through practice in class, you will listen, read and study new
material at home. This new material will not be presented in class. To help you process this material,
you have daily written assignments due at the beginning of class on the day designated in the
schedule.
Homework assignments will be evaluated daily. The effort you put into your at-home preparation and
homework is an important part of your homework grade. You do not have to get everything 100%
correct on your homework in order to get the top grade. It is important to make your best effort.
Homework is scored on a scale of 0 to 5 (5=excellent; 4=good but not your best effort; 3-insufficient;
2=poor; 1=very poor; 0=late or not submitted). Your two lowest homework grades will be dropped for
grade calculation purposes.
•   You know by now that daily homework and preparation for class is essential for progress and
    success. For each class period, expect an average of 2 hours of focused work--with full
    concentration--outside of class for every one hour spent in class, with slightly longer waajibaat over
    the weekend. If you find struggling with the work, please come see your instructor.
•   Assignments are to be turned in at the beginning of class. Late assignments will not be accepted. On
    each homework assignment, please write your name, HW number & drill. Please double-space
    (write on every other line) your homework assignments so that your instructor and TA have space to
    write comments.
•   Your instructors take time to write comments on your homework because it is an opportunity to
    connect with you as an individual learner and help you achieve your best. We also welcome the
    opportunity to talk with you during office hours, so please come if you have questions about the
    comments on your waajib or anything else related to the course.
                                                    [3]


                                                                          % 20         ‫اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺎت وﺗﺼﺤﯿﺤﮭﺎ‬
• Writing is not only a very effective way to activate new vocabulary and structures and to push your
  proficiency by expressing complex ideas—it also allows you to develop critical thinking skills in
  Arabic. Hence, the extent to which you critically engage the topic and use a range of new and old
  vocabulary will be evaluated.
• Revising and rewriting is an essential part of learning to write in any language. There are two
  aspects of rewriting, and both will be evaluated. The first is to reread what you have written with an
  eye to grammatical accuracy, analyzing the parts of each sentence and checking to make sure they
  follow the rules. The second is to reread your essay with an eye to the presentation and organization
  of ideas: do your word choices convey the meaning you intend as closely as possible? Are the ideas
  explained as well as possible? Is the organization clear?
• You will be writing 4 substantial essays this semester (325-425 words in length). These essays will
  be critiqued and returned to you to revise in order for you to improve accuracy and the organization
  and presentation of your ideas. The due dates, topics, word length requirements and grading rubrics
  for your ‫ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺎت‬will be posted on Canvas.
• All ‫ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺎت‬must be typed (Font 14 or larger), triple-spaced and submitted in class. Writing
  assignments submitted via email will not be accepted unless you have received prior permission
  from your instructor. Double-sided copies are welcome.
                                                                                %5         ‫ﻣﺸﺮوع اﻟﻘﺮاءة‬
• This semester we will begin a new stage in the transition from textbook to the real world:
  independent reading in Arabic. Each of you will choose a news topic about the Arab world, or a
  particular Arab country, to follow on the news site http://www.bbc.co.uk/arabic/ throughout the
  semester. You will read about your topic twice a week, report about your reading in class once a
  week, and report to one of the instructors once a week as well. You are not expected to use the
  dictionary, or understand all the details of what you read, but rather to read for general
  comprehension and enjoyment and use your reading strategies to get as much as you can out of each
  piece you read.
                                                                                  % 20          ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت‬
§ We will have four quizzes throughout the semester, one approximately every 2-3 weeks. Quizzes
  will be announced on your schedule at least a week in advance. They will focus on vocabulary, but
  grammatical accuracy in using the vocabulary will also be graded.
                                                                              % 15        ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﻲ‬
  •    The final exam will be administered on the date designated by the Registrar during the final
       exams period in December. All students are expected to be present on exam day or on the
       officially scheduled make-up day. The earliest possible exam day will be scheduled; however,
       the date is determined by the University and not the instructors or department.
  •    The final examination will be comprehensive and will test your overall proficiency and
       achievement in reading, writing, speaking, listening, and cultural knowledge.
                                                 [4]


ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
     §  All students 1) with an Arabic-speaking parent or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-
     speaking country or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT
     prior to enrollment in this course must take the departmental placement examination for
     Arabic before beginning their study of Arabic at UT. Failure to do so constitutes an act of
     academic dishonesty.
FINAL GRADE CALCULATION AND GRADE POLICIES:
          Number       Letter     Number         Letter       Number         Letter       Number         Letter
                                 87 - 89.9         B+        77 – 79.9         C+         67 – 69.9       D+
         94 – 100       A
                                 84 - 86.9         B         74 – 76.9         C          64 – 66.9       D
         90 – 93.9      A-       80 – 83.9         B-        70 – 73.9         C-         60 – 63.9       D-
                                                                                         (Below 60% = F)
     § Grades on the border between two letter grades (89.9 for example) may or may not be rounded up
     to the next higher letter grade. This is at the instructor's discretion and will be considered on a case-
     by-case basis.
     § Exam grades are usually a good indicator of how you will do on the final and of your overall ability
     to use the material we are studying. If you are not doing well on quizzes, talk to your instructor to get
     suggestions for strategies to improve your performance.
     § In order to continue to the next level of Arabic, you must have a grade of C or better. If you take
     the course Pass/Fail, you may not register for the next level of Arabic. No Incompletes will be given
     for this course. Auditing is not permitted.
THE FOLLOWING ARE IMPORTANT UT POLICIES AND REGULATIONS THAT APPLY TO
THIS COURSE.
UT Honor Code the UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is
not your own, or that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. If you have any
questions about the Honor Code, please ask.
Religious Holidays A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Disabilities Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of
Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be
presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed
should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an exam the student should remind the
instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed. See website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system, which you will access with your UT EID
and password. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and
announcements. Canvas is available at https://utexascie.instructure.com/. Support is provided by the ITS
                                                        [5]


Help Desk in the FAC lobby during regular business hours (Monday through Friday, 8am-5pm). During and
after of regular business hours, you may seek support by calling 512-475-9400 or submitting an online help
request; please see https://www.utexas.edu/its/helpdesk/forms/emailform.php for details.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students All students should become familiar with
the University's official e-mail student notification policy. Students are expected to check e-mail on a
frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing
that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail
address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) If you are worried about someone who is acting differently,
you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy the State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education
may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.”
A FINAL NOTE: PRINCIPLES FOR IN-CLASS WORK
      § There can be no language without community. In our class community, respect for each other at
      all times will ensure a positive and fruitful learning experience. We will spend at least 75% of class
      time in small group or pair activities so that each one of you gets the maximum possible time to
      participate and practice. During these activities, the instructor plays the role of personal trainer.
      Learning a language is a lot like going to the gym: the personal trainer guides you, but you have to do
      the work to get the benefit.
      § Please keep in mind the following principles for group work:
      § Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them: each of you can learn with and
      from everyone else.
      § Work with different people on a regular basis.
      § Come prepared. Don’t be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to fully
      participate in the work. If you are not prepared for class let your instructor know beforehand and s/he
      will arrange for you to learn by listening on that day.
      § Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to finish. Most activities are designed to elicit
      creative play with vocabulary and structures on which we are working.
      § If you do the minimum, you will get only minimum benefit and may slow your colleagues’ progress
      as well. Take advantage of class time by pushing yourself to be creative and say and write as much as
      you can.
                                                         [6]


                   ‫‪Correction Code for‬اﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ واﻟﻮاﺟﺒﺎت‬
                           ‫ج = اﻟﺠﺬر ﻏﯿﺮ ﺻﺤﯿﺢ )ﻣﺜﻼ‪ :‬س ﻓﻲ ﻣﻜﺎن ص(‬
‫و = اﻟﻮزن ﻏﯿﺮ ﺻﺤﯿﺢ )ﻣﺜﻼ‪ :‬ﯾﻔﻌﻞ ﻓﻲ ﻣﻜﺎن ﯾﻔﺎﻋﻞ أو أﻓﻌﺎل ﻓﻲ ﻣﻜﺎن ﻓﻌﻮل(‬
                ‫ق = ﻣﺸﻜﻠﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘَﻮا ِﻋﺪ )ﻣﺜﻼ‪ :‬ال‪ ،‬ﻣﺬﻛﺮ‪/‬ﻣﺆﻧﺚ‪ ،‬ﻣﻔﺮد‪/‬ﺟﻤﻊ(‬
                                       ‫ھـ = ﻣﺸﻜﻠﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟ ِﮭﺠﺎء )ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺔ اﻟﻜﻠﻤﺔ(‬
                                            ‫ح ج = ﺣﺮف اﻟﺠ ّﺮ ﻏﯿﺮ ﺻﺤﯿﺢ‬
                                       ‫)‪(connector‬‬  ‫‪ /‬ر = ﺗﺤﺘﺎج اﻟﻰ اﻟﺮﱠﺑﻂ‬
       ‫)‪ = (squiggly line‬ﻟﻢ ﻧﻔﮭﻢ اﻟﻔﻜﺮة‪ ،‬ﺗﻜﻠﻤﻮا ﻣﻊ اﻷﺳﺘﺎذ‪/‬ة أو اﻟﻤﻌﯿﺪ‪/‬ة ﻋﻨﮭﺎ‬
                       ‫ﻧﺘﻤﻨﻰ ﻟﻜﻢ ﻓﺼﻼ دراﺳﯿﺎ ﻣﻤﺘﻌﺎ وﻣﻔﯿﺪا‬
                                        ‫]‪[7‬‬
