                                              ANT 324L/REE 345
                                   Power and Resistance in Putin’s Russia
                                                   Spring 2020
                             Maria Sidorkina (maria.sidorkina@austin.utexas.edu)
Summary:
Is Russia a source of problems for democracy, or a site for new experiments in civic life? This
anthropology course introduces students to politics in Russia beyond the headlines, outside the Kremlin
walls, and within a comparative context. Learn about collective resilience in a place where loss of trust in
state and media institutions and culture war is no longer news. Research local and transnational cultures
of protest, including ironic anti-parades, art interventions, post-disaster mutual relief efforts, rural eco-
activism, anti-state trolling, and copycat movements. Students will study Russian protest traditions by
placing them in the context of regional “color revolutions;” digital media-enabled social movements in
the Middle East and China; and emergent forms of assembly that aim to create new types of sociability,
such as the global “occupy” movements and Tahrir square demonstrations. Disambiguating liberal, anti-
liberal and non-liberal forms of political mobilization, we will address methodological debates central to
protest studies, such as whether we can call properly “political” those actors that who aim to change the
political system or those for whom the efficacy of protest is measured by solving problems in particular
cases (e.g. wage arrears, environmental destruction, homophobia, etc.)
Considering power and resistance in contemporary Russia in a systematic way will allow us to engage
with larger, theoretical questions about state-citizen interactions beyond the margins of the liberal project:
How do political activists speak to the state? In turn, how does the state encourage, respond to, and censor
activist speech? Drawing on examples from Russia and Eastern Europe, we will develop methodologies
for studying how state power is analyzed “from below” by ordinary citizens seeking to shape politics and
policy. We will take protests seriously as events; consider interactions between protest participants and
the social spaces in which protests take place; and situate events with respect to ordinary moments of
cultural and political life. Finally, we will discuss the lessons of the surprising experiments with
collectivity that post-socialist activists have taken up after decades of dealing with opaque and illiberal
mechanisms of local, national, and international governance.
Requirements:
The bulk of the work over the course of the semester will include readings, independent research, short
response papers, a mid-term paper, and a final paper. Further specifications for each assignment and the
due dates will be posted to the course website. Students are required to:
     1.   Prepare the readings and fully participate in discussing them (10%).
     2.   Submit paragraph-long response to the readings, due on Tuesday each week (20%).
     3.   Keep a journal using Evernote, a note-taking platform, to create weekly research notes on a
          protest movement that interests you. Due Thursday each week. (20%)
     4.   Write a summary, synthesis, extension, and critique of 1-3 class readings from the first half of
          the semester (20%).
     5.   Submit a final essay of 10 pages (30%), which uses the class texts and independent research to
          analyze an example of protest activity in Russia or postsocialist Eurasia.


Syllabus Change Policy:
This syllabus is only a guide for the course and is subject to change with advanced notice.
Schedule:
WEEK I. (January 21, 23) Introduction to the course. What is a protest? A social movement?
         Nathan Heller (2017). “Is There Any Point to Protesting? We turn out in the streets and nothing
         seems to happen. Maybe weʼre doing it wrong.” The New Yorker
WEEK II. (January 28, 30) The Russian case – how is Russian political culture a product of particular
historical and geopolitical forces? What socio-political patterns does Russia share with its neighbors?
         Alexei Yurchak (2005) Selections from Everything Was Forever, Until It Was No More: The Last
         Soviet Generation
         Jessica Greenberg (2010) “There’s Nothing Anyone Can Do About It”: Participation, Apathy, and
         “Successful” Democratic Transition in Postsocialist Serbia, Slavic Review
WEEK III. (February 4, 6) Paradigms for understanding collective action as political communication. The
1990s-2000s.
         Graeme Robertson (2012) Selections from The Politics of Protest in Hybrid Regimes: Managing
         Dissent in Post-Communist Russia, Cambridge University Press
         Olga Shevchenko (2008) Selections from Crisis and the Everyday in Postsocialist Moscow
         Phillip M. Ayoub & Agnès Chetaille (2017) “Movement/countermovement interaction and
         instrumental framing in a multi-level world: rooting Polish lesbian and gay activism” Social
         Movement Studies
WEEK IV. (February 11, 13) Do we need new political paradigms for understanding politics after
liberalism? The late 2000s.
         Samuel Greene (2014) Selections from Moscow in Movement: Power and Opposition in Putin's
         Russia, Stanford UP
         Mischa Gabowitsch (2016) Selections from Protest in Putin's Russia, Wiley
         Don Kalb (2009) “Conversations with a Polish populist: Tracing hidden histories of globalization,
         class, and dispossession in postsocialism (and beyond)” American Ethnologist
WEEK V. (February 18, 20) Political Participation, Social Media and Putin’s Third Term
         Guobin Yang (2011) The Power of the Internet in China: Citizen Activism Online, Columbia UP
         Megan MacDuffee Metzger and Joshua A. Tucker (2017) “Social Media and EuroMaidan: A
         Review Essay” Slavic Review
         Joshua A. Tucker, Yannis Theocharis, Margaret E. Roberts, and Pablo Barberá (2017) “From
         Liberation to Turmoil: Social Media And Democracy” Journal of Democracy
WEEK VI. (February 25, 27) Fair Elections Movement of 2011-2012


     Robertson, Graeme. “Russian Protesters: Not Optimistic But Here to Stay.” Russian Analytical
     Digest 20, no. 115 (2012).
WEEK VII. (March 3, 5) Youth in protest
     Jeremy Morris (2018) “Young Russians Are Not Just Young and Russian”
     Julie Hemment (2015) Selections from Youth Politics in Putin’s Russia: Producing Patriots and
     Entrepreneurs
     Olena Nikolayenkо (2017) Youth Movements and Elections in Eastern Europe
WEEK VIII. (March 10, 12) Art and Actionism: Pussy Riot, Voina, Pavlensky
     Valentina Parisi (2017) “Dissidents reloaded? Anti-Putin activists and the Soviet legacy” from
     Cultural Forms of Protest in Russia
     Anya Bernstein (2013) “An Inadvertent Sacrifice: Body Politics and Sovereign Power in the
     Pussy Riot Affair”
                      ********SPRING BREAK (March 17, 19)***********
WEEK IX. (March 24, 26) Humor, Satire, Trolling
     Maria Brock (2018) “Political satire and its disruptive potential: irony and cynicism in Russia and
     the US”
     Larisa Kurtović (2019) “Interpellating the State: Activists Seek Political Authority in Postwar
     Bosnia and Herzegovina.” American Ethnologist
     Dominic Boyer and Alexei Yurchak (2010) “AMERICAN STIOB: Or, What Late-Socialist
     Aesthetics of Parody Reveal about Contemporary Political Culture in the West.”
WEEK X. (March 31, 2) Violence and the State
     Mohammad Ali Kadivar and Neil Ketchley. (2018) “Sticks, Stones, and Molotov Cocktails:
     Unarmed Collective Violence and Democratization,” Socius
     Vadim Volkov (2002) from Violent Entrepreneurs: The Use of Force in the Making of Russian
     Capitalism
WEEK XI. (April 7, 9) Regime Change
     Paul Manning, (2007) “Rose Colored Glasses? Color Revolutions and Cartoon Chaos in
     Postsocialist Georgia,” Cultural Anthropology
     Dace Dzenovska & Ivan Arenas (2012) “Don't Fence Me In: Barricade Sociality and Political
     Struggles in Mexico and Latvia.”
     Henry E. Hale (2013) “Regime Change Cascades: What We Have Learned from the 1848
     Revolutions to the 2011 Arab Uprisings”


WEEK XII. (April 14, 16) Theorizing Resistance
     Michel Foucault (1982), “The Subject and Power,” Critical Inquiry
     Banu Bargu (2014) Selections from Starve and Immolate: The Politics of Human Weapons
WEEK XIII. (April 21, 23) Assembling Bodies and Commonplaces: The Environment and Rights to Life
     Judith Butler (2015) Selections from Notes Toward a Performative Theory of Assembly
     Alfred P. Evans. “Protests and civil society in Russia: The struggle for the Khimki Forest”
     Communist and Post-Communist Studies
WEEK XIV. (April 28, 30) Lessons from Russia: Beyond Polarization, Cynicism, and Resistance
     Samuel Greene (2019) “Homo Post-Sovieticus: Reconstructing Citizenship in Russia”
     Alfred B. Evans (2018) “Protests in Russia: The Example of the Blue Buckets Society”
     Demokratizatsiya
WEEK XV. (May 5, 7) FLEX WEEK
