GOV 347N/ANS 361: POLITICS OF SOUTHEAST ASIA
University of Texas at Austin
Class Meet Time: Tuesday and Thursday 8:00-9:30
Class Meet Location: Parlin Hall 105
Fall 2018
Unique #: 38475 (GOV); 32327 (ANS)
CONTACT INFORMATION
     Professor Amy Liu
     Office Location: Batts Hall 3.128
     Email: amy.liu@austin.utexas.edu
     Office Hours: Thursday 12:30-3:30
COURSE DESCRIPTION
     This course is designed to introduce students to the politics of Southeast Asia. We will begin with a
     discussion of the ethnic landscape of the region, drawing attention to the difference between
     nationality and ethnicity. We will then talk about the political regimes. We will learn about the
     democracies – and how they compare to the United States. We will also examine the different
     institutions employed by dictators to stay in power – personal cult, the military, a party structure, or
     the royal family. We will conclude by circling back to ethnic politics, noting whether certain political
     regimes – e.g., democracies or dictatorships – are better at accommodating ethnic minorities. Note
     that this course is not about Southeast Asian foreign policy or US-Southeast Asia relations.
COURSE STRUCTURE
     The class is a lecture meeting two times a week. Reading assignments are important and should be
     done before each class. Attendance will not be taken in the course. You are, however, strongly
     encouraged to attend each class for several reasons. First, readings and class lectures are not
     substitutes. In class, I will present additional materials that either challenge or build on the
     arguments made in the readings. Second, some of the readings are more difficult. When this is the
     case, I will devote significant class time going over the reading. And third, if you are absent on a quiz
     day (see below), you will receive a 0% on that specific quiz. I will not post lecture notes online. If you
     do miss class, I strongly encourage you to get notes from a classmate first before you come to my
     office hours.
     Note that this course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
     increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect
     a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
     histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
     Prerequisites
                                                       1


Students wishing to enroll in this class must have taken a foundational course in government or
Asian studies. The course also assumes basic knowledge of world history. If you find yourself lost
during lectures or class discussions, come see me during office hours immediately.
Readings
The following book is required:
    • D.R. SarDesai. 2012. Southeast Asia: Past and Present. 7th Edition. Boulder, CO:
        Westview Press (hereafter referred to as “SarDesai”).
You can purchase a hard copy through Amazon or another third party vendor. Alternatively, you can
access a free electronic version of the book through the UT library (http://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/). I
have placed all the other assigned readings on Canvas (https://canvas.utexas.edu).
Grading
Your final grade is composed of the following five parts:
    1.  Quizzes: 20%
    2.  Midterm Examination: 20%
    3.  Final Examination: 20%
    4.  Coding Assignment: 20%
    5.  Coding-Based Paper Assignment: 20%
The quizzes can be cumulative and cover both the lectures notes and assigned readings. Quiz dates
will usually be announced in the previous class. I do, however, reserve the right to administer pop
quizzes. These quizzes will test key information. On average, there will be one quiz per week, for an
approximate total of eleven to thirteen quizzes for the semester. On each announced quiz, there will
be a bonus question (worth 3% of the quiz) about current affairs in Southeast Asia. I strongly
encourage you to read the following news sources on a regular basis. Note that each new sources
has an app that you can follow on your smart phone.
    •   BBC: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world/asia
    •   The Guardian: https://www.theguardian.com
    •   The Straits Times (Singapore): http://www.straitstimes.com
    •   Washington Post: http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia
One objective of this course is to expose you to how political science is done and to train you with
the necessary tools to understand – if not execute – it at a basic level. Political scientists are
frequently “coding” – the act of taking a set of information (usually in words), turning it into
numbers, and categorizing it into a dataset. The purpose of this database is to assist with some
analysis. In this course, we will focus on government cabinets. Specifically, we will seek to
understand how they were systematically different during communism, and how they accommodate
minorities in the present day – if at all.
To this end, to help you gain familiarity with (and appreciation for) political science research, you
will be asked to do some of your own coding. To make the practice more manageable, you will be
assigned a five-year period for a pair of countries (from a list of three choices). For each year, you
are to identify the cabinet ministries in the two assigned countries. You will be asked to note the
cabinet ministry ranks as documented in the Europa Yearbook and the corresponding minister’s
name in an Excel spreadsheet. You will also be asked to identify the ethnicity of each cabinet
                                                2


   minister – a task that will require more fact-checking. This coding assignment is due electronically
   by the start of class on the following dates:
        •   Philippines/Indonesia: 09/25;
        •   Thailand/Myanmar: 10/25; and
        •   Malaysia/Cambodia: 11/20.
   After you have completed your Excel spreadsheet, there will be a corresponding paper. For this
   assignment, you are to prepare a 5-7 page, double-spaced, grammatically-sound paper comparing
   your pair of countries 1960-2015. Do certain political institutions accommodate more minorities in
   the government cabinet? You will be asked to hypothesize a reason for this difference. The paper is
   due in hard copy at the start of class on the following dates:
        •   Philippines/Indonesia: 10/11;
        •   Thailand/Myanmar: 11/06; and
        •   Malaysia/Cambodia: 12/04.
COURSE POLICIES
   Grading Policies
   Only the top ten quiz grades will be counted. If you are absent for whatever reason on a day a quiz is
   given, you will receive a 0% for that specific quiz. There are no makeup quizzes. If you miss
   between 40-50% of total quizzes given, your final quiz grade for the semester will be a 0%. If you
   miss 50% or more of the quizzes given, you will automatically fail the course.
   Make-up exams will only be given in the case of sickness (requiring a doctor’s note), family
   emergency (requiring a Dean’s note), or religious observance (requiring prior approval from the
   instructor). There are no exceptions.
   Appeals
   If you believe a grade does not reflect your performance, you are welcomed to dispute the grade. I
   ask that all grade appeals be made in writing. In the memo, explain why you should receive a higher
   grade on that quiz, examination, assignment, or analysis. This should be done within a week after
   the grade is announced and submitted after class or in office hours. Note that the individual who did
   not grade the quiz, examination, or assignment will be the one tasked with the re-grading. You will
   get a response in writing addressing your concerns.
   Students with Disabilities
   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
   Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities: 512.471.6259 or
   http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
   Religious Observances
   By university policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
   date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss an examination or an assignment in
                                                      3


     order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
     within a reasonable time after the absence.
     Academic Dishonesty
     “Scholastic dishonesty… includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying
     academic records, and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as,
     but not limited to, submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
     prior permission of the instructor, providing false or misleading information in an effort to receive a
     postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment), or the attempt to commit such
     an act” (Section 11-802 (b), Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities).
     If you have any questions about what constitutes scholastic dishonesty, you should consult with me
     and http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html. Any student that violates this
     policy will fail this course and have the details of the violation reported to Student Judicial Services.
     Emergency Evacuation Policy
     In the event of a fire or other emergency, it may be necessary to evacuate a building rapidly. Upon
     the activation of a fire alarm or the announcement of an emergency in a university building, all
     occupants of the building are required to evacuate and assemble outside. Once evacuated, no one
     may re-enter the building without instruction to do so from the Austin Fire Department, University
     of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     Students should familiarize themselves with all the exit doors of each room and building they
     occupy at the university, and should remember that the nearest exit routes may not be the same as
     the way they typically enter buildings.
     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructors in writing during the first
     week of class. Faculty members must then provide this information to the Fire Prevention Services
     office by fax (512.232.2759), with “Attn. Mr. Roosevelt Easley” written in the subject line.
     Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at
     http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
     Additional Policies
     Since studies have shown people are more likely to multi-task (i.e., be distracted and be distracting)
     when they are sitting behind a computer,1 I do not allow laptop computers or tablets in the
     classroom. In the same spirit, please do not check your email, browse the internet, or send texts on
     your phone in the middle of class. I reserve the right to confiscate your phone for the class period
     and/or penalize the entire class for violations of this policy.
     Also, when emailing me, address me with either “Prof” or “Dr”. Do not use messaging or Twitter
     language. I reserve the right to not respond to emails in the twelve hours before an examination date
     or an assignment due date.
     .
1 Fried, Carrie B. 2006. “In-class laptop use and its effects on student learning.” Computers and Education
50: 906-914.
                                                        4


COURSE SCHEDULE
Week 1
             08/30 (Thursday) — Introduction
             09/04 (Tuesday) — Overview of Southeast Asia
Week 2
         Ethnicity: Concepts and Measurements
             09/06 (Thursday) — Political Ethnicity in Southeast Asia
                • [Canvas] Davidson, Jamie. “The Study of Political Ethnicity in Southeast Asia.”
             09/11 (Tuesday) — Coding Assignment
Week 3
         The Philippines
             09/13 (Thursday) — Democracy: The Early Years
                • SarDesai: 186-189.
             09/18 (Tuesday) — Personalist Dictatorship: Marcos
                • SarDesai: 189-196.
Week 4       09/20 (Thursday) — Democracy: Post-Marcos
                • SarDesai: 196-207.
             09/25 (Tuesday) — Democratic Backsliding: Duterte
                • [Canvas] Coronel, Sheila. “I Will Kill All the Drug Lords.”
Week 5
                     Due: Coding Assignment for Philippines/Indonesia [email]
         Indonesia
             09/27 (Thursday) — Personalist Dictatorship: Sukarno
                • SarDesai: 256-260.
             10/02 (Tuesday) — Military Dictatorship: Suharto
Week 6
                • SarDesai: 260-265 (stop at “The Downfall of Suharto”).
             10/04 (Thursday) — Midterm Examination
             10/09 (Tuesday) — Democratization: Downfall of Suharto
                • SarDesai: 265-266 (stop at “Indonesia after Suharto”).
Week 7       10/11 (Thursday) — Democracy: Post-Suharto
                • SarDesai: 266-270, 273-277.
                     Due: Coding-Based Paper Assignment for Philippines/Indonesia [hard copy]
                                                       5


          Thailand
             10/16 (Tuesday) — Monarchical Dictatorship: Rama Dynasty
Week 8
                • SarDesai: 118-123.
             10/18 (Thursday) — Military Dictatorship: From Phibun to Prem
                • SarDesai: 161-164, 237-248.
             10/23 (Tuesday) — Democracy: Thaksin
                • SarDesai: 248-251.
Week 9
             10/25 (Thursday) — Democratic Backsliding: Red Shirts, Yellow Shirts, and the Military
                • [Canvas] Hewison, Kevin and Kengkij Kitirianglarp. “Thai-Style Democracy.”
                     Due: Coding Assignment for Thailand/Myanmar [email]
          Myanmar
             10/30 (Tuesday) — Personalist Dictatorship: U Nu
Week 10
                • SarDesai: 214-217.
             11/01 (Thursday) — Military Dictatorship: Tatmadaw
                • SarDesai: 217-227.
             11/06 (Tuesday) — Democratization: Aung San Suu Kyi
                • [Canvas] Barany, Zoltan. 2018. “Burma: Suu Kyi’s Missteps.”
Week 11
                     Due: Coding-Based Paper Assignment for Thailand/Myanmar [hard copy]
             11/08 (Thursday) — Democracy: Alliance Party
                • SarDesai: 285-288.
          Malaysia
             11/13 (Tuesday) — Party Dictatorship: National Front and Mahathir
Week 12
                • SarDesai: 291-300.
             11/15 (Thursday) — Party Dictatorship: Post-Mahathir Politics…and the Return of Mahathir
                • SarDesai: 300-301.
             11/20 (Tuesday) — Democracy: Post-National Front
                • [Canvas] Weiss, Meredith. TBA.
Week 13              Due: Coding Assignment for Malaysia/Cambodia [email]
             11/22 (Thursday) —No Class (Thanksgiving)
                                                      6


          Cambodia
              11/27 (Tuesday) —Personalist Dictatorship: Sihanouk
Week 14
                 • SarDesai: 325-327.
              11/29 (Thursday) — Party Dictatorship: Khmer Rouge
                 • SarDesai: 340-342.
              12/04 (Tuesday) — Party Dictatorship: Hun Sen
                 • [Canvas] TBA
                      Due: Coding-Based Paper Assignment for Malaysia/Cambodia [hard copy]
Week 15   Minority Recognition in Southeast Asia
              12/06 (Thursday) — Minority Recognition in Southeast Asia
                 • [Canvas] Liu, Amy H., Jennifer Gandhi, and Curtis Bell. “Democracy and Minority
                     Language Recognition.”
              12/14 (Friday) — Final Examination [2:00-5:00]
                                                     7
