                                ‫‪ARA 360L: Contemporary World Challenges‬‬
                                          ‫ﻗﻀﺎ<ﺎ ﻋﺎﻟﻤ@ﺔ ﻣﻌﺎ‪D‬ة‬
                                                                                                      ‫ُ‬
                                                                               ‫‪Q‬‬ ‫اﻷﺳﺘﺎذة‪ :‬ﻋﻼ ﻧﺠﺎح اﻟﺸﺎﻟ ‪S R‬‬
                                                                                    ‫اﻟﻤﻜﺘﺐ‪ :‬ﻏﺮﻓﺔ ‪CAL ٥٠٨‬‬
                                                      ‫اﻟﺴﺎﻋﺎت اﻟﻤﻜﺘ^@ﺔ‪ :‬ﻳﻮم اﻷر‪c‬ﻌﺎء واﻟﺠﻤﻌﺔ ﻣﻦ ‪١٢-١١‬‬
                                                         ‫اﻟ‪kjR‬ﺪ اﻻﻟ‪jon‬و ‪olla@austin.utexas.edu :pS q‬‬
                                                                                                ‫اﻷ‪#‬ﺪاف اﻟﻌﺎﻣﺔ‪:‬‬
                      ‫‪ 1‬اﻟﻄﺎﻟﺐ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻤﻨﺎﻗﺸﺔ ‪:‬ﺎﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌ=>?ﺔ ﻋﻦ ﻣﻮاﺿﻴﻊ ﻋﺎﻟﻤ?ﺔ ﻣﻌﺎ‪E‬ة‬        ‫ﺗﻤﻜ ‪3 2‬‬         ‫‪-１‬‬
                                                         ‫ﺗﻌ‪HG‬ﺰ ﺑﻨﻚ اﻟﻤﻔﺮدات ﻟﺪى اﻟﻄﺎﻟﺐ‬                  ‫‪-２‬‬
                               ‫اﻟﻘ?ﺎم ‪:‬ﺎﻟ‪S‬ﺤﺚ واﻟﻤﻨﺎﻗﺸﺔ ﻟﻤﺠﻤﻮﻋﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻤﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت اﻟﻤﺘﻌﻠﻘﺔ‬                    ‫‪-３‬‬
                                                                         ‫اﻟﻘﺮاءات واﻟﻔ?ﺪﻳﻮ‪#‬ﺎت اﻟﻤﻄﻠ[>ﺔ‪:‬‬
        ‫ﺗﺤﻀ‪ ]2‬اﻟﻘﺮاءات اﻟﻤﻄﻠ[>ﺔ وﻣﺸﺎ‪#‬ﺪات اﻟﻔ?ﺪﻳﻮ‪#‬ﺎت اﻟﻤﻄﻠ[>ﺔ واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ اﻟﻔﻌﺎﻟﺔ ‪`a 3‬‬                     ‫‪-１‬‬
                                                                     ‫‪b‬ﺸﺎﻃﺎت اﻟﺼﻒ وﻣﻨﺎﻗﺸﺘﻬﺎ‪.‬‬
                                               ‫‪3‬‬             ‫‪k‬‬
 ‫اﺧﺘ?ﺎر ﻣﻮﺿ[ع ﻟﻠ‪S‬ﺤﺚ اﻟﻨﻬﺎ ‪ ja‬واﻟ‪S‬ﺤﺚ ﻋﻨﻪ ‪ `a‬اﻟﻌ=>?ﺔ و‪H‬ﺠﺐ اﺳﺘﺨﺪام ﻧﺼﻮص ﻣﺴﻤﻮﻋﺔ‬                             ‫‪-２‬‬
                                                                                                ‫وﻣﻜﺘ[>ﺔ‬
                                                                                                  ‫ﻃ=‪H‬ﻘﺔ اﻟﺘﻘﻴ?ﻢ‪:‬‬
                                                       ‫اﻟﻤﻨﺎﻗﺸﺔ اﻟﻔﻌﺎﻟﺔ داﺧﻞ اﻟﺼﻒ ‪٪٢٠‬‬                   ‫‪-１‬‬
                                                                           ‫ﻛﺘﺎ‪:‬ﺎت ‪٪٢٠‬‬                   ‫‪-２‬‬
                                                                         ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت ‪٪٢٠‬‬                  ‫‪-３‬‬
                                                                   ‫ا‪x‬ﻤﺎل اﻟﻮاﺟ‪S‬ﺎت ‪٪٢٠‬‬                   ‫‪-４‬‬
                                                                   ‫اﻟﻤ|{وع اﻟﻨﻬﺎ ‪٪٢٠ ja k‬‬               ‫‪-５‬‬
                                                                                                ‫ﻣﺘﻄﻠ‪S‬ﺎت اﻟﺼﻒ‬
  ‫‪ -١‬اﻟﻤﻨﺎﻗﺸﺔ اﻟﻔﻌﺎﻟﺔ داﺧﻞ اﻟﺼﻒ ‪ :‬ﺗﺤﻀ‪ ]2‬اﻟﻘﺮاءة واﻟﻨﺼﻮص اﻟﻤﻜﺘ[>ﺔ وﻣﺸﺎ‪#‬ﺪة اﻟﻔ?ﺪﻳﻮ‪#‬ﺎت واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ‬
  ‫اﻟﻔﻌﺎﻟﺔ ‪b `a 3‬ﺸﺎﻃﺎت اﻟﺼﻒ‪ .‬ﺳ?ﺄﺧﺬ ‪#‬ﺬا اﻟﻔﺼﻞ ﺷ•ﻞ ﺣﻠﻘﺔ دراﺳ?ﺔ )ﺳﻤﻨﺎر( و‪#‬ﺬا …ﻌ ‪ †a 3‬أن اﻟﻘ?ﺎم ‪:‬ﺎﻟﻘﺮاءة‬
  ‫اﻟﻤﻄﻠ[>ﺔ وﻣﺸﺎ‪#‬ﺪة اﻟﻔ?ﺪﻳﻮ‪#‬ﺎت اﻟﻤﻄﻠ[>ﺔ ﻗ‪S‬ﻞ اﻟﺤﻀﻮر إ‪ Š‬اﻟﺼﻒ واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ اﻟﻔﻌﺎﻟﺔ ‪ `a 3‬اﻟﻤﻨﺎﻗﺸﺎت ‪#‬ﻤﺎ‬
‫ﻣﻜﻮﻧﺎن أﺳﺎﺳ?ﺎن ﻣﻦ ﻣﻜﻮﻧﺎت اﻟﺼﻒ‪ .‬اﻟﻤﺘﻮﻗﻊ ﻣﻦ اﻟﺠﻤﻴﻊ اﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ ‪ `a 3‬اﻟﻤﻨﺎﻗﺸﺎت وﺗﻐﺬﻳﺘﻬﺎ ‪:‬ﺎﻵراء ووﺟﻬﺎت‬
                                                    ‫اﻟﻨﻈﺮ اﻟﻤﺨﺘﻠﻔﺔ ﺣﻮل اﻟﻤﻮاد اﻟ • ‪ †a‬ﺳﻨﻘﺮأ‪#‬ﺎ أو ﺳ‪Ž‬ﺸﺎ‪#‬ﺪ‪#‬ﺎ‪.‬‬
‫• ﻟ•ﻞ ﻃﺎﻟﺐ ﻗﺎﺋﻤﺔ ﻣﻔﺮدات ﻟ•ﻞ وﺣﺪة ﺳﻨﺪرﺳﻬﺎ وﺳ?ﻜﻮن ﻣﻦ اﻟﻼزم ﻋ”‬
                                       ‫‪3‬‬                                ‫‪ -٢‬اﺧﺘ?ﺎر ﻣﻔﺮدات ﺟﺪ…ﺪة‪ :‬ﺳ?ﻌ ‪a‬‬
  ‫اﻟﻄﺎﻟﺐ أن …ﺨﺘﺎر •ﻠﻤﺎت إﺿﺎﻓ?ﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻨﺼﻮص اﻟﻤﻜﺘ[>ﺔ أو اﻟﻤﺴﻤﻮﻋﺔ ‪ `a‬اﻟﺪروس اﻟ • ‪ †a‬ﺳﻨﺪرﺳﻬﺎ وﺳ?ﻜﻮن‬


            ‫` ﺳ?ﺎق ﺟﺪ…ﺪ …ﻘﻮم ﺑﺘﺄﻟ?ﻔﻪ و™ﺴﺘﺨﺪم ﻓ?ﻪ اﻟ•ﻠﻤﺎت‬a 3 ‫ﺔ اﻟﻤﻔﺮدات اﻟﺠﺪ…ﺪة‬:‫ﻣﻄﻠ[>ﺎ ﻣﻦ •ﻞ ﻃﺎﻟﺐ ﻛﺘﺎ‬
                                                                                                      .‫اﻟﺠﺪ…ﺪة‬
  ‫ﺔ أﺳﺌﻠﺔ‬:‫ﻌﺪ •ﻞ وﺣﺪة ﺳ?ﻜﻮن ﻋﻨﺪﻧﺎ اﻣﺘﺤﺎن واﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن ﻗﺪ ›ﺸﻤﻞ اﻟﻤﻔﺮدات اﻟﺠﺪ…ﺪة واﺟﺎ‬: :‫ اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت‬-٣
                                                                                  .‫ﺣﻮل ﻧﺺ ﻣﻜﺘﻮب أم ﻣﺴﻤ[ع‬
      .(‫ ﻟ•ﻞ ﻣﻮﺿ[ع‬1     3 2 ‫ أﺳﺒﻮﻋ‬Š‫]ة )أﺳﺒ[ع وﻧﺼﻒ إ‬2‫ ﺳﻨﺪرس وﻧﻨﺎﻗﺶ ﻣﻮﺿ[ع واﺣﺪ ﺧﻼل ﻓ•]ة ﻗﺼ‬:‫ﺎت‬:‫ ﻛﺘﺎ‬-٤
 .‫ﺔ ﻣﻮﺟﺰ ﻟﻬﺬە اﻟﻤﻘﺎﻟﺔ‬:‫† ﻧﺪرﺳﻬﺎ وﻛﺘﺎ‬a • ‫ﺤﺚ ﻋﻦ ﻣﻘﺎﻟﺔ ﻟﻬﺎ ﻋﻼﻗﺔ ﺑﻨﻔﺲ اﻟﻤﻮﺿ[ع اﻟ‬S‫وﻣﻄﻠﻮب ﻣﻦ •ﻞ ﻃﺎﻟﺐ اﻟ‬
 `a 3 ‫ﺴﺎﻋﺪ‬¥‫ﺎت ﻣﺘﻨﻮﻋﺔ وﺳ‬S‫ ﺳﺘﻜﻮن اﻟﻮاﺟ‬.‫ اﻟﺼﻒ‬Š‫ﻞ اﻟﺤﻀﻮر ا‬S‫ﺎت ﻗ‬S‫ﻤﺎل اﻟﻮاﺟ‬x‫ …ﺠﺐ ا‬:‫ﺎت‬S‫ﻤﺎل اﻟﻮاﺟ‬x‫ ا‬-٥
                                                 .‫ﺔ واﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع واﻟ•ﻼم( وﺗﺤﺴ¨ﻨﻬﺎ‬:‫•ﻞ اﻟﻤﻬﺎرات )أي اﻟﻘﺮاءة واﻟ§ﺘﺎ‬
     ‫ﺔ ﻣﻘﺎﻟﺔ ﻣﻮﺳﻌﺔ ﻋﻦ أي‬:‫ اﻟﺠﺰء اﻷول ﻛﺘﺎ‬:1        3 2 ‫ ﻟﻬﺬا اﻟﺼﻒ ﻣﻦ ﺟﺰﺋﻴ‬jk‫ﺤﺚ اﻟﻨﻬﺎ‬S‫ ﻳﺘﻜّﻮن اﻟ‬:jk‫ﺤﺚ اﻟﻨﻬﺎ‬S‫ اﻟ‬-٦
                                                                         a                     a
        ‫ﻞ ®ﺴﻠ?ﻢ‬S‫ ﻗ‬1 3 2 ‫ •ﻠﻤﺔ وﺗﻘﺪ…ﻢ ﻣﺴﻮدة ﻟﻬﺬە اﻟﻤﻘﺎﻟﺔ أﺳﺒﻮﻋ‬2000 ‫` ﺣﺪود‬3 ‫ﻌﻨﻮان اﻟﺼﻒ‬: ‫ﻂ‬S‫ﻣﻮﺿ[ع ﻣﺮﺗ‬
                                                                                a
         ‫ﻌﺪ( وﻣﺘﻮﻗﻊ ﻣﻦ •ﻞ ﻃﺎﻟﺐ ﺗﺤﺪ…ﺪ ﻣﻮﺿ[ع اﻟﻤﻘﺎﻟﺔ و ﻣﻨﺎﻗﺸﺘﻬﺎ‬: ‫ـ ـﺦ ﺳ?ﺤﺪد ﻓ?ﻤﺎ‬H‫اﻟﻤﺴﻮدة اﻟﻨﻬﺎﺋ?ﺔ )اﻟﺘﺎر‬
         ‫ﺤﺚ ﻋﻨﻪ اﻟﻄﺎﻟﺐ اﻣﺎم اﻟﺼﻒ‬: ‫ ﺗﻘﺪ…ﻢ ﻣﺎ‬:ja 3 ‫ اﻟﺠﺰء اﻟﺜﺎ‬.‫ﺔ‬:‫ﺎﻟ§ﺘﺎ‬: ‫ﺪء‬S‫ﻞ اﻟ‬S‫ﺎﻻﺗﻔﺎق اﻟﻤﺴﺒﻖ ﻣﻊ اﻷﺳﺘﺎذة ﻗ‬:
                                                                                       .‫و|´ح اﻟﻤﻮﺿ[ع ﻟﺰﻣﻼﺋﻪ‬
Important UT and Departmental policies and regulations that apply to this course
Important Dates
      •   September 4th is the last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in
          registration require the approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
      •   September 14th Last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare and
          extenuating circumstances. Last day to drop a class for a possible refund. Last day a graduate
          student may, with the required approvals, add a class.
      •   November 1st is the last day a graduate student may change registration in a class to or from a
          credit/no credit basis. Also, it is the last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s
          approval, withdraw from the University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated,
          nonacademic reasons and it is the last day an undergraduate student may change registration in
          a class to or from a pass/fail basis.
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. The University’s Honor Code states: “The core values
of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.”Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your own, or that you did not
participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code.


Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more
information, visit the Student Judicial Services web site at www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ or call
471-2841.
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent, or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking
country, or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to enrollment in
this course must contact the Arabic Coordinator, Olla Al-Shalchi at olla@austin.utexas.edu immediately
to determine whether they can be placed in this course. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic
dishonesty.
Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-
6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented
to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be
discussed at that time. Five business days before an exam the student should remind the instructor of
any testing accommodations that will be needed. See website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Religious holy days.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible (a minimum
of 2 weeks here is required) so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence, particularly in the case where they might affect larger assignments
such as quizzes, skits, oral interviews, etc.
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work
and announcements. Canvas is available at http://courses.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS
Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this


policy      and     instructions    for   updating      your    e-mail     address    are    available     at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation
The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security,512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
      § Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
          buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
          assembling outside.
      § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      § Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
          week of class.
      § In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      § Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
      § Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
          found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Prohibition of Sexual Discrimination, LGBTQ Discrimination, Sexual Harassment, Sexual
Assault, Sexual Misconduct, Interpersonal Violence, and Stalking
It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin (“University”) to provide an educational and working
environment for its students, faculty, and staff that is free from sex and gender discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence (including domestic violence and
dating violence), and stalking. In accordance with federal and state law, the University prohibits
discrimination on the basis of sex and gender and prohibits sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual
misconduct, interpersonal violence, and stalking.
The        full     policy      statement       on     this     issue      can     be      found       here:
https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/prohibition-sexual-discrimination-sexual-harassment-
sexual-assault-sexual-misconduct
Students in need of assistance for this type of issue or any other personal emergency or crisis should
the Police and the Dean of Students via these resources and links:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/resourceslinks.php


Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer
student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
dropping more than that number.”
Campus Carry
    1.  The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do
        not attempt to question or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained
        to handle this situation.
    2.  There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited,
        including some portions of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible
        for knowing the locations that exclude concealed handguns and to plan their daily activities
        carefully.
    3.  License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on
        campus. "About" the person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in
        a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license
        holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the
        trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
    4.  All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times when the
        consequence of your activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are
        going to a Rec Sports area, have a class that requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or
        contact with other students, you might expose the handgun. Remember that there is no storage
        on campus except in a privately owned vehicle.
    5.  Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand those
        passions. However, regardless of your opinion about the legislation, you are required to follow
        the laws laid out by the State of Texas, and the policies of The University of Texas at Austin.
        We also ask that everyone show respect toward other members of the university community
        who have different views.
