AET304 Course Syllabus
        Foundations Of Arts And Entertainment Technologies
                                                   AET 304
      “In this electronic age, we see ourselves being translated more and more into the form of information,
                 moving toward the technological extension of consciousness.” – Marshall McLuhan
                                     Spring 2019, LAITS Online Broadcast
                                  MW, 10:00 – 11:30 am (and On Demand)
Instructor:                 Jack W. Stamps, DMA
Office Hours:               Wednesday, 2-3pm in the Foundry (main level DFA)
Lead TA:                    Thomas B. Yee, MM
TA Team Email:              onlineaet304ta@austin.utexas.edu
                            Only email the above address for AET 304-related matters! Any emails sent to Dr.
                            Stamps or Thomas directly will not be responded to. Any contact made to other
                            staff or faculty of the School of Design and Creative Technologies or the College
                            of Fine Arts about AET 304 matters will be considered a violation of class policy
                            and may negatively affect the consideration of your request.
I.       Rationale:
This course presents a broad overview of digital media technologies, software and
applications along with the fundamental concepts of digital representations of images and
signals. Students will study an assortment of entertainment concepts or experiences,
discover the underlying technology involved and learn how this technology is delivered to
the participant. For example: What is the relationship between circuit-bending and DIY
electronics? How does interactive art work? How do robotic lights move? How can a
dancer’s body movements affect the music that accompanies the dance? What goes on
behind the scenes of a large-scale live musical performance? How are 3D printers changing
art, manufacturing, and medicine? In pursuit of answers to such questions students will
also consider the cultural, philosophical, ethical and practical aspects of entertainment
technology.
II.      Course Aims and Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
    •   Understand the history, present and future of arts and entertainment technologies
                                                           1


  AET304 Course Syllabus
      •  Consider the historical landmarks of entertainment technologies and their continuing impact on
         popular culture aesthetics of the present and future
      •  Experience and investigate a wide range of cutting-edge arts and entertainment technologies
      •  Personally engage arts and entertainment technologies through three creative projects
      •  Gain introductory experience on visual- and audio-editing software and crowdfunding tools
      •  Explore the infinite combinatorial possibilities of arts and entertainment technologies
      •  Consider the cultural/political/economic implications of arts and entertainment technologies
      •  Think critically about how, why, and where entertainment technologies are deployed
  III.     Assessment Model:
           Attendance and Content Completion:                                                    15%
Attendance credit for the first three class sessions is assessed automatically based on being logged in to the
LAITS broadcast stream in Canvas for the entirety of the class session. Completion credit for the On Demand
content after the third class session is      assessed by viewing the entirety of video content or reading the
entirety of text content. Attendance credit for the first three class sessions may be excused by requesting
excused absences (see Section VI below). Completion of the On Demand modules may not be excused. All
content must be complete by May 8 at 11:59 PM.
           Session Comprehension Checks:                                                         10%
Comprehension checks during the first three class sessions will be assessed by Instapolls sent over the LAITS
broadcast stream in Canvas. You must be logged in to the stream when the Instapoll begins to receive the
Instapoll. If the Instapoll does not initially appear, do not refresh your webpage; the timing of receiving the
Instapoll varies based on internet connection. Comprehension checks for the On Demand content after the third
class session is administered at various points during the video content. The checks must be completed at that
time; backtracking in the video or refreshing the page will forfeit your ability to answer the check. Therefore,
attentiveness throughout the video content is essential. Instapolls for the first three class sessions may be
excused by requesting excused absences (see Section VI). On Demand checks may not be excused. All content
must be complete by May 8 at 11:59 PM.
           Quizzes (during “live” sessions) (4):                                                 20%
Each is worth 5% total semester grade. Email the TAs for a make-up quiz up to one week later.
           Topical Discussions (during “live” sessions) (4):                                     16%
Each is worth 4% total semester grade. Email the TAs for a make-up discussion up to one week later.
           Creative Projects (3):                                                                24%
Please see the Assignment Prompts in Canvas for detailed instructions about each Creative Project. Projects will
be accepted up to two weeks after the due date with an increasing late penalty. After the two weeks are up,
any late projectsmust be emailed directly to the TA Team and can only receive 50% maximum of the original
grade value. May 8 by 11:59 PM is the deadline for accepting late assignments.
           Final Exam (1):                                                                       15%
Absolutely no late submissions will be accepted for the Final Exam. A study packet will be provided.
                                                          2


AET304 Course Syllabus
          Letter Grade Policy:
          To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
          will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
          Thus, the conversion from percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
          A = 94 – 100
          A- = 90 – 93.999…
          B+ = 87 – 89.999…
          B = 84 – 86.999…
          B- = 80 – 83.999…
          C+ = 77 – 79.999…
          C = 74 – 76.999…
          C- = 70 – 73.999…
          D+ = 67 – 69.999…
          D = 64 – 66.999…
          D- = 60 – 63.999…
          F = 0 – 59.999…
IV.      Academic Integrity
Cheating and Plagiarism
By enrolling in this course, you agree to abide by the student Honor Code and Academic Integrity policies as outlined
by the Office of the Dean of Students here. Infractions of this policy will be severely penalized. We have uncovered
evidence of students cheating on quizzes or caught plagiarism on creative projects red-handed in past semesters.
In such cases, failing the course, suspension from school, or even expulsion are all penalties that may be applied
at the discretion of the Office of the Dean of Students. Academic Dishonesty may ruin your grade, academic career,
and can stain your reputation for decades to come.
Academic Dishonesty
“Academic dishonesty” or “scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the
student or the attempt to commit such an act. In AET 304, this includes but is not limited to:
         1) Submitting all or part of someone else’s work as your own, without properly crediting your
              sources (this especially applies to creative projects). When in doubt, cite your sources!
         2) Sharing answers to Comprehension Checks, Quizzes, or the Final Exam with other students
         3) Taking Comprehension Checks, Quizzes, or the Final Exam together with other students. If you are
              with other students during the broadcast, do not interact with them while taking these.
         4) Using forbidden aids like internet searches on Comprehension Checks, Quizzes, or the Final Exam
V.        Course Schedule
                                                             3


AET304 Course Syllabus
 Week      Date(s)                        Topic                                Assignments and Comments
     1       1/23      Introduction, Syllabus               Live Session: 10:00 – 11:30 AM, LAITS Video Stream Tool
     I.                     Music and Audio Technology
     2       1/28      The History of Music Technology      Live Session: 10:00 – 11:30 AM, LAITS Video Stream Tool
             1/30      A Closer Look at Logic X             Live Session: 10:00 – 11:30 AM, LAITS Video Stream Tool
     3      2/3-2/9    Modern Songwriting                   From Week 3 on, all content will be viewed On Demand through
                       Music and Concert Technologies       the Modules tab at your convenience/schedule.
     4    2/10-2/16    Benefits and Consequences
                       Cultural Implications of Sampling
   5.1    2/17-2/23    Adapting to the Digital Revolution
             2/20      Live: Unit I Discussion and Quiz
    II.                   Performance & Visual Technology
   5.2    2/17-2/23    Tools of Digital Visualization
     6     2/24-3/2    The .GIF as Art Form                 Creative Project 1: Short Recursive Animation (Due 3/9)
                       Robotics and Entertainment
     7      3/3-3/9    Projection Design
                       Max/MSP
              3/6      Live: Unit II Discussion and Quiz
   III.                      The World of Video Gaming
     8    3/10-3/16    From Pong to Tomorrow
                       Mobile Apps and Gaming
          3/17-3/23    Spring Break: No Class!
     9    3/24-3/30    Virtual Reality
                       Augmented Reality
   10      3/31-4/6    The Sociology of Gaming              Creative Project 2: Video Game Crowdfunding (Due 4/13)
                       Gaming Aesthetics Studies
  11.1     4/7-4/13    Video Game Design
             4/10      Live: Unit III Discussion and Quiz
   IV.                   The Democratization of Technology
  11.2     4/7-4/13    Makerspaces and DIY Technology
   12     4/14-4/20    Podcasting                           Creative Project 3: Podcast Episode (Due 4/27)
   13     4/21-4/27    Processing
   14      4/28-5/4    Subversive Technologies
                       Redemptive Technologies
              5/1      Live: Unit IV Discussion and Quiz
   V.                         The New Heuristics of Art
   15       5/5-5/8    The Device                           Final Exam Study Packet Distributed (approx.. 5/5)
                       Course Wrap-up and Takeaways         Late Projects (up to 50% Total Credit): Due 5/8, 11:59 PM
                                                            Extra Credit (from last two weeks): Due 5/8, 11:59 PM
           5/9-5/11    Final Exam: administered via Canvas  Absolutely no late submissions accepted! Due 5/11, 11:59 PM
                                                          4


AET304 Course Syllabus
VI. AET 304 Class Policies
        1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                   AET 304 in Spring 2019 is a hybrid broadcast course. This means that the first three class
                   sessions will take place live at the class times listed above. After the third class session, the
                   course content will be delivered in an On Demand format through the Canvas modules tab.
                   This means that students will be able to view video- and text-based content based on their own
                   schedules and optimal learning conditions.
                   (a) For the first three live class sessions, attendance—and attentiveness—is essential and
                        required. Attendance is facilitated through the LAITS broadcast stream in Canvas and
                        assessed by Instapolls. Students must attend the entire session to be counted present.
                   (b) After the third class session, attendance and participation is assessed automatically via viewing
                        video- and text-based content in the Modules tab in Canvas. Attentiveness is essential, and
                        multitasking during video content is highly discouraged. Students must view the entirety of
                        video content to receive completion credit.
                   (c) In addition to the first three live class sessions, there will be four live sessions (one per unit)
                        throughout the semester. Each of these sessions will consist of one Topical Discussion followed
                        by one Quiz over the unit material. These sessions will take place in the normal class time—
                        10:00 – 11:30 AM. The full session time may not be needed.
                   (d) If one must miss a class session and desires to ask for an excused absence, it is the student’s
                        responsibility to let the TA team know by email in advance of the absence. An excused
                        absence may not be granted if you notify us only after missing a class session. It is the
                        student’s responsibility to catch up with material or class activities missed due to the
                        absence—the TA team will not necessarily remind the student of what needs to be made
                        up from the class session missed.
                   (e) Instapolls and Attendance in the first three class sessions may be excused, but the Topical
                        Discussions and Quizzes in the four live sessions must be made up or they will receive zeroes.
                        Make-up Quizzes may be taken within one week of the live class session, and make-up Topical
                        Discussions may be submitted within one week as well. Contact the TA email to schedule a
                        make-up Quiz or receive instructions for a make-up Discussion.
                   Religious Holy Days
                   By UT Austin policy, you must notify the TA Team of your pending absence at least fourteen
                   days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
                   examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, we will
                   give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
                   absence. With advance notice, we are happy to accommodate religious holy days.
        2. Required Course Materials:
                   Required Textbook: Pixels, Samples, Lumens, Illusion by Dr. Jack W. Stamps. 2nd Edition. Kendall
                   Hunt Publishing (Dubuque, IA: 2018). Available in the UT Co-Op in paperback or as a digital copy
                   at the below link (with a $35 discount!):
                   https://he.kendallhunt.com/product/pixels-samples-lumens-illusion-foundations-art-and-entertainment-technologies
                   The textbook comes with a one-use code for accessing online supplemental materials including
                   links to videos, websites, music tracks, and more. Being able to access these online
                   supplemental materials will be essential to success in the course. Thus, buying a physical or
                   digital textbook with a working access code is required. Buying a used textbook may result in
                   having an access code that has already been used once and is thus invalid. Buying a new digital
                   copy from the link above is highly recommended.
                                                                  5


AET304 Course Syllabus
          3. Piazza and Email Correspondence:
                   There are two modes of correspondence between students and the teacher/TA team in AET
                   304: Piazza and Email. Carefully note the appropriate usage of the two tools:
                   Piazza: Accessible through a tab in Canvas, Piazza works as a forum space for AET 304 students
                   to ask questions about the course materials, discuss interesting course-related topics, and
                   quickly answer each other’s questions if TA action or attention is not required. For example: if
                   a student needs to clarify a question about the Creative Project instructions, the student may
                   ask on Piazza and receive confirmation or clarification from other students in the course. Dr.
                   Stamps and the TA Team reserve the right to delete posts that are inappropriate, off-topic, rude
                   to classmates, or violate academic integrity.
                   Email: Any student request that requires TA action or attention must be directed to the TA
                   Team email. Requests made through other channels will not be acknowledged.
VII. Other University Notices and Policies
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 or 1-866-329-3986. AET 304 will be unable to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details of a student’s
disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition or diagnosis when
receiving an official accommodation letter.)
    • If you require accommodations on completing assignments and quizzes/exams, please email a digital copy
        of your official SSD accommodations letter to the shared TA email address as soon as possible. We will be
        happy to provide accommodations as specified in the accommodation letter from SSD.
    • Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
        instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
        conversion, etc.).
    • Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips
        are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
        transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
    • Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
        phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
 to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
 partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
 Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
 5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
   undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
   dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
   than that number.”
                                                         6
