RS352 (ANT324L, ANS340): Japanese Religion and
Western Imagination
This course focuses on how Japanese religious traditions, particularly Zen, have been
viewed from the perspective of people living in non-Japanese societies since the end of
World War II. Using Ruth Benedict’s book The Chrysanthemum and the Sword as a
starting point, we will explore different ways in which non-Japanese have imagined
Japanese religious and ethical ideas and both explained Japanese behavior and adopted
(often stereotyped) ideas about Japan into their writings about philosophy and life. We
will discuss and deconstruct works by authors such as Alan Watts, Eugene Herrigel (Zen
in the Art of Archery), and Roberg Pirsig (Zen in the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance) as a
framework for thinking about how Japanese religious and ethical ideas have been
imagined in the West.
Required Books
Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance: An Inquiry...
Publisher: HarperTorch; 1st edition (April 25, 2006)
ISBN-10: 0060589469
ISBN-13: 978-0060589462
The Way of Zen
Publisher: Vintage; Later Printing Used edition (January 26, 1999)
ISBN-10: 0375705104
ISBN-13: 978-0375705106
Zen Mind Beginner's Mind
Publisher: Shambhala; 9/19/11 edition (June 28, 2011)
ISBN-10: 9781590308493
ISBN-13: 978-1590308493
Zen in the Art of Archery
Publisher: Vintage Books; Later Printing edition (January 26, 1999)
ISBN-10: 9780375705090
ISBN-13: 978-0375705090
Alan Watts in the Academy
Publisher: SUNY Press (July 2, 2018)
ISBN-10: 1438465548
ISBN-13: 978-1438465548


Assignments
1) Thought papers (500 words, maximum, 90%, 8 total)
Throughout the semester you will be required to turn in six one to two-page thought
papers (600 word maximum, 400 word minimum). This is an opportunity for you to
reflect specifically on the readings or film that interests you. The format of these papers
requires that you ask a question about the readings of film for that week and this is
separate from the weekly question assignment (they should not be the same question).
This can be a question that identifies a problem with the readings or a question that arises
in your mind more generally about the topic. It’s pretty loose, but you need to respond to
a question. At the beginning of each paper, write the question you have and then write
your reactions to the reading based upon the question. The writing can be a critique of
the reading due to the fact that the question was left unanswered or insufficiently
addressed, a question for further research/writing that arose in your mind related to the
readings, a question about methodology/bias/perspective/approach, etc.
You must turn in a total of 8 of these papers and you can select the weeks you wish to
skip. There are no deadlines on these papers, but you are strongly encouraged to
write/submit your papers in weeks that correspond to readings. The only rule is that you
must have turned in at least 4 papers by 31 October, 6 by 25 November, and all 8 papers
by 9 December. If you do not meet these targets, you will receive a ZERO for the
papers that are missing. Thus, for example, if you only turn in 3 papers by 31 October,
you will be graded on those three and receive a zero for the fourth.
3) Weekly question (10%)
On the weekends, you need to think about a question that comes to mind based upon the
readings for that week. Since we will spend quite a bit of time discussing the readings in
class, this will help you to formulate ideas. This is a completion grade. If you turn in a
question, you get full credit; if you don’t you get zero credit. Late questions will not be
accepted. You will need to do this 10 times throughout the semester. These should be
uploaded through Canvas. The assignments on Canvas allow you to input the text.


STANDARDS AND EXPECTATIONS
Grades are assigned as follows: 93-100 = A; 90 – 92 = A-, 88 – 89 = B+, 83 – 87 = B, 80
– 82 = B-; 78 – 79 = C+, 73 – 77 = C, 70 – 72 = C-; 68 – 70 = D+, 63 – 67 = D, 60 – 62 =
D-; below 60 = F. There is no scaling of grades. You are expected to attend class
regularly and to participate in discussion. There are no extra credit assignments in this
class. In general, I do not “bump” up final grades that are borderline. An 89 is a B+, a
79 is a C+, etc. I may make exceptions for students who have been regular contributors
to class discussion.
 GRADING RUBRIC
 Grade               Expectations/Standards
 A, A-               The grade of A will be only given for exemplary work. The paper, presentation, or exam
                     demonstrates a detailed understanding of the topic and provides a creative and scholarly
                     analysis of the issues. There is a clear thesis and the thesis is well supported. It is clearly
                     written, without typographical errors, spelling mistakes, or grammatical errors.
 B+, B, B-           This grade will be given to an exam, presentation, or paper that presents material clearly,
                     shows a basic understanding of the topic and provides a clear analysis of the issues. It is well
                     written, but may have some typographical errors, spelling mistakes, or grammatical problems
                     (there are few, however). There is room for improvement in both presentation and
                     content/structure of the argument.
 C+, C, C-           This grade will be given to a product that shows some problems in terms of understanding and
                     analyzing the materials. There are problems with writing, some typographical errors, spelling
                     mistakes, or grammatical problems. These are sufficient to hinder understanding of the
                     writing and argument. There are problems in the argument and its supporting data.
 D+, D, D-           This is given when there are significant problems related to understanding and analysis of
                     materials. The argument is poorly presented or is very weak. There are major problems with
                     writing, presentation style, spelling, grammar, etc.
 F                   This grade is given when there are extremely serious deficiencies related to understanding and
                     analysis of the topic at hand and there are major problems with writing, presentation style,
                     spelling, grammar, etc. The grade F indicates a very serious deficiency in the paper,
                     presentation, or exam.
 A-/B+, B-/C+, C-    Grades such as A/B indicate a paper, presentation, or exam that is borderline. This means that
 /D+                 the paper is between the two grades. An A/B indicates the paper, presentation, exam, etc. is
                     closer to an A; a B/A indicates it is closer to a B.
Ground Rules for the Course
    1. NO LOBBYING FOR INCREASES IN YOUR GRADES. I will not under any
        conditions entertain emails or other contacts that involve attempts to lobby for a
        grade. For example, if you calculate your final grade for the semester and it is a
        79.4, do not send me an email (or any other communication) trying to explain
        why you think you deserve a B-. Your grade is based upon your work, not upon
        your capacity to convince me that you deserve a particular grade. If you disagree
        with your grade, you should go through the process of appeal outlined below.
    2. NO OFFERING PRESENTS TO THE PROFESSOR OR TA. Although I
        appreciate it when a student has enjoyed the class and wishes to thank me or my
        TA with a gift, the rules of the university forbid this, and I also do not wish to


         receive such presents as they represent a conflict of interest. Please do not offer
         any sort of present—including candy, baked goods, etc.—at any time prior to,
         during, of after the course has ended. Gifts brought to my office will be refused
         and gifts left in my mailbox will be discarded.
     3. YOU MUST UNDERSTAND WHAT CONSTITUTES ACADEMIC
         INTEGRITY. You will be required to read and understand the academic
         dishonesty site provided by Student Judicial Services. This is your responsibility.
         The URL is http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Policy on Examination and Assignment Schedule: Examinations are to be taken on
the assigned date and time and assignments are to be turned in on the assigned date.
     q   There will be no make-ups in this class; if you miss an exam or paper due date,
         you will receive a zero. If you turn in an assignment late, it will receive the grade
         of zero unless there is a verifiable and acceptable reason for being late.
     q   If an examination or other due date conflicts with a religious holiday, you must
         contact the instructor prior to that date to arrange an alternative date to take the
         exam. If you have some type of important event, and can prove it, I will be happy
         to discuss an alternate date and time for you to take your exam—discussing it
         does not necessarily mean that I will approve the change in exam dates. You
         must give at least five business days prior notice in order to receive an exception
         to an exam date.
     q   Emergencies will be handled on a case-by-case basis, but will require evidence
         that proves that you actually encountered a situation that prevented you from
         taking the exam. Excuses such as being confused about the date of the exam or
         failing to wake-up early enough to make it to class on an exam day will not be
         considered acceptable and will receive a grade of zero.
Appealing Grades
It is important to understand that you earn your grades on assignments and exams and
that you earn your final grade for the course—I do not assign grades to your work, rather,
based upon the quality of the work you turn in, I arrive at an opinion about the grade
which you have earned. The grade you earn is based upon the quality of the work you
turn in—there are no other criteria that are used to arrive at a grade.
Should you find that you disagree with me on a grade you receive for an examination or
other assignment you turn in, you have the option of appealing your grade. If you want
to appeal your grade, you must follow the steps below within two days of my returning
the graded assignments. If you are not in class to receive the returned assignment, you
still have only two days from the date that I return them—you do not have two days from
the date that you receive your graded assignment(once I have returned the assignment to
the class, the clock is ticking). Follow these directions—if you do not follow the
directions, I may not be willing to consider your appeal:


• Provide the original assignment with any comments I have written on it, including
  the grade given. Keep a copy for yourself.
• Include a written explanation of why you believe that you have earned a grade
  different from the one I believe you have earned. I will assume that you will be
  appealing for a higher grade, but should you want to lower your grade, you are
  welcome to appeal for that as well. The written explanation should be no more
  than two paragraphs in length—it must be typed (single space is fine). Part of the
  success of your appeal will be based upon the quality of your argument as to why
  the grade I believe you earned is not appropriate. In your argument, you must
  indicate the exact grade that you believe you earned and explain why you believe
  this to be the case.
       o Keep in mind that the amount of time or effort you put into an assignment
           is not an adequate reason for changing a grade. If you spend four years
           working on something and turn in a product of poor quality, you will still
           receive a low grade. While there is no question that there is a correlation
           between the amount of work and time you put into an assignment and the
           grade you earn, as an instructor I cannot take into account how much
           time/effort you put into the assignment beyond the evident quality of the
           assignment you turn in. If you appeal your grade on the basis of the fact
           that you put a lot of work into the assignment, do not expect to receive a
           positive response. I may sympathize with you and will be more than
           happy to discuss how you can improve the quality of your work; but I am
           unlikely to change your grade.
       o Also keep in mind that asking me to “round up” a grade that is close to a
           higher grade is not considered an acceptable appeal. You may appeal a
           grade only when you believe that I have made an error in grading or have
           been unfair in my conclusion about the grade you have earned.
       o NOTE: In the case of a simple error in calculating your grade, you do not
           need to go through the above process. Simply see me after class and point
           out the error.
• You may be asked to come to my office hours to discuss your appeal. If this
  happens, come prepared to discuss/debate your appeal and to support your
  argument.
• Should you wish to discuss an appeal prior to actually submitting it, you are
  welcome to do so during my office hours (keep in mind that you only have two
  days in which to submit the appeal).
• If you want to appeal your final grade, you must provide all original graded
  materials for the semester to the instructor within five days of grades being posted
  to the CliPS online system. All of the above apply to appeals of final grades.
• Appealing a grade means that you are requesting that I re-evaluate your
  assignment(s) and the grade I believe you have earned. It is possible, although
  unlikely, that I will lower your grade if I feel that you have earned a grade which
  is lower than the one I original believed to be appropriate.


POLICY ON ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
You are expected to adhere to university requirements on academic honesty and integrity.
Behaviors such as plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, copying of another student’s
work, or cheating on examinations in any form will be viewed as an offense against the
academic community and will be dealt with accordingly. If you are uncertain about what
constitutes academic integrity (for example, if you are uncertain about what constitutes
plagiarism), you can either meet with the instructor or visit the web site of Student
Judicial Services (http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/). In the event that a student is
found engaging in behavior that violates university policies on academic integrity, as
stipulated by the office of Student Judicial Services, the student will receive the grade of
F for the course and will be reported to the office of Student Judicial Services, where
further disciplinary action may be taken. There will be no exceptions.
UNIVERSITY ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATION POLICY
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will
be responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements.
POLICY ON LAPTOPS AND OTHER TECHNOLOGY USAGE IN CLASS
    •   You are encouraged to bring your laptop computer to class to use for taking notes.
        However, I do not want you to surf the web or otherwise use your computer for
        things not related to class while I am lecturing. Aside from the fact that it is rude,
        it is distracting to other students (particularly those behind you during lectures)
        and also distracts YOU from the lecture or discussion. My lectures may be
        boring, but I still expect you to pay attention (or at least to do a good job
        pretending to pay attention). Don’t think that because I cannot see your screen, I
        don’t have any idea that you are surfing the web. It is actually quite easy to tell
        when people are surfing the web simply by looking at their faces. If I find that a
        student is not adhering to this policy, I will ask the student to meet me during
        office hours to discuss an appropriate penalty. Expect a minimum of a 5%
        reduction in your final grade if you are caught using your laptop during class for
        purposes unrelated to the course. You are welcome to surf the web to look for
        information directly related to what we are discussing in class.


    •   Please turn off your cell phone before coming to class, unless you don’t mind my
        stopping class and asking you to answer a call while we all wait and listen (yes,
        I’ve done it before).
    •   Some students, particularly those for whom English is not their first language,
        may wish to record lectures. You are welcome to do so.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY POLICY
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf
or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of
the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. We do not
have any in-class exams, however, if you need any sort of special accommodation for the
take-home exam, you need to give me at least five business days notice so that we can
work out what you need. See following website for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php.
Office Hours
My office hours for this semester are listed at the beginning of this syllabus. I will
normally be in my office during those hours; however, I am often also in my office at
other times. You are free to visit my office at any time—you are not limited to visiting
during office hours. If the door is shut, just knock. If I am busy (with meetings, etc.)
outside of office hours, I will let you know or I won’t answer the door.
TENTATIVE CLASS SCHEDULE
All articles are available on Canvas (marked with <). You are expected to have
completed the readings for each week on the Monday of that week. You should be
prepared to discuss readings in class.
8.28-30 Orientalism
<Readings: Three articles on Orientalism, you can find these on Canvas
9.2-6 Orientalism and Western Imagination
Get ahead on reading this week
9.9-13 What is Japanese Religion?
<Readings: Plath
9.16-20 What is Japanese Religion?
<Readings: Fridell (State Shinto)


9.23-27 What is Japanese Religion?
<Readings: Connor/Traphagan
9.30-10.4 Ruth Benedict and the Western Gaze
<Readings: Benedict Chapters 2,3,6, 7
10.7-11 Ruth Benedict and the Western Gaze
<Reading: Chapters from Benedict’s Chrysanthemum and Sword
Chapters 9 and 11
10.14-18 Zen: History and Ideas
Reading: Watts, The Way of Zen, Part 1, pp. 3-114
10.21-25 Zen: History and Ideas
Reading: Watts, The Way of Zen, Part 2, pp. 115-end
10.28-11.1 Zen: Dōgen
<Readings: Three articles on Dōgen’s philosophy
11.4-8 Zen: A Japanese Perspective
Reading: Suzuki, Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind, entire book
11.11-15 Movie Week
Banmei Takahashi. 2009. Zen.
11.18-22 Zen: A German Perspective
Readings: Zen in the Art of Archery, entire book
*11.25-29 Zen: An American Perspective (Thanksgiving Week)
Reading: Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, Chapters 1 - 15
12.2-9 Zen: An American Perspective
Reading: Pirsig, Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, Chapters 16 - end
