                  THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number: SW 381R                          Professor: Jolynne Batchelor, Ph.D., LCSW
Unique Number: 87570                            Email: jolynne.batchelor@austin.utexas.edu
Semester: Summer 2020                           Office: Through zoom
Meeting Time/Place: Mon/Wed                     Office Phone: 512-721-8136
1:30pm-4:00pm                                   Office Hours: Mon/Wed 1:00pm-1:30pm
Through zoom                                    Other times by appointment
                         THEORIES AND CRITICAL PERSPECTIVES
         OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
I.      STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This graduate-level course will focus on empirically based theories and conceptual approaches
that undergird social work practice and research with individuals and families in social systems.
Ecological-systems theory and a lifespan developmental framework will serve as conceptual
guideposts for understanding social work’s person-in-environment, contextual approach to the
reciprocal relationship between human behavior and the social environment. Other traditional
and alternative theories are also examined, including Psychodynamic, Cognitive Behavioral,
Social Learning, Empowerment, Transpersonal, and Feminist. A critical perspective is
emphasized to understand (1) theoretical knowledge construction, engagement, assessment,
intervention, evaluation, and integration, and (2) theoretical relevance to explain the influence
and contribution of factors related to race, ethnicity, culture, gender, age, sexual orientation,
socio-economic status, and physical and mental ability to human behavior and development.
Methodological, empirical, and ethical considerations of contemporary issues (i.e., poverty,
privilege, oppression, risk, and resiliency) and multi-dimensional aspects of the human
experience and change across the lifespan (i.e., biological, psychological, social, cultural, and
spiritual) will be critically examined.
II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, the student will be able to:
        1.       Demonstrate knowledge about and critically analyze relevant theories of human
                 behavior and development comparing definitional components, philosophical
                 underpinnings, value assumptions, strengths, and limitations.
        2.       Analyze the reciprocal relationships of human behavior and social systems, and
                 how this interaction influences health and well-being as well as risk and
                 vulnerability.
        3.       Describe the social construction of theoretical concepts, empirical evidence, gaps
                 in knowledge, and relevant controversies regarding theories of human behavior
                 and development.
        4.       Analyze the impact of such factors as race, ethnicity, culture, gender, age, sexual
                 orientation, socio-economic status, and physical and mental ability on risk and
                 resilience, identity development, and human interactions within social systems.
        5.       Understand the interaction between the biological, psychological, social, cultural,
                 and spiritual dimensions of the human experience and lifespan development.
                                                                                                     1


        6.      Conduct a scientific review of empirical evidence and theory to address human
                behavior and development topics.
        7.      Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person in
                environment, and other multidisciplinary theoretical frameworks to engage
                with clients and constituencies, assess data from clients and constituencies,
                select and implement interventions with clients and constituencies, and
                evaluate practice with individuals, families, and groups.
EPAS Competencies
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on
Social Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the UT
SHSSW engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s
Education Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of
knowledge, skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following
competencies:
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 6.1: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other multidisciplinary theoretical frameworks to engage with clients and
constituencies.
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 7.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in the analysis of assessment
data from clients and constituencies.
Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 8.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in interventions with clients and
constituencies.
Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations,
and Communities
Outcome 9:2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in evaluating practice with
individuals, families, and groups.
III.    TEACHING METHODS
This class is conducted in an active learning approach using a variety of teaching methods such
as lectures, videos, guest speakers, and group discussions. Students are expected to complete
assigned readings of chapters, cases, and other assigned materials prior to each class period.
IV.     REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Hutchison, E. D. (2015). Dimensions of human behavior: Person and environment (5th ed.)
        Sage Publication, Inc., CA.
                                                                                                 2


Scales, T. L., & Wolfer, T. A. (2006). Decision cases for generalist social work practice:
        Thinking like a social worker. Thompson: Brooks/Cole, CA.
V.      COURSE REQUIREMENTS
1. LITERATURE REVIEW RESEARCH PAPER. There will be a literature review research
paper due as noted in the course schedule on a social work topic of interest to the student. Papers
should be typed Times New Roman 12 point font within 9-10 double-spaced full pages of text and
does not include counting the title and reference page. No first person. The paper should include
the following elements:
           1. Title Page – student name and title of paper included (abstract is not necessary)
           2. Introduction to the overall issue/problem area (3 points – about 1 page)
           Provides a clear statement of the issue you are focusing upon, including the
           importance or significance of the issue to social work.
           a). Establish the focus of the topic – what is the social or clinical problem you
           are addressing? What is the research question you want to answer in the paper?(1
           point)
           b). Must include demographic and statistical information: how many people have the
           problem or are impacted by the topic area (epidemiology) and how large is this
           problem (does it have societal cost as well as individual cost? (1 point)
           c). Explain the rationale for why this is an important issue to study; what is its
           significance to social work? (1 point)
           3. Review of the literature (6 points – about 6-7 pages)
           Although a literature review is a description of relevant research on your topic, it is
           not simply a summarization of a few studies; the literature must be synthesized as it
           relates to issues or subtopics in your area. Synthesizing means critical thinking and
           critiques of the empirical research articles are expected in the review. Organize the
           review by subheadings that guide the reader through a logical flow of ideas. When
           citing literature on your topic, group your references together when they point to a
           common issue you are discussing. Point out conflicts in the literature, as indicated by
           critical thinking skills. Use the results of studies you are citing to show empirical
           evidence related to the topic you are discussing. The literature review presents others'
           ideas; therefore, it is written in third-person. Do not use first person in any part of the
           literature review.
           Be sure your literature review can address a research question that you want to find
           an answer to; for example, what are some interventions used to avoid burnout? Or
           what kinds of immediate supports do victims of human trafficking need when they
           initially settle into the United States?
           a). Use at least 8 evidence-based, peer-reviewed journal articles for your literature
           review (only 1 website may be used in reference list for demographic information).
           b). Use current literature (try to use literature published no earlier than 2000) from
           peer- reviewed sources.
           c). Only include literature that is relevant to your topic.
           d). Make sure topic flows logically and moves from one point to another with
           appropriate transitions between paragraphs.
                                                                                                      3


            e) Be sure to include evidence-based research studies and summarize the sample,
            methodology, and findings in the empirical studies.
            4. Conclusions (3 points- 2pages)
            Sum up the literature by answering:
            1) What does this literature review mean for the field of social work? (1 point)
            2) What are possible implications for research, policy, and practice that you
            recommend for future directions (2 points)
            5. Writing Style and References (3 points)
             a). Style formatting of citations throughout the paper and reference list must follow
            Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association - APA citations must
            be used appropriately and often. Remember, if you are quoting material exactly, you
            must put content inside quotations and add page numbers of where that quote can be
            found.
            b). Grammar, spelling errors, incoherence in writing, or using the first person instead
            of the third person voice will be graded.
            c). Use at least 8 evidence-based, peer reviewed journal articles for your literature
            review (only 1 website may be used in reference list for demographics).
            d). Use current literature (use literature published no earlier than 2000 unless you can
            justify there is no current literature) from peer-reviewed journal article sources.
            Magazines and newspapers are not peer-reviewed sources.
            e). Make sure topic flows logically and moves from one point to another with
            appropriate transitions between paragraphs.
            f) Typed, 12 point Times New Roman font, 9-10 full pages, double-spaced.
            The assignment is worth total 15 points.
2. HBSE COMMON ASSIGNMENT: CASE ANALYSIS PAPER. The assignment is for
students to write a case analysis paper focusing on how to engage, assess, intervene, and evaluate
practice with an individual, a family, a group, an organization, or a community. Each student
will sign up for the case they want to analyze. The Case choices are #3, #4, and #8 from the
Scales & Wolfer book. Students need to choose a case different from cases they may be
assessing in other classes.
The paper will have several parts:
Competency 6/Part 1 and 2:
6.1) Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person in environment,
and other multidisciplinary theoretical frameworks to engage with clients and constituencies.
PART ONE Introduction and relevant background information (3pts): In the introduction
be sure to clearly indicate who you are identifying as the targeted client system, which can be an
individual, family, group, organization, or community, and why you chose that system as the
client. The introductory background information is to include detailed relevant facts related only
to the targeted client system you chose. This is grounded in the case information presented about
the client system you chose to focus on in the case and not based on unwritten assumptions,
stereotypes, or biased opinions. This information should help explain the behavior of the client
system in its social environment.
                                                                                                    4


PART TWO Engagement of the Client in the Case (3pts): Use a strengths-based and
empowerment theoretical framework to engage the client. It is important to engage the client and
develop a relationship so the client will be willing to seek and receive help. Be sure to describe
the engagement strategies such as empathy, reflection and interpersonal skills used with the
targeted client system in the case. Remember the targeted client system can be an individual,
family, group, organization, or community.
Competency 7/Part 3:
7.2) Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-environment,
and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in the analysis of assessment data from clients
and constituencies.
PART THREE Assessment of the Case (3pts): In reviewing the case, collect and organize the
information data from the case study and describe a single problem that the targeted client
system is facing in the case. Demonstrate critical thinking skills in analyzing the assessment of
the case. Choose one theoretical framework that guided the assessment of the problem of the
targeted client system. Use 3 references/citations of evidence-based, peer-reviewed literature
(journal articles) to offer support documentation about the assessments of the problem described.
All have to be referred journal articles published later than the year 2000.
Competency 8/Part 4:
8.2) Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-environment,
and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in interventions with clients and
constituencies
PART FOUR Intervention Strategies (3pts): Develop intervention goals and select appropriate
intervention strategies. Describe how the intervention strategies will be implemented. Be sure
the problem has its own intervention strategy to address it. Be sure to use a theoretical
framework to guide the intervention selection and implementation. Use 3 references of referred
journal articles supporting the intervention chosen to address the problem identified and clearly
stated in the assessment section of the case.
Competency 9/Part 5:
9.2) Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-environment,
and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in evaluating practice with individuals,
families, and groups
PART FIVE Evaluation of Practice (3pts): Select and use appropriate methods to evaluate the
interventions selected. Write up how you would know if the intervention you chose was
effectively dealing with the problem. In other words, tell how you would know if the
intervention is working to address the selected problem. Be sure to use a theoretical framework
to guide the evaluation of the intervention selected and implemented.
        APA/Writing/Grammar/Paper Length (5pts)
        The case analysis paper should be typed, double-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman
        font, at least 8 full pages in length (excluding title and reference pages), and must adhere
        to APA 6th edition. No first person. Each paper should be supported with a minimum of 6
        referenced journal articles. ALL 6 journal articles have to be recent ones, published in
                                                                                                     5


        the year 2000 and later. Three references are to be used as evidence-based sources of
        documentation in the assessment of the case and three references are to be used as
        evidence-based sources for the intervention strategies sections of the case analysis paper.
        Writing style, clarity, spelling/grammar problems, references in APA, length, etc. is
        considered in final grade. Please include a title page. The total points for the case
        analysis paper is 20 points.
3. CASE ANALYSIS GROUP PRESENTATION. Students will sign up for one case which
will be presented in a group presentation. The Case choices are #2, #1, #5 and #7 from the Scales
& Wolfer book.
Students will be assigned into a group to lead the case discussion for each case. The group will
present the introduction to the case, engagement of the client system, analysis of assessment of
the 3 problems with a theoretical framework, and 3 interventions addressing each of the 3
problems for the case, grounded in theoretical frameworks for the intervention selection and
implementation. The group will lead a mock team meeting where classmates will contribute to
further analysis of the case based on the homework sheet done by all students, except those who
are leading the group presentation.
The purpose of presenting your case analysis is to gain experience presenting a case and
engaging and describing your opinions to your peers. The presentation will mirror a case meeting
that many social workers have at their practice settings. Thus, the entire class will be
contributing to the discussion. Presentations will last for approximately 25-30 minutes. The
group will address all the components listed for the final case analysis write-up. Presenters will
lead the discussion and class members will actively ask questions throughout the presentation
and provide feedback to the presentation in terms of implications of the findings of the group.
Creativity is HIGHLY encouraged….please make it interesting! Each member of the group will
be given a group grade. On the day of the presentation, one member of the group needs to
submit a full bulleted outline of the entire presentation that makes note of which part of the
presentation each student researched/presented. The assignment is 10 points.
4. MIDTERM AND FINAL EXAMS. There will be a mid-term exam and final exam on dates
noted in the course schedule. Exams will cover readings and class lectures covered prior to the
exam date (for the midterm this is Hutchison chapters 1-6 and for the final this is Hutchison
chapters 7-12). The final is not cumulative. Videos, class activities, and guest lecturers are part
of the class and will also be covered on exams. Exams will be administered through Canvas and
open at the start of the class time on the date due. Exams will be timed. If you are unable to take
an exam on the assigned date/time for any reason other than an emergency, you must notify the
professor at least one week in advance of the test date. If you do not, then it may result in not
taking the exam. On exam days, you will need to start the exam on time. If you arrive late, extra
time will not be given for the exam. If you do not take the exams, you may be in jeopardy of not
passing the course. Both midterm and final exam are 20 points each.
5. ACTIVITY LEARNING PRESENTATIONS. On the week assigned, a small group of
students will choose ONE Activity Learning exercise from that week’s chapter in the Hutchison
book and lead a 15 minute class discussion about the Activity Learning exercise selected.
Students will have to meet outside of class and organize themselves to prepare and do the
Activity Learning exercise as a group.
                                                                                                    6


6. Class Participation, Attendance, and Case Homeworks. Students will receive allotted 5
points of their total grade for their class attendance, class participation, Case Homeworks, and
professional conduct. Attendance will be taken every class period. A student may be excused and
miss two classes without penalty. For each additional class missed, one point will be deducted
from the class participation grade.
The use of computer is not allowed in class unless you have a professional letter explaining the
need. This letter needs to be presented to the professor within the first 2 weeks of the course. Cell
phones need to be turned off and put away during class time.
In addition, students who inappropriately use cell phones, computers, or any other technological
device during class will have points deducted from their participation grade.
In order to receive a passing grade for the course, ALL assignments need to be completed or
you may be in jeopardy of failing the course.
    Assignments                                                                           Points
      Literature Review Research Paper                                                    15 pts
      Case Analysis Paper                                                                 20 pts
     Mid-term Exam                                                                         20pts
     Case Analysis Group Presentation                                                      10pts
     Final Exam                                                                            20pts
     Activity Learning (average of 3 presentations)                                       10 pts
     Class Participation, Attendance, Case Homeworks                                        5pts
TOTAL 100 pts
The final total of 100 points will be scaled to the 100 point grading scale for the final grade.
VI.      GRADES
         94.0 and Above               A
         90.0 to 93.999               A-
         87.0 to 89.999               B+
         84.0 to 86.999               B
         80.0 to 83.999               B-
         77.0 to 79.999               C+
         74.0 to 76.999               C
         70.0 to 73.999               C-
         67.0 to 69.999               D+
         64.0 to 66.999               D
         60.0 to 63.999               D-
         Below 60.0                   F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
1. Class Attendance. Class attendance is required every class period for the entire class time
    period in order to get credit for attending class that day. Attendance will be taken each class.
    It is the student’s sole responsibility to sign the attendance sheet each class. Students may not
    sign in for each other because that would be forgery and violating UT’s expectations for
                                                                                                    7


    academic integrity. This behavior may result in academic dismissal from UT or from the
    SSW.
2.  Excused Absences. Students are allowed to have two excused absences due to unforeseen
    circumstances. Any classes missed beyond the 2 excused absences will be deducted 1 point
    per class missed. Any class material missed due to class absence is the student’s sole
    responsibility. If students know that they will have to miss a class, it is advised to notify the
    professor ahead of time.
3.  Class preparation. Before class time students are expected to read and/or complete the
    assigned chapter, handouts, case readings, and case homeworks prior to class. Students
    should be well prepared to participate in discussions and experiential learning assignments.
    Failure to demonstrate through discussions that one has comprehended the readings will be
    considered in assigning the class participation grade. If you do not verbally participate in
    class, it can affect your grade for participation.
4.  General assignment requirements. Assignments should be printed and handed to the
    professor during the class period on the due date. All assignments must be typed in double
    spaced and have one inch margins, typed in Times New Roman 12 point font.
    References/sources used in papers must be in American Psychological Association (APA)
    format and from evidenced based, peer reviewed journals. Do not write in first person. If
    questions about the credibility of a reference arise, consult with the professor. The professor
    is available by email to answer questions about assignments. Students should submit
    questions or requests for clarifications at least 24 hours before an assignment is due. If an
    assignment is due in less than 24 hours, the professor cannot guarantee a timely response.
    Assignments are expected to be completed by the class time. Assignments submitted after
    the class period (even on the same day) will be considered late. The professor may change
    the assignment, which if done will be with class discussion and majority vote approval before
    the assignment is changed. Students will be informed of any changes in assignments, due
    dates, and other class content. UT does not allow Incompletes (grade of X) to provide
    additional time to complete assignments.
5.  Assignment due dates. Assignments are due as indicated in the course schedule. Students
    will be penalized 3 points for each calendar day that an assignment is late and not turned in
    on the day it is due by the end of the class period. Please upload assignments on Canvas, not
    electronically by email. If for some reason the professor gives you approval to email an
    assignment, make sure your assignment when emailed includes your attachment and it
    successfully reaches the professor on time. If not, it may result in not receiving credit for the
    assignment if you did not check your computer and the professor never got the assignment.
6.  Electronics. It is expected that students will give full attention to the professor, guest lecturer,
    classmates, or the classroom activity that is happening. So to facilitate classroom
    communication, students may not use social media, the Internet, email, or cell phones
    (including texting) during class. Use of laptop beyond participating in class through zoom, if
    required in a letter from the Office of Services for Students with Disabilities, will be
    accommodated if so stipulated.
VIII.         UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
                                                                                                      8


DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
                                                                                                     9


Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
                                                                                                     10


the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    ·       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    ·       If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    ·       In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    ·       Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX.      COURSE SCHEDULE
   Date                 Topic                  Assignment Due                  Readings
                                                                                                    11


Class 1 Welcome/Introduction
  6/8   Review:
        -Introductions
        -Syllabus/HBSE Content
        -Activity Learning groups
        hello!
        VIDEO
Class 2 How to Write a Literature Start thinking about    Hutchison Ch. 1 & 2
 6/10   Review                    your literature review
                                  topic and your case     Scales & Wolfer, Ch.
        Theoretical Perspectives  choices (from Scales &  1& 2
        On Human Behavior         Wolfer) for your case
                                  analysis paper and case
                                  group presentation.
Class 3 Continue Theoretical      Submit your CHOICES     Scales & Wolfer, Case
 6/15   Perspectives On Human     for                     6
        Behavior                      1) Case Analysis
                                          Paper           NASW Code of Ethics
        Core Social Work Skills       2) Case Group       – uploaded on Canvas
                                          Presentation
        Case 6 Homework               3) LITERATURE
        Practice in groups                REVIEW
                                          RESEARCH
                                          PAPER TOPIC
                                          by
                                  by 11:59pm
Class 4 The Biological Person     Activity Learning for   Hutchison Ch. 3
 6/17                             group 1 (from Ch. 3)
        The Psychological                                 Hutchison Ch. 4
        Person
        Trauma: Guest Speaker
        Samantha Zuniga
        Thompson from the
        Texas Institute for Child
        and Family Wellbeing
                                                                                12


Class 5 The Psychosocial Person  Case 9 Homework Due   Hutchison Ch. 5
 6/22                            before class
        Risk & Resiliency:                             Scales & Wolfer, Case
        Guest Speaker Tym        Activity Learning for 9
        Belseth from the Texas   group 2
        Institute for Child and
        Family Wellbeing and
        former foster youth
Class 6 The Spiritual Person     Activity Learning for Hutchison Ch. 6
 6/24                            Group 3
        Time in class to meet                          Read the case assigned
        with your case                                 for your case group
        presentation group                             presentation BEFORE
                                                       CLASS so you can be
                                                       prepared to meet with
                                                       your group
Class 7 MIDTERM EXAM
 6/29
Class 8 The Physical             Activity Learning for Hutchison Ch. 7
  7/1   Environment              group 1
        VIDEO                    LITERATURE
                                 REVIEW RESEARCH
                                 PAPER DUE by
                                 11:59pm
Class 9 Culture                  Activity Learning for Hutchison Ch. 8
  7/6                            group 2
        Immigration and
        Deportation: Guest
        Speaker Ana Hernandez
        from the Texas Institute
        for Child and Family
        Wellbeing
 Class  NO class meeting. Work
  10    with your case
  7/8   presentation groups.
 Class  Social Structure and     Case 2 Homework Due   Hutchison Ch. 9
  11    Social Institutions      before class
                                                                              13


7/13                                                 Scales & Wolfer, Case
      Domestic Violence:      Activity Learning for  2
      Guest Speaker Anna      group 3
      Wasim from the Texas
      Institute for Child and GROUP CASE
      Family Wellbeing        ANALYSIS
                              PRESENTATION
                              Scales & Wolfer Case 2
Class Families                Case 1 Homework Due    Hutchison Ch. 10
 12                           before class
7/15  Fathers and Kinship                            Scales & Wolfer, Case
      Networks: Guest         Activity Learning for  1
      Speaker Kenneth         group 1
      Thompson from the
      Texas Department of     GROUP CASE
      Family and Protective   ANALYSIS
      Services                PRESENTATION
                              Scales & Wolfer Case 1
Class Small Groups            Case 5 Homework Due    Hutchison Ch. 11
 13                           before class
7/20                                                 Scales & Wolfer, Case
                              Activity Learning for  5
                              group 2
                              GROUP CASE
                              ANALYSIS
                              PRESENTATION
                              Scales & Wolfer Case 5
Class Formal Organizations    Case 7 Homework Due    Hutchison Ch 12
 14                           before class
7/22                                                 Scales & Wolfer, Case
                              Activity Learning for  7
                              group 3
                              GROUP CASE
                              ANALYSIS
                              PRESENTATION
                              Scales & Wolfer Case 7
                              CASE ANALYSIS
                              PAPER DUE by
                              11:59pm
                                                                           14


  Class     FINAL EXAM
    15
   7/27
X.      BIBLIOGRAPHY
(May be helpful in getting your analyses started; not to replace your own literature searches.)
Adams, K. B., Sanders, S, & Auth, E. (2004). Risk and resilience factors of loneliness
        and depression in residents of independent living retirement communities. Aging
        and Mental Health, 8(6), 465-475.
Arber, S. (2003) Gender, marital status and ageing: Linking material, health and social
        resources. Journal of Aging Studies, 18(1), 91-108.
Atwood, N. C. (2001). Gender bias in families and its clinical implications for women.
        Social Work, 46(1), 23-38.
Biggerstaff, M. A., Morris, P. M., Nichols-Casebolt, A. (2002). Living on the edge:
        Examination of people attending food pantries and soup kitchens. Social Work,
        47(3), 267-277.
Borowsky, I. W., Ireland, M., Resnick, M. D. (2001). Adolescent suicide attempts: Risk
        and protectors. Pediatrics, 107(3), 485-494.
Bui, H. N. (2003). Help-seeking behavior among abused immigrant women: A case of
        Vietnamese American women. Violence Against Women, 9(2), 207-237.
Burt, J.A., & Mutchler, J. E. (2003). English language skills, ethnic concentration, and
        household composition: Older Mexican immigrants. The Journals of Gerontology
        Series B, 58, S83-S92.
Conyers, J. (2007). The 2005 reauthorization of the violence against women act: Why congress
        acted to expand protections to immigrant victims. Violence Against Women, 13(5), 457-
        468.
Eamon, M. K. (2001). The effects of poverty on children’s socio-emotional development: An
        ecological systems analysis. Social Work, 46(3), 256-266.
Ellickson, P., & McGuigan, K. A. (2002). Early predictors of adolescent violence. American
        Journal of Public Health, 90(1), 566-572.
Erich, S., Leung, P., Kindle, P, & Carter, S. (2005). Gay and lesbian adoptive families: An
        exploratory study of family functioning, adoptive child’s behavior, and familial support
        networks. Journal of Family Social Work, 9, 17-32.
                                                                                                15


Green, R. J. (2000). Lesbians, gay men, and their parents: A critique of Lasala and the prevailing
        clinical wisdom. Family Process, 39(2), 257-267.
Jones, B. L. (2008). Promoting health development among survivors of adolescent cancer.
        Family & Community Health, 31, S61-S70.
Kivnick, H. Q., & Stoffel, S. A. (2005). Vital involvement practice: Strengths as more than tools
        for solving problems. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 46, 85-116.
Kulis, S., Marsiglia, F. F., & Hurdle, D. (2003). Gender identity, ethnicity, acculturation and
        drug use: Exploring differences among adolescents in the Southwest. Journal of
        Community Psychology, 13(2), 167-188.
Raj, A., & Silverman, J. (2002). Violence against immigrant women: The roles of culture,
        context, and legal immigrant status on intimate partner violence. Violence Against
        Women, 8(3), 367-398.
Rawal, P., Ramansky, J., Jenuwine, M., & Lyons, J. S. (2004). Racial differences in the mental
        health needs and services utilization of youth in the juvenile justice system. The Journal
        of Behavioral Health Services & Research, 31(3), 242-254.
Reimer, M. S. (2002). Gender, risk, and resilience in the middle school context. Children in
        Schools, 24(1), 35-47.
Richardson, J., Anderson, T., Flaherty, J., & Bell, C. (2003). The quality of mental health for
        African Americans. Culture, Medicine, & Psychiatry, 27, 487-498.
Rosen, A., & Zlotnik, J. (2001). Demographics and reality: The “disconnect” in social work
        education.. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 36(3/4), 81-97.
Scharlach, A., Damron-Rodriguez, J., Robinson, B., & Feldman, R. (2000). Educating Social
        Workers for an Aging Society: A Vision for the 21st Century. Journal of Social Work
        Education, 36(3), 521-538.
Sinclair, W., & Presinger, R. W., (2001). Environmental causes of infertility. Infertility and
        Miscarriage Research Summaries. On line: http://chem-tox.com/infertility/
Sternbach, Jack. (2000). Lessons learned about working with men: A prison memoir. Social
        Work, 45(5), 413-426.
Tanner, E. M., & Finn-Stevenson, M. (2002). Nutrition and brain development: Social policy
        implications. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 72, 182-193.
Tickamyer, A. R., Henderson, D. A., White, J. A., & Tadlock, B. L. (2000). Voices of welfare
        reform: Bureaucratic rationality versus the perceptions of welfare participants. Affilia:
        Journal of Women and Social Work, 15(2), 173-192.
Worthington, R. L., Savoy, H. B., Dillon, F. R., & Vernaglia, E. R. (2002). Heterosexual identity
        development: A multidimensional model of individual and social identity. The
                                                                                                  16


Counseling Psychologist, 30, 496-531.
                                      17
