                          The University of Texas at Austin
                       Department of Middle Eastern Studies
                      ARA 621K: Intensive Arabic III
                                ‫السنة الثانية‬/ ‫اللغة العربية‬
                              !‫أهال وسهال بكم ف الصف الثان‬
 Course Unique Number: 40120/ 40168 (Graduate Students)
 Instructor: Cheng-Wei Lin
                         Required Course Materials
● Brustad, Al-Batal, and Al-Tonsi. Al-Kitaab fii Tacallum al-cArabiyya: A Textbook for
   Arabic Part One. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. Third edition.
● Brustad, Al-Batal, and Al-Tonsi. Al-Kitaab fii Tacallum al-cArabiyya: A Textbook for
   Arabic Part Two. Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. Third edition.
● Textbook companion website: you will need to purchase access to the companion
   textbook sites for both Al Kitaab, Part 1 and Al Kitaab, Part 2. Please see the class
   Canvas page for sign-up instructions. The companion website is in the process of
   migrating between domains, so you will find it on one of the following two sites:
       ○ http://www.georgetownuniversitypresstextbooks.com/
       ○ https://books.quia.com
● Canvas: All communications for this course will be conducted through Canvas.
● Wehr, Hans. A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
       ○ Searchable online: http://ejtaal.net/aa/#HW=489,LL=4_283,LS=2,HA=380
       ○ Pdf available online: https://archive.org/details/Dict_Wehr.pdf
                               Course Objectives
● Speaking: As we continue to increase fluency, accuracy becomes more important. It
   is not enough just to speak; we want to speak in a way comprehensible to native
   speakers who are not Arabic teachers.
● Vocabulary: In al-Kitaab Part II, each lesson contains double or triple the number of
   new words compared to al-Kitaab Part I. This will require skills and effort on your
   part. We will show you how to develop the skills; the effort comes from you.
● Grammar: You will become grammar masters. Complex grammatical structures of
   Arabic beyond daily life will gradually play a bigger role in our materials.
● Listening: We will work on developing listening strategies with special focus on
   close listening (listening for details).


    ● Reading: Last year you learned to guess from context and ‫ ; جذر‬this year you will
       add more grammatical analysis to guess and construct the meaning of what you
       read. We will work on using an Arabic dictionary efficiently and intelligently.
    ● Writing: You will be able to write more fluently, with ability to write in both
       informal and formal styles.
    ● Culture: You will read and listen to pieces that address issues in Arab culture,
       including marriage and family relations, Arab diaspora communities, markets, and
       new media.
                             Assignments and Grading
Grade Distribution
Daily Attendance and Participation          20%
Daily Homework                              15%
Homework Corrections                        5%
Tests (5)                                   20%
In-class Quizzes                            5%
Presentations (2; skit and cultural video)  10%
Writing Portfolio                           10%
Final Exam                                  15%
Attendance and Participation (20%)
You will receive full marks for:
    ● Attending class on time.
    ● Speaking in Arabic, except when given permission to use English.
    ● Being fully prepared for class, ready to use and pronounce correctly new vocab and
       material. (You will lose points for not having prepared well—and this includes
       listening, which is detectable via your pronunciation)
    ● Being an active and respectful participant in all class activities and being helpful to
       classmates.
Points will be deducted for:
    ● Being late.
    ● Being uncooperative or having a negative attitude toward colleagues or activities.
    ● Being unprepared for class.
Laptops, cell phones, and tablets are not allowed in class except when permitted by your
instructor. Your instructor will inform you when the use of electronic devices is permitted.
Use of an electronic device outside of these instances will result in a reduction in your
participation grade.
                                              [2]


Gum is not allowed in class because it interferes with your ability to speak. Drinks are
permitted as long as they are in a sealed container. If you bring food, you must bring
enough to share, in keeping with Arab culture.
You will lose participation points for tardiness; for each 5 minutes you are late, your
maximum participation grade for that class day will decrease by 1 point. If you are 20
minutes late or more, this will count as an absence. Zero points will be given for an absence,
no matter the reason. Your lowest three participation grades will be dropped for grade
calculation purposes. You are expected to inform your instructor beforehand if you will be
absent from class.
Absence from more than 10 class sessions or more—whatever the reason for the
absence—will result in an “F” grade in the course. This is a departmental policy and no
exceptions will be made.
Homework (15%)
Homework is due at the beginning of class on the day designated in the schedule. Expect to
spend an average of 2 to 2.5 hours each day of the week, including Saturday and Sunday.
On each written assignment, please write the HW# underneath your name, and double-
space so we have space to give you feedback. Please submit all hand-written assignments in
pencil. All written and typed assignments must be double-spaced and legible.
Late homework will not be accepted after the fact. If there are extenuating circumstances
that will prevent you from turning in homework on time, contact your instructor before
class to discuss.
Homework is graded on our assessment of the effort and focus you put into it, not what you
get right or wrong. Please email your instructor if something is not clear.
Receiving help on homework from anyone outside Arabic III is cheating. This is a serious
offense and will be treated according to university policy. You are welcome to work
cooperatively with—not get answers from—your zumalaa’ in any section, but you must be
an equal partner in the work.
Your three lowest homework grades will be dropped for grade calculation purposes.
Grading Scale
Your homework will be graded on a scale of 0 to 5 (5=excellent; 4=good but not your best
effort; 3=barely passing; 2=poor; 1=very poor; 0=late or not submitted).
Homework on the companion website
                                              [3]


The work you do on this website is the single most important factor in your success in this
class. Shortcuts and cheating are serious offenses and will be treated according to
university policy, but in the end, you will be cheating yourself most of all, and your quiz
grades and participation grades will suffer. It is cheating, and cheating yourself, to look at
any of the answers before you submit your best effort. To receive full credit for vocabulary
and grammar drills, re-do the exercise until you get at least a 90%. We will be checking
your attempts in order to gauge your effort and progress.
Instructor Feedback
Your instructors spend as much time reading and giving feedback on your waajib as you
spend doing it. We do this because your waajib is our most important means of giving you
individual feedback. If we find that we are writing the same things over and over, your
grade will suffer, and communications with you will suffer. Office hours are ideal for going
over questions on waajib. Quick questions can often be answered right after class, time
permitting. You will be asked to correct and resubmit homework on an individual basis as
your instructors deem necessary. In this case, you will see Re-do instead of a grade, and you
will receive a grade for the homework when you re-submit with the corrections, within 2
days. Repeated instances of poor work will result in zero.
Homework Corrections (5%)
You will be asked to make corrections on specific written homework assignments
throughout the semester. Mistakes on homework are a natural part of the learning process.
However, for you to fully benefit from your mistakes, you need to go back and correct them.
The homework rating system in the class is designed to reward you for doing just that.
When you submit homework that will be corrected, your instructor or TA will underline or
circle mistakes to be corrected and label them with correction symbols using the correction
code (posted on Canvas). When you get your homework back you are expected to go over it
and correct the mistakes (using a different color ink or pencil) on the original homework
paper and next to what you wrote originally, and then resubmit it according to the daily
assignment schedule.
To get full credit for your homework corrections you must attempt to correct every mistake
pointed out to you. If you don’t understand why something is wrong, contact your
instructor/TA by email or in office hours to get more help.
Late corrected homework will not be accepted.
Tests (20%)
We will have 5 tests this semester, and exact test dates will be announced on your
homework schedule at least a week beforehand. If you think you will miss a test, contact
                                              [4]


your instructor as soon as possible. Requests for make-ups will be considered on a case-by-
case basis.
In-Class Quizzes (5%)
In addition to tests approximately every chapter, you will take a series of short, in-class
quizzes. These quizzes are designed as accountability mechanisms to ensure you are
keeping up with vocabulary and concepts covered in your reading assignments. Quizzes
will be announced ahead of time. You will not be allowed to make up quizzes if you were
absent on the day they were administered.
Your lowest quiz grade will be dropped for grade calculation purposes.
Presentations (10%)
Culture Video
You will make a video presentation about an aspect of Arab culture. Your grade will be
based on the quality of your presentation and your engagement with your peers’ work.
Details will be posted on Canvas in October. Your culture video will be worth 5% of your
overall grade.
Skit
You and a partner will prepare one skit (7-10 minutes) and present it in class together.
Further information about the skit's format and evaluation will be provided in October.
Your skit will be worth 5% of your overall grade.
Writing Portfolio (10%)
During this session you will do several extensive essays (‫ )إنشاءات‬as part of your writing
portfolio (‫)ملف الكتابة‬. The due dates, topics, and word length requirements for your writing
will be given on the weekly schedule. You will be required to correct some of these
assignments and submit them as final drafts as noted in advance on the weekly schedule.
Both first and final drafts will be graded and weighted equally in your Writing Portfolio
grade.
Your essays should be composed primarily in MSA (‫ )الفصح‬unless otherwise specified.
Essays will be only accepted if submitted on time, on paper, and in class. Essays submitted
via email will not be accepted or corrected.
                                                 [5]


All drafts should be typed in a large font with double spacing so your instructor can make
comments. When you submit a final draft, be sure to submit the first draft with your final
draft. Please include a word count on all of your essays.
First drafts will be graded as follows:
    ● 10: Your assignment
            ○ 1. Meets the length and submission requirements and is on-topic
            ○ 2. Is completely comprehensible
            ○ 3. Uses a substantial amount of new vocabulary and 4. new structures with 5.
               a high level of accuracy
    ● 8: Your assignment is well written but does not meet one of the above criteria
    ● 6: Your assignment does not meet two of the above criteria
    ● 4: Your assignment does not meet three of the above criteria
    ● 2: Your assignment does not meet any of the criteria
    ● 0: You did not submit the assignment or submitted it after the deadline without
        making prior arrangements with the instructor for late submission
Final drafts must meet the above requirements and also reflect:
    ● a clear effort to address your instructors’ feedback on your first draft in a thorough
        manner
    ● a clear effort to strengthen your writing style (through, for example, the use of
        connectors, vocabulary choice, or expanding your ideas)
    ● a clear effort to correct remaining/repeated errors (if you make the same mistake
        multiple times in your essay, your instructors will make a note of this; you are then
        expected to correct all the examples of that mistake in your essay)
Final Exam (15%)
The Registrar’s Office will schedule a uniform final exam for second-year Arabic. All
sections will take the exam at the same time. Once the date and time have been announced,
you will be notified. This exam will evaluate speaking, listening, reading and writing skills
in addition to your ability to use vocabulary and grammar. The listening portion of the
exam is tentatively scheduled for the final class day (Dec. 9).
Final Grade Calculation and Academic Credit
Your instructor will record your grades on Canvas on at least a weekly basis. It is your
responsibility to check your grades. If you notice any grade that you have a question about,
please discuss it with your instructor as soon as possible. If your question concerns a grade
you received on paper, bring the assignment in question to your instructor to discuss it.
                                               [6]


Plus/Minus grading is in effect in this course. Grades on the border between two letter
grades may or may not be rounded up to the next higher letter grade, at the instructor’s
discretion.
No Incompletes will be given for this course. Auditing is not permitted.
You must earn a C+ or higher to automatically continue to the 4th semester of Intensive
Arabic at UT Austin.
In all cases, final grading decisions rest with the course instructor.
Number/Letter Grade Equivalents
Number          Letter   Number       Letter    Number       Letter    Number        Letter
94 – 100        A        87 - 89.9    B+        77 – 79.9    C+        67 – 69.9     D+
                         84 - 86.9    B         74 – 76.9    C         64 – 66.9     D
90 – 93.9       A-       80 – 83.9    B-        70 – 73.9    C-        60 – 63.9     D-
                                                                              (Below 60% = F)
     Important UT and Departmental Policies and Regulations
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not
your own, or that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. More
information about the UT Honor Code can be found at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php.
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent, or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-
speaking country, or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT
prior to enrollment in this course must contact the Arabic Coordinator, Dr. Olla Al-Shalchi
at olla@austin.utexas.edu immediately to determine whether they can be placed in this
course. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Disabilities and Accommodations
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment
consistent with university policy and federal and state law. Please let me know if you
experience any barriers to learning so I can work with you to ensure you have equal
opportunity to participate fully in this course. If you are a student with a disability, or think
                                                [7]


you may have a disability, and need accommodations, please contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD). Please refer to SSD’s website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with SSD, please
deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the semester so we can
discuss your approved accommodations and needs in this course.
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-
protected site is created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas
course site regularly for class work and announcements. Canvas is available at
http://canvas.utexas.edu/ Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday
through Friday, 8 am to 6 pm. We strongly recommend that you subscribe to Canvas
notifications for announcements and messages as Canvas will be the primary method of
communication between the instructor and students.
Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official email student notification
policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his
or her email address. Students are expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis
in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that email be checked daily, but at
a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating
your email address are available at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-
mail-student-notification-policy.
Religious holy days
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the
absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence pursuant to Sections 51.911 and 51.925 of the Texas
Education Code. For the purposes of this course, the instructor must be notified by email of
any foreseeable absences due to religious reasons by the second Monday of the semester.
The exact dates during which the student anticipates being absent must be specified.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050
or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                [8]


Emergency Evacuation
 The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
 Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
     ● Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
        announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
        occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
        entering the building.
     ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
        during the first week of class.
     ● In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     ● Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention Services office.
     ● Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
        procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault
It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin to foster a campus environment that is
free from intimidation and one in which students may be educated to their fullest potential.
Therefore, the University will not tolerate any forms of harassment, physical abuse, threats
of violence, physical assault, or any form of sexual assault, including but not limited to
acquaintance or date rape. Title IX makes it clear that violence and harassment based on
sex and gender is a Civil Rights offense subject to the same kinds of accountability and the
same kinds of support applied to offenses against other protected categories such as race,
national origin, LGBTQ identity, etc.
If you or someone you know has been harassed or assaulted in any way, you can find the
appropriate resources here: https://titleix.utexas.edu/file-a-report.
Other important links include:
     ● Voices Against Violence Program
        (512) 471-3515 for information, counseling and advocacy.
     ● UT Austin Police:
        http://www.utexas.edu/police/
     ● Dean of Students:
        http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
     ● Student Counseling & Health Services
        http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Campus Carry
     ● The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see
        a gun, do not attempt to question or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL
        911. Police are trained to handle this situation.
                                               [9]


    ● There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is
       prohibited, including some portions of residence halls. Individuals with a license to
       carry are responsible for knowing the locations that exclude concealed handguns
       and to plan their daily activities carefully.
    ● License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times
       while on campus. "About" the person means that a license holder may carry
       a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag
       must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially
       changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have
       enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
    ● All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times
       when the consequence of your activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For
       example, if you are going to a Rec Sports area, have a class that requires role playing,
       rolling, or spinning or contact with other students, you might expose the handgun.
    ● Remember that there is no storage on campus except in a privately owned vehicle.
    ● Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the law, and we understand
       those passions. However, regardless of your opinion about the legislation, you are
       required to follow the laws laid out by the State of Texas, and the policies of The
       University of Texas at Austin. We also ask that everyone show respect toward other
       members of the university community who have different views.
                                    Important Dates
September 3rd:
Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration require the
approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
September 13th:
Last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare and extenuating
circumstances.
Last day to drop a class for a possible refund.
Last day a graduate student may, with the required approvals, add a class.
October 31st:
Last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval, withdraw from the
University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons.
Last day an undergraduate student may change registration in a class to or from a pass/fail
basis.
                                               [10]


November 25th:
Last day a graduate student may change registration in a class to or from a credit/no credit
basis.
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) policy:
The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of
higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another
institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
than that number.”
  This syllabus is subject to change. Your instructor will communicate any changes to you
                                            promptly.
                                                ‫ا‬        ‫ا‬
                                    !‫أهل وسهل ف صفنا‬
            How to Do Well in Your Second Year Arabic Class
                                 By Professor Kristen Brustad
                                Things to Keep in Mind this Year
     ● Second year language study is your “teenage-hood” in language study. It can be
         frustrating at times because the higher levels of proficiency demand greater
         accuracy and you must more than double your vocabulary this semester, which in
         turn requires more mechanical practice. Know that your frustration will be
         temporary and that you are learning more than you can tell right now because you
         are developing skills that will help you reach an advanced level Progress at this
         level is often from plateau to plateau, rather than a steady climb. Keep at it!
     ● We move from “sprint training” to “marathon training.” Notice that sentences,
         texts, video passages and drills are getting longer as you reach the upper levels of
         intermediate proficiency. We will be building memory capacity and endurance.
         Push yourself to speak and write in longer sentences and paragraphs.
  The following suggestions will help you get the most out of your course.
                                               [11]


1. Be an active learner. The approach we use here at UT depends on you learning new
material at home, and encourages you to use analogy and logical thinking to master
grammar a little bit at a time. You will learn better and remember more when you are
able to answer your own questions. Active learners often have questions that reflect their
engagement with the material. Take initiative in class and on homework: this effort will
be rewarded both in your grade and in your language ability. Feel free to write us
questions on specific language features in your daily homework—just remember to be
specific.
2. Put yourself out there. Language learning requires you to make mistakes, both in
your assignments and in front of your peers. In this class, you will never be penalized for
a mistake that you make when trying something new. You will be corrected in class.
Feedback from your instructors is intended to support you as you develop your language
proficiency, and not as criticism.
3. Personalize vocabulary. You will remember vocabulary when you “own” it. Make
words relevant to your life by thinking of what you can say about yourself with them.
Write extra sentences that are meaningful to you so that the vocabulary becomes “yours”
and expresses something about your world.
4. Prepare for active participation in class by anticipating what you will do. You
should soon be able to predict what kinds of activities will be performed and how. As you
study new material and complete assignments before each class, think about how you
will use the material. This will help you to prepare for the activities we’ll do in class.
5. Study out loud, and repeat new words many times. The only way to train your brain
and your mouth to speak this language is by doing it aloud. Certain muscles need to be
strengthened before they’ll be able to produce some Arabic sounds correctly; studying
aloud and exaggerating these sounds will help your muscles develop! Pronounce new
vocabulary words at least fifteen times, until you can say them easily and it feels natural.
6. Guess. Think about how you acquired your native language: you did not use a
dictionary. Rather, you learned new words by guessing their meaning from context, and
you learned how to produce sentences by imitating and using patterns. As adult learners,
we can take some shortcuts, but guessing skills remain central to language acquisition. Do
not leave blanks on the homework, but do not allow yourself to become frustrated; give it
your best shot, and move on. If you are not sure you have understood a sentence in the
homework, write a translation or a question on your homework for your instructor to
check or answer.
7. Correct yourself. Good language learners learn from their own successes and
mistakes and those of others. Correcting mistakes is an essential part of the learning
process. In this class, you will never be penalized for a mistake that you make when
trying something new. When your instructors and classmates are speaking, be an active
listener by listening both to what they are saying and how they are saying it. Correcting
the mistakes of others in your head or in your notebook is also good practice.
                                             [12]


  8. Extend language learning beyond the classroom. Practice Arabic as much as
  possible. Study with classmates: ask each other questions, brainstorm about assignments,
  go over materials–and do this in Arabic as much as possible. Look out for films and
  cultural activities on campus and around town and go attend them.
  9. Develop your memorization skills for vocabulary learning. Experiment with
  different techniques, combining listening, speaking and writing together as much as
  possible. Try some vocab study techniques from the list on the next page.
Vocabulary Study Strategies
(Adapted from arabicteachers.wikispaces.com)
Use the words. Your goal in learning vocabulary is to be able to use it, right? The purpose
of studying a new language is NOT to be able to recognize vocabulary words on a page.
That won’t help you when you’re actually interacting with an Arabic speaker! Instead, use
the words in phrases and sentences to describe what you see around you.
Listen to the words. You want to be able to recognize words you know when you hear
them in conversation. This doesn’t just happen by studying the words on a page. “Tune”
your ears to the sounds of Arabic by listening to your vocabulary sets regularly.
Memorize language in “chunks.” Your brain organizes things in groups. When you learn
new words, try to organize them around basic concepts or webs. Re-organize your notes in
a way that helps you relate the words to each other.
Be creative and have fun with the language. Draw a silly image that will remind you of a
word, act out words and phrases, handle and manipulate objects as you learn the words for
them or make up songs or rhymes to help you associate groups of words. Or, instead of
drawing, create a mental image to associate with the new word.
Quiz yourself and your classmates. Study some new words in the morning, and then
check to see if you can still remember them in a few hours, the next day, and a week later. If
you find some words are not sticking, try using different techniques from this list to work
on those words.
Write it out. Try saying each word aloud as you write it. Try writing sentences using the
new words. The simple act of writing the words can help to make the vocabulary stick,
especially when combined with other strategies. Writing out and using flash cards can be a
great technique, too. Just keep in mind that you don’t only want to be able to translate the
words—you want to be able to use them. Flash cards are helpful, but aren’t enough on their
own.
Focus on what you can say with the words you have, rather than looking up brand
new words. Looking up a bunch of new words distracts you from the words that you are
                                             [13]


learning in your course. Use the words you are learning creatively to get your point across.
This not only helps the words to stick, but also is a great way to train your brain to use
circumlocution--to speak around topics and vocabulary you don’t have specific terms for.
Principles for Group Activities
This class is a group effort! We can make much more progress as a class than as
individuals by creating an Arabic-speaking community, of which you will be a fully
participating member. In our class community, respect for each other at all times will
ensure a positive and fruitful learning experience. We will spend at least 75% of class time
in small group or pair activities so that each one of you gets the maximum possible time to
participate and practice. During these activities, the instructor plays the role of a personal
trainer. Learning a language is a lot like going to the gym: the personal trainer guides you,
but you have to do the work to get the benefit.
Please keep in mind the following principles for group work:
    ● Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them: each of us can
       learn from everyone else.
    ● Work with different people on a regular basis.
    ● Come prepared. Don’t be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to
       fully participate in the work. If you are not prepared for class, let your instructor
       know beforehand and s/he will arrange for you to learn by listening on that day.
    ● Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to finish. If you do the minimum,
       you will get only minimum benefit. Take advantage of class time by pushing yourself
       to be creative and say and write as much as you can, rather than trying to finish
       quickly.
    ● Speak in Arabic while you are engaged in the activity. If you feel frustrated, raise
       your hand and ask for help.
    ● When your group finishes the task, raise your hand to let the instructor know.
    ● The instructor may call time before everyone is finished. If your group does not
       finish, you may want to take a few minutes after class to study the rest of the
       exercise.
                                              [14]
