              MAS 319-39590 + LAS 310-38740 + HIS 306N-37980 + AMS 315-30520
                                  Drug History in the Americas
              Department of Mexican American + Latina/o Studies ǀ University of Texas at Austin
                                       Fall Semester 2019 ǀ 3 Credit Hours
                             MWF ǀ 11:00am-12:00pm ǀ BUR, Room 136
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION
Instructor ǀ Antonio Vásquez, Ph.D.                              Teaching Assistant ǀ TBA
Pronouns ǀ he/his/him                                            Pronouns ǀ TBA
Email | antonio.vasquez@utexas.edu                               Email | TBA
Telephone | 512-471-4557 (MALS office)                           Telephone | TBA
Fax | 512-471-9639 (MALS office)                                 Fax | TBA
Office | GWB 2.334                                               Office | TBA
Hours | Friday, 12 to 4pm + by appointment                       Hours | TBA
COURSE INFORMATION
DESCRIPTION + FORMAT
Welcome to Drug History in the Americas!
According to the author in our text, Drug War Capitalism, “The drug war is less about cocaine and marijuana
than it is about social, economic, and territorial control.” Who benefits from these maneuvers for social,
economic, and territorial control, and at what cost? Together as a class, we will respond to this question by
critically and collaboratively examining the contours and consequences of the “war on drugs” for
marginalized communities in Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, and the United States. This inquiry
includes developing a critical assessment of dominant narratives surrounding the drug war and Latinas/os
in U.S. popular culture; the repercussions of U.S. economic and military intervention in the Americas; the
relationship between drug war reforms, foreign investment, and extractive industries; the history and
ramifications of anti-drug legislation and enforcement; the concomitant expansion of militarization and
paramilitarization by nation-state and non-state actors; the visibility and human cost of drug violence; and
alternative strategies to the drug war. Toward the end of the semester, we will also give attention to the
current opiate epidemic in the United States. In order to address these varied points, we will engage in
readings from four (4) interdisciplinary texts, in-class lectures, presentations, film, and small-large group
discussion. You will be asked to complete five (5) quizzes, three (3) online discussion exercises, three (3)
critical response essays, and two (2) examinations. Please note that assignments in this course may be
processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an archived database of published work
to check for potential plagiarism.
To be successful in this class, do your absolute best to be present and prepared for every scheduled class
activity. Feel free to also contact and visit with your teaching assistant and/or instructor should you have
any questions related to the course. When communicating, please do so through Canvas email first, and,
secondarily, with the contact information provided above. Please be sure to include your name and course
in the subject line. In this way, we can best respond and address your inquiry.
All submissions for this class will be made through Canvas, which is available at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Please note that all assignments in this course may be processed by


TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an archived database of published work to check for
potential plagiarism.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
underrepresentation. In addition, this course carries the flag for Global Cultures. Global Cultures courses
are designed to increase familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Consistent with other classes in Mexican American and Latina/o Studies, this course will also enhance our
critical thinking skills in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. Welcome again to the class!
COURSE OBJECTIVES ǀ DRUG HISTORY IN THE AMERICAS
     §   DRUG WAR IN THE AMERICAS: Developed comparative understanding of varied social/cultural,
         economic, and political effects of the drug war
     §   MEXICAN AMERICAN + LATINA/O STUDIES: Increased interdisciplinary knowledge and analyses of
         subject matter in relation to Mexican American and Latina/o Studies
     §   CRITICAL ANALYSIS: Enhanced critical thinking skills in reading, writing, listening, and speaking in
         relation to course content
     §   RESEARCH: Strengthened skills in conducting research in relation to the course content
TEXTBOOKS + SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
TEXTBOOKS
The following books are REQUIRED for this course. They are available for purchase at the University Co-op
Bookstore. When available, the books can be accessed electronically via UT Libraries.
     §   Durán-Martínez, Angelica. The Politics of Drug Violence: Criminals, Cops and Politicians in Colombia
         and Mexico. Oxford University Press, 2017.
     §   Quiñones, Sam. Dreamland: The True Tale of America’s Opiate Epidemic. Bloomsbury Press, 2016.
     §   Paley, Dawn. Drug War Capitalism. AK Press, 2014. (electronic version available via UT Libraries)
     §   Payan, Tony, Kathleen Staudt, and Anthony Kruszewski, eds. A War That Can’t Be Won: Binational
         Perspectives on the War on Drugs. University of Arizona Press, 2013.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
     §   When applicable, supplementary digital course material will be utilized in conjunction with our
         selected textbooks. These will be accessible through our course Canvas site at
         https://utexas.instructure.com.
GRADING + ASSESSMENT
                                                                        Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019


    Grading Components + Scale           Percentage         Grade    Percentage         Grade        Percentage
    I.      In-Class Quiz                    15%               A      94-100%+             C           74-76%
    II.     Online Discussion                15%              A-        90-93%             C-          70-73%
    III.    Critical Response                30%              B+        87-89%             D+          67-69%
    IV.     Examination                      40%               B        84-86%             D           64-66%
                                Total       100%              B-        80-83%             D-          60-63%
                                                              C+        77-79%             F            0-59%
GRADING DESCRIPTIONS
There are four (4) components that will make-up your overall grade. These include in-class quiz (15%),
online discussion (15%), critical response (30%), and examination (40%). These are described below.
I. Quizzes (15%)
Please note that attendance will not be taken in our class. In lieu of attendance, we will have five (5) quizzes
conducted randomly during the semester. These are worth 15% of your total grade, or 3% each. All quizzes
will be based on in-class content. The best way to maximize your points is to come to every scheduled class.
II. Online Discussion (15%)
To further demonstrate knowledge of course content, you will be asked to engage in three (3) online
discussion exercises in accordance with the course calendar. These are worth 15% of your total grade, or
5% each. These are scheduled throughout the semester and will be accessible for a period of one-week only.
More information for each will be discussed during class.
III. Critical Response (30%)
To strengthen skills in critical thinking and demonstrate knowledge of course content, you will be asked to
conduct three (3) critical response essays. These will be worth 30% of your total grade, or 10% each. More
information for each will be posted in Canvas and discussed in-class.
IV. Examination (40%)
There will be two (2) examinations for this semester, worth approximately 40% of your total grade, or 20%
each. The first examination will take place during Week 07 (October 7-11) and your second examination
will take place during Week 16 (December 9-13). Please note that both will be conducted online through
our course Canvas site at https://utexas.instructure.com. In other words, you will need access to the
internet and Canvas to complete both examinations successfully. More information will be shared in-class
but be sure to plan accordingly.
Extra Credit? When possible, extra credit assignments will be offered during the semester. Come to class
every day to stay informed on possible extra credit opportunities.
                            Material submitted for this class is subject
                               for screening for academic misconduct.
GUIDELINES + EXPECTATIONS
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let us
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
                                                                      Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019


of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Several are
listed in this syllabus, and I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact UT Services for Students with
Disabilities ( http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability ) at (512) 471-6259 (voice), 1 (800) 329-3986 (video
phone), or email at sssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Title IX
Title IX, a segment of the Education Amendments of 1972, protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking
at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community,
the University can:
1.Intevene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating;
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
involved in a Title IX investigation;
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the University’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title
IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you or someone you know
has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources at
https://www.utexas.edu/student-affairs/policies/title-ix.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
Absences
Just to be clear, it is expected that you are present and prepared for every class during the semester. If you
are absent, you are responsible for any work missed if applicable. It is also expected that you communicate
with me and/or your teaching assistant in writing prior to the class.
The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays, University commitments, or
extenuating emergency circumstances. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday or
University commitment, please let your teaching assistant and/or instructor know in advance. If you miss
due to an emergency, be prepared to provide formal documentation. You will not be penalized for excused
absences, although you will still be responsible for any work missed on that day if applicable.
In the event that class may need to be cancelled for any unexpected emergency, we will do our absolute best
to let you know as soon as possible.
Grading
                                                                        Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019


It is expected that all assignments will be completed on-time. Grades and individual feedback, if any, should
be posted no later than two (2) weeks after each assignment deadline. Should you any follow-up questions
regarding a specific assignment grade, you should contact your teaching assistant and/or instructor directly
no later than two-weeks after being posted in Canvas for full consideration.
TurnItIn
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an
archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to
determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the
faculty member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
Email Communication
When sending an email to your teaching assistant and/or instructor, always include your name and course in
the subject line. In this way, we can best respond and address your inquiry. Remember as well that any
email related to this class should be considered formal communication. Your email is not a text.
It is expected that your teaching assistant and/or instructor will respond to any email requests once
received. If you do not receive an email response after two-weeks, send another follow-up email and let us
know in-person.
Discussion Communication
When applicable, you will be asked to share your own thoughts and/or respond to other posts in Canvas
Discussion. Kindly remember that we should always be respectful of other’s ideas. Do not make insulting,
derogatory, or inflammatory statements to other members of the discussion group. Do your best to be
thoughtful, positive, and constructive in your posts, comments, and/or suggestions.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc.). Please advise our teaching assistant and/or your
instructor of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the teaching team of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Integrity
This course adheres with all expectations regarding academic integrity, including the principles of honesty,
trust, fairness, respect, and responsibility. Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. If you use words or
ideas that aren’t your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty (including cheating on tests, plagiarism on written
assignments, etc.) are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course. It is
each and every student’s responsibility to be familiar with UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor
Code which can be found at the following: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php.
The University of Texas Honor Code reads as follows: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Long live Longhorn nation!
R-E-S-P-E-C-T
                                                                        Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019


It is expected that mutual respect is applied in everything that we do in this course. This means that we
refrain from any behavior that could disrupt our learning environment, such as calling, texting, smoking,
yelling, and the like. Be sure to turn off or put on vibrate mode your cell phone before the class begins. Use
of laptops are acceptable when taking notes during lectures only and should be put away during other class
activities. In addition, you are not allowed to use any video or audio recording devices during class.
In other words, respect is respect, is respect.
STUDENT RESOURCES
University Writing Center
The University Writing Center provides a relaxed, yet professional atmosphere in which writers from
across the curriculum can become more comfortable with processes of writing at all levels. Appointments
are available for all UT students at http://uwc.utexas.edu/appointments or by calling the UWC Front
Desk at 512-471-6222.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Services are available here at UT, and treatment
does work. The UT Counseling and Mental Health Center ( http://chmc.utexas.edu/ ) provides
counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals
and enhance their personal growth and well-being. The CMHC crisis line is available 24/7/365 at 512-471-
2255.
Copyright Information
More information about copyright law can be accessed at The TEACH Act or directly at
https://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/teachact.html.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call (512) 471-3614 (JES A332).
Libraries
For more information about The University of Texas Libraries, visit http://lib.utexas.edu or call 512-495-
4250.
IT Services
Walk-up services for any computer and IT help is available on the first-floor lobby of the Flawn Academic
Center (FAC), open Monday through Friday except during University Holidays. You can also contact IT
Services at http://it.utexas.edu or call 512-475-9400. For particular questions about Canvas, technical
support is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the semester at 855-308-2494.
                                                                       Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019


BeVocal Syllabus Statement
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce
harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, please visit
http://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
Emergency Evacuation
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
        that the nearest exit door may be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
        week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
        building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
        at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
        found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
For more information regarding emergency evacuation, contact the Office of Campus Safety and Security at
512-471-5767 or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/.
COURSE CHANGES
The professor reserves the right to change and/or alter any component of this
course, with notice to students.
                                                                     Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019


COURSE OUTLINE + READINGS + ASSIGNMENTS
                 Fall 2019 Drug History in the Americas
      Week 01 | Aug 26-30
                         M
                        W Introductions + Syllabus
                         F Lecture
        Week 02 | Sep 2-6
                         M University Holiday
                        W Lecture
                         F Lecture + Discussion 01 Due
    Week 03 | Sep 9-Sep 13 *Drug War Capitalism, Chapters 1 + 2
                           *A War That Can’t Be Won, Chapters 1 + 2
                         M Lecture
                        W Lecture
                         F Lecture
      Week 04 | Sep 16-20 *Drug War Capitalism, Chapter 3
                           *The Politics of Drug Violence, Chapters 1 + 2 + 3
                         M Lecture
                        W Lecture
                         F Lecture
      Week 05 | Sep 23-27 *The Politics of Drug Violence, Chapters 4 + 5 + 6 + Conclusion
                         M Lecture
                        W Lecture
                         F Lecture + Critical Response 01 Due
    Week 06 | Sep 30-Oct 4  *Drug War Capitalism, Chapters 4 + 5 + 6
                           *A War That Can’t Be Won, Chapter 2
                         M Lecture
                        W Lecture
                         F Lecture + Examination Review
       Week 07 | Oct 7-11
                         M Examination 01
                        W Examination 01
                         F Examination 01
      Week 08 | Oct 14-18 *A War That Can’t Be Won, Chapter 3
                         M Lecture
                        W Lecture
                         F Lecture
      Week 09 | Oct 21-25  *A War That Can’t Be Won, Chapters 4 + 5 + 6 + 7
                         M Lecture
                        W  Lecture
                         F Lecture + Discussion 02 Due
    Week 10 | Oct 28-Nov 1 *A War That Can’t Be Won, Chapters 8 + 9 + 10 + 11
                                                               Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019


                  M Lecture
                 W Lecture
                  F Lecture + Critical Response 02 Due
 Week 11 | Nov 4-8  *Drug War Capitalism, Chapters 7 + 8
                  M Lecture
                 W  Lecture
                  F Lecture
Week 12 | Nov 11-15 *Drug War Capitalism, Conclusion
                    *A War That Can’t Be Won, Conclusion
                  M Lecture
                 W Lecture
                  F Lecture
Week 13 | Nov 18-22 *Dreamland, Introduction + Part I + Part II
                  M Lecture
                 W  Lecture
                  F Lecture + Discussion 03 Due
Week 14 | Nov 25-29
                  M Lecture
                 W University Holiday
                  F University Holiday
  Week 15 | Dec 2-6 *Dreamland, Part III + Part IV + Part V
                  M Lecture
                 W  Lecture
                  F Lecture + Examination Review + Critical Response 03 Due
 Week 16 | Dec 9-13
                  M Examination 02
                 W
                  F
                                                        Drug History in the Americas | Vásquez | Fall 2019
