                       AFR 317: African American Literature and Culture
                                       Creaking of the Word
Instructor: Dr. Patrick F. Walter
         How can we think about blackness and sound? Antagonisms of race often take shape in
African American literature as sonic distortions or vibrations of the otherwise silent text on the
page, what Nathaniel Mackey might call “the creaking of the word” or Fred Moten terms “the
(im)pure sonority of unaccounted for things.” This survey will take up this idea by reading and
listening to some of the key works of African American literature – from Frederick Douglass’
“autobiographical” articulation of enslavement, to the blues aesthetics of Langston Hughes and
Gayl Jones, to the hip hop lyricism of Paul Beatty. How do these sonic narratives relate to
specific black diasporic political movements such as abolition, Civil Rights, Black Power and
#BlackLivesMatter and cultural movements such as The Harlem Renaissance, the Black Arts
Movement and Hip Hop? What are the political stakes of associating blackness with sound?
How have black feminists and queers of color expressed unique auditory frequencies of gender
and sexuality? This course provides a survey of black literary and cultural aesthetics, as well as
practice in analyzing, researching and writing about literary works.
Books to Purchase
Jones, Gayl. Corregidora. ISBN: 9780807063156
Beatty, Paul. The Sellout. ISBN: 978-1250083258
Assignments
Attendance/Participation: 10%
Quizzes: 20%
Essay 1: 35%
Essay 2: 35%
                                       Course Policies
Attendance: Attendance is mandatory and will be taken at each of these meetings. Success in this
course also depends upon your active participation in discussions. You are allowed two
absences for the semester without penalty. Your third absence will result in a 1/3 grade
reduction. A fourth absence will result in another 1/3 grade reduction. A fifth absence will
result in the failing of the course.
Technology: There will be no use of laptops or phones in lectures, discussions, or screenings.
Anyone on a phone or laptop will be asked to leave and will not receive attendance credit for the
day.
Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are
not your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action, which will also reflect in their grade.


Language and Comportment: This course necessitates the discussion of complex and delicate
ideas about race and power. Throughout the semester, in papers and discussions, attempt to use
precise and up-to-date language. For example, rather than “freedom” perhaps “emancipation” or
“manumission” is more appropriate. The use of the terms lesbian, gay, trans, or queer, are more
specific and accurate than homosexual. Either “Black women” or “black men” is preferable to
“the Black Man” or “the Black woman.” Never use the n-word unless quoting in an essay, and
even then, try to avoid it. Use African American rather than “negro” or “colored” and black
where appropriate (e.g. Jimmy Cliff, a Jamaican musician, is black but not African American).
Most importantly, be respectful to your fellow classmates. If you do not feel that what you are
about to say is inappropriate, maybe give yourself some time to work through your thought or
share it with your TA or myself in an office hour before articulating said thought in class.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, you can speak with me to make accommodations.
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive)
who requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations.
TRIGGER WARNING: This course is about race and literature. We will be dealing with subject
matter at times involving racist language and sexual violence. I will try to provide specific
warnings for certain classes or screenings, but I am also providing this general warning for the
entire course.
                                          Schedule
Middle Passages
Week 1: Course Introduction
Wednesday 8/28: Personal Introductions; Course Introduction
Friday 8/30: Discuss the syllabus
Week 2: Slavery the Meaning of Blackness
Monday 9/2: Labor Day
Wednesday 9/4: Finish Intro on Slavery and the Ontology of Blackness
Friday 9/6: A Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass (selection); Aunt Hester’s scream;
The possibility of a “slave literature.”
Week 3: Speaking Double Consciousness
Monday 9/9: Discuss Marx’s “The Fetishism of the Commodity and It’s Secret”; Finish
discussing Douglass
Wednesday 9/11: Final remarks on Marx and Douglass.
Friday 9/13: Introduction to W.E.B Du Bois; Discuss Du Bois “The Forethought” and “Of Our
Spiritual Strivings”


Blues, the Black Sermon and the Barred Voice
Week 4: Baldwin and the Pulpit
Monday 9/16: Finish discussing Du Bois “The Sorrow Songs”
Wednesday 9/18: Discuss Andrew Bartlett’s “Airshafts, Loudspeakers and the Hip Hop
Sample”;
Friday: 9/20: Finish discussing Bartlett; “Vintage Gospel Sermon Oh Lord I Am Your Child;
Old Time Preaching, Shouting and Singing; “If It Wasn’t For The Lord”; “Dry Bones in the
Valley”
Week 5: Baldwin and the Pulpit Continued
Monday 9/23: Discuss “Afro-American Work Songs in a Texas Prison”; Discuss Lomax and
Jackson writings and Jackson photographs. Quiz 1
Wednesday 9/25: Discuss LeRoi Jones’ Blues People (59-80); Robert Johnson; Mississippi Fred
McDowell; Skip James
Friday 9/27: Intro to Baldwin; Discussion of Baldwin’s “Sonny’s Blues”
Week 6: Preaching the Blues
Monday 9/30: Discussion of Baldwin’s “Sonny’s Blues”
Wednesday 10/2: Final discussion of Baldwin
Friday 10/4: Discussion of Angela Davis Blues Legacies (3-41); Listen to Gertrude Ma Rainey;
Bessie Smith
Week 7: As Blue as a Black Woman
Monday 10/7: Discuss Gayl Jones’ Corregidora part 1.
Wednesday 10/9 Continue Discussing Jones’ Corregidora Part I
Friday 10/11 Discuss Jones’ Corregidora Part II. Introduction of Essay 1.
Week 8: From Blues to Jazz
Monday 10/14: Final discussion of Jones’ Corregidora
Wednesday 10/16: Discussion of Ellison. What is jazz?
Friday 10/18: Discussion of Ellison; Louise Armstrong; Due Ellington. Quiz 2
Improvisational Frequencies
Week 9: Jazz and Black Modernism
Monday 10/21: Harlem Renaissance; discussion of Langston Hughes “I, Too”; “Weary Blues”
Wednesday 10/23: Continued discussion of Hughes poems. “The Lynching Song” “Harlem”
Friday 10/25: Black Arts; Discuss Amiri Baraka’s “Black Art” and “Against Bourgeois Art”
Week 10: Black Arts, Black Feminism and the Question of Freedom
Monday 10/28: ESSAY 1 DUE! Discuss Parker; Gillespie; Colman, Coltrane and Ayler.
Wednesday 10/30: Discussion of Haki R. Madhubuti poems and Larry Neal poems.
Friday 11/1: Audre Lorde poems; Sonia Sanchez poems Introduction to Mantana Robert’s Coin
Coin
Week 11: Funk, Soul, and the Proto-MC
Monday 11/4: Finish Mantana Roberts’ Coin Coin
Wednesday 11/6: Gil-Scott Heron’s “The Revolution Will Not Be Televised” and “We Almost
Lost Detroit”; The Last Poets; James Brown; Aretha Franklin;


Friday 11/8: P-Funk; Zapp and Roger; Roger Troutman; Alexander Weheliye’s “Feenin”
              Quiz 3
Hip Hop and Black Postmodernism
Week 12: Can It Be that It Was All So Simple
Monday 11/11: Neoliberalism and Black America
Wednesday 11/13: Discuss The Sellout
Friday 11/15 Discuss Beatty’s The Sellout
Week 13: Hip Hop and Afro-Pessimissm
Monday 11/18: Discuss Beatty’s The Sellout
Wednesday 11/20 Discuss Beatty’s The Sellout
Friday 11/22 Discuss The Sellout
Week 14: Fall Break
Week 15: Hip Hop and Global Blackness
Monday 12/2 Discuss Billy Woods
Wednesday 12/4: Discuss Billy Woods
Friday 12/6: ESSAY 2 DUE! Final thoughts
