                             Jewish Studies: An Introduction
                                        Dr. Amelia Rosenberg Weinreb
                                    JS 311 * ANT 310L * MES 310 * RS 313
                                    39580 31632           40789     43197
                                                     * * *
                                                  MEZ 2.124
                                              M/W/F 12pm-1pm
                                         Office hours: By appointment
                                                RPL (CLA) 4.412
                                       amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu
                                                 512-232-2204
1. Course Description
This survey course aims to expose students to major themes in Jewish Studies through guest lectures by
UT faculty who work in the field. It is recommended for motivated undergraduates in any discipline with
an intellectual curiosity about Jewish Studies, but requires no previous knowledge of Jewish religion,
ethnicity, or culture. The material in the course is not designed be comprehensive, but rather provides a
curated sample of lectures and core topics. This semester, the course is organized around three
thematic units: 1) Exile and Diaspora, 2) Jewish Identity, and 3) Jewish Ethics.
The weekly rhythm of the course is generally as follows: On Mondays and Wednesdays, various faculty
associated with Jewish Studies will visit the classroom and deliver lectures concentrating on their period,
geographical area, and field of research as they relate to the thematic unit at hand. Fridays are a series
of lively, fast-paced, interactive meetings, led by students. Students are encouraged to consider course
materials comparatively, in view of both their distinct features and their overarching threads, and
defend positions through evidence based both on lectures and the course reader. Student discussion
leaders, designated in advance, will raise questions, stimulate debate, and integrate ideas into our
collective analysis.
2. Course flags
This course carries both a Global Cultures and Ethics flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of non-U.S. Jewish groups, past and present. Courses carrying the Ethics Flag equip you with the tools
necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. Courses carrying this flag
expose you to ethical issues and to the process of applying ethical reasoning. This course exposes
students to Jewish Ethics and its application.
3. Required Course Materials
a) A required course pack is available for purchase online at Paradigm books
https://squareup.com/store/paradigmbooks
This pack contains hard copies of all of the short readings assigned by guest lecturers. It is for your
convenience, so you have all readings in one place, complete with your underlining, markings, and
marginalia. More importantly, students are expected to bring their packs with them each Friday or
                                                       1


student led seminar so everyone can refer directly to the text during discussion. There are no other
required readings outside of this pack.
b) One clearly labelled notebook exclusively to taking hand-written notes related for this course.
c) A pen that is satisfying to write with, and always easy to locate at the beginning of class.
4. Course objectives
Upon completion of the course, students will have developed the written, oral and recall skills to be able
to:
● Produce relevant notes during lectures
● Engage comfortably in discussion and debate in the seminar classroom
● Articulate central themes of the Jewish experience over time
● Place course units within in a wider context of Jewish Studies as a field
● Converse, with historical and ethnographic accuracy, about a range of contemporary social issues for
Jews
● Write short, clear, detailed essays that connect diverse lectures and readings, displaying a command
of facts and examples to support arguments
5. Important note on classroom etiquette and vibe:
Regular attendance is not only the key to your own success as a student in this course, but also for the
quality of the course as a dynamic whole. Arriving late and leaving early disrupts guests lecturers and
class flow, so make every effort to arrive to class a few minutes early so get situated with a notebook
and pen. This is a low-tech, highly interpersonal seminar. Students place their phones on silent and
deposit them at the front of classroom when they enter each day, and all course notes are taken by
hand in a notebook unless you provide a note from SSD. Please do not eat or make distracting, crinkly
snacking noises during guest lectures. Fridays (or on student-led discussion days), are more informal,
however, and food and drink is welcome!
6. Overview of Grade Distribution
25% Attendance and participation
15% Discussion leadership and memo
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 1: Exile and Diaspora
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 2: Jewish Identity
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 3: Jewish Ethics
7. Explanation of Grade Distribution
 Attendance and participation (25%) Students are permitted 4 absences, no questions asked. After that,
their total overall grade is reduced by 2% following each, subsequent absence. In addition to being
polite, attentive audience members during guest lectures, students will be graded on their regular,
active, intellectually rigorous contribution to the seminar component of the course, and on displaying
evidence of careful reading of assigned texts.
Discussion leadership and response memo (15%): A group of 3 students, delegated in advance,
facilitate the discussion or an activity based on their reading memos. Each student will do this once
during the semester. I will generally provide the group with a shared grade unless there are individuals
who contributed significantly less or more to leadership and discussion. Take the time to communicate
with fellow group members to produce a smooth, organized, meaningful dialogue.
How to write a reading response memo (V+, V, V- evaluation)
On the day that you lead discussion with your group, each individual in that group will write a separate,
                                                       2


1-page "memo" in response to the day’s reading. Completing the memo properly includes the following
steps :
a) Memo: A 200-250-word, clear, focused response to one of these prompts: What theme leapt out to
you? What bothered you in the reading or lecture? How was the reading or lecture related to more
general course themes, other course material and how? What content interested you most and why?
What quote stood out in your mind, and why? Your response must refer directly to both the week’s
lecture and reading, including page citations.
b) Questions: At the bottom of the page, include two questions for discussion, debate, or further
thought, related directly to themes in the reading. Come prepared to share your ideas in class.
c) Proofread and cite: Remember, even if the assignment is short, write clearly and proofread as
carefully as you would for any graded assignment. Include page citations and a literature cited at the
bottom of the page.
D) Submission: Send your memo to me via email at amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu by 9pm, the
night before you lead discussion, and bring a hard copy to class for your reference.
3 short papers (20% each). For each of the three short papers in this course, the prompt is the same: In
500-700 words, pose a question that can be addressed/answered by material in two of the lectures and
their readings in the unit. Please follow these requirements:
a) State your question clearly in bold font. These questions should be designed to be engaging,
thought-provoking or informative.
b) Address your question. The answer can be creative, and include reflections, reactions, critical
commentaries or overviews. However, the short papers will be rigorously graded on their writing
quality, as well as their attention to facts, examples and details from two lectures and their
accompanying readings, citing page numbers
d) Cite all references following the Chicago Manual of Style, and include a literature cited section.
8. Grading
Grades in this course will be based on the following scale:
A 95-100%         Excellent grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides
                  relevant details and examples; draws clear and interesting connections,
                  exceptionally original, coherent and well-organized; ideas clearly
                  written/stated, outstanding classroom participation
A- 90-94%         Very good grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly;
                  provides relevant details and examples; draws clear connections; ideas
                  clearly written/stated
B+ 85-89%         Good grasp of some elements above, others need work
B 83-84%          Satisfactory grasp of some elements above
B- 80-82%         Uneven, spotty grasp of the elements above
C+ 75-79 %        Limited grasp of the above
C 73-74%          Poor grasp of the above
C- 70-72%         Very poor grasp of the above
D 60-69%          Little evidence of grasp of material, having done readings, attended class,
                  or completed assignments
F 0-59%           No evidence of having done readings, attended class, or completed
                  assignments, or plagiarized.
9. Notes on Grading Policy and Support for Students:
Complete written assignments on time: I am committed to returning assignments to you promptly so
you can benefit from my feedback while material is fresh in your mind. I do not grade papers or exams
                                                       3


until I have the entire printed set in front of me. For these reasons, I do not accept late assignments.
Bring a hard copy at the beginning of class on the day it is due. If you anticipate a problem, or have a
history of deadline problems, meet with a consultant at the learning or writing center to help you plan
ahead.
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Grading policy: I am very happy to discuss how you may improve your work, and will read early drafts,
but I will not reconsider grades on papers. I grade all the papers in a set to ensure that I am applying
the same standards, and I make every effort to be fair.
Plagiarism and copying: Although this course is designed for creative, individual work and synthesis of
ideas from various sources, any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be
the student's own work. Should copying occur from another student, both the student who copied work
and the student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the
assignment.
Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
disciplinary action. Here are University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of
plagiarizing: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/faculty/plagiarism/preventing.html
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Using office hours, getting help: I check email regularly, will usually reply to emails within 24 hours for
basic questions. Feel welcome to take advantage of office hours (by appointment).
10. University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
In this course, that means we will all work to ensure that the discussion space is shared relatively equally
among the participants, and to maintain an atmosphere of respect for each other’s perspectives and
arguments, especially when there are strong disagreements.
Students with disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Please contact me as early in the semester as possible to let me know if you need anything to participate
fully.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, students are required to notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will certainly give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
11. Course Schedule: The syllabus below represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class. Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
                                                       4


Note 3 Paper Deadlines
(Submit stapled hard copies in class)
Monday 10/15
Monday 11/12
Monday 12/10
   Date                      Topics                     Reading: complete prior to class       Assignments
                                          Unit 1: Exile and Diaspora
W 8/29    Intro to the course and its structure, sign
          up for discussion leadership
Fri. 8/30 Student Discussion 1: on Simon Schama’s Watch “Lecture” 1: Simon                 Student discussion
          parts 1-2, “The Story of the Jews.”           Schama’s “The Story of the         group 1 on Schama
                                                        Jews” (2014). Parts 1 and 2. Links series: Email memo
                                                        available on Canvas                by 9pm Thu. night
M 9/3     Labor day                                     Good opportunity to watch
                                                        Schama
W 9/5     Student Discussion 2, on Simon Schama’s Complete Schama, Parts 3-5.              Student discussion
          5-part, “The Story of the Jews.”              Links available on Canvas.         group 2 on Schama
                                                                                           series: Email memo
                                                                                           by 9pm Tue. night
F 9/7     Lecture 1: “The Sephardim: Diasporas          "The Historical Background of
          within a Diaspora.” with Dr. Miriam Bodian the Caribbean Sephardi
                                                        Diaspora" (Bodian 2013)
M 9/10 Rosh Ha Shana
W 9/12 Student discussion group 3 on Bodian                                                Student discussion
                                                                                           group 3 on Bodian
                                                                                           Lecture: Email
                                                                                           memo by 9pm Tue.
                                                                                           night
F 9/14    Things you’ve always wanted to know
          about Jews and Judaism but were afraid to
          ask.
M 9/17 Lecture 2: “Jewish Latin American Writing “Latin America” in Cambridge
          and Film” with Dr. Naomi Lindstrom            Dictionary of Judaism and Jewish
                                                        Culture (Lindstrom 2011)
W 9/19 Yom Kippur
F 9/21    Student discussion group 4 on Lindstrom                                          Student discussion
                                                                                           group 4 on
                                                                                           Lindstrom Lecture:
                                                                                           Email memo by
                                                                                           9pm Thu. night
M 9/24 Sukkot
W 9/26 Lecture 3: “Global Antisemitism” with Dr. “Forward:
          Alex Weinreb
                                                      5


                                                    3D Test of Anti-Semitism:
                                                    Demonization, Double
                                                    Standards, Delegitimization”
                                                    (Natan Sharansky 2004).
F 9/27  Student discussion 5 on Weinreb                                                Student discussion
                                                                                       group 5 on Weinreb
                                                                                       Lecture: Email
                                                                                       memo by 9pm Thu.
                                                                                       night
M 10/1  Schmini Atzeret/Simhat Torah
W 10/3  Lecture 4: “ The Galveston Movement”        “Galveston and Palestine:
        with Dr. Suzy Seriff                        Immigration and Ideology in the
                                                    Early 20th Century” (Alroey
                                                    2004).
                                                    “When the Jews Came to
                                                    Galveston” (Brawley 2009).
F 10/5  Student discussion group 6 on Seriff                                           Student discussion
                                                                                       group 6 on Seriff:
                                                                                       Email memo by
                                                                                       9pm Thu. night
M 10/8  Lecture 5: “Questions of Indigeneity” with “Are Jews Indigenous to the
        Dr. Amy Weinreb                             Land of Israel?” (Bellrose 2017).
                                                    “The struggle for indigenous
                                                    rights extends to Palestine”
                                                    (Salhani 2016).
                                                    “Official Definitions
                                                    of Indigeneity” (a compiled list).
W 10/10 Lecture 6: “Jews in America: 1940-41”       Selections from The Atlantic
        Dr. Bob Abzug                               Monthly 1941
F 10/12 Student discussion group 7 on Weinreb                                          Student discussion
        and Abzug lectures                                                             group 7 on Weinreb
                                                                                       and Abzug lectures:
                                                                                       Email memo by
                                                                                       9pm Thu. night
M 10/15 Unit 1 wrap-up                                                                 PAPER #1 DUE
                                                                                       Submit stapled
                                                                                       hard copy
                                                                                       Each student bring
                                                                                       1 comment or
                                                                                       reflection from
                                                                                       your paper to share
                                                                                       regarding exile and
                                                                                       Diaspora.
                                                  6


                                          Unit 2: Jewish Identities
W 10/17 “Jewish Student Voices.”                      Links to be supplied on Canvas
        To kick off this unit, we will host a
        volunteer panel of Jewish students to take
        questions from the audience.
F 10/19 Student discussion group 8 on Jewish                                           Student discussion
        Student voices                                                                 group 8 on Jewish
                                                                                       Student Voices:
                                                                                       Email memo by
                                                                                       9pm Thu. night
M 10/22 Lecture 7: “Beyond Blood: Cross-Cultural      NOTE location: RLP (CLA) 1.302E
        Encounters in Inquisitorial Mexico” With      (public lecture)
        Dr. Ronnie Perelis
W 10/24 Lecture 8: “Mizrahi Jews and Poetry” with     “Confronting an ‘Impossible’
        Dr. Karen Grumberg                            Identity: Poetry by Arab Jews in
                                                      Israel” (Poems by Chetrit 1960
                                                      and Behar 1978)
                                                      “Revisiting Bialik: A Radical
                                                      Mizrahi Reading of the Jewish
                                                      National Poet” (Chetrit 2010).
F 10/26 Student discussion group 9 on Perelis and                                      Student discussion
        Grumberg lectures                                                              group 9 on Perelis
                                                                                       and Grumberg
                                                                                       lectures: Email
                                                                                       memo by 9pm Thu.
                                                                                       night
M 10/29 Lecture 9: “Jewish Identity in American       “Moving Metaphors: Jewishness
        Dance” with Dr. Rebecca Rossen                in American Modern and
                                                      Postmodern Dance,” (Jackson
                                                      2011).
W 10/31 Lecture 10: “The Development of Modern "Hebrew: Eliezer Ben-Yehuda &
        Hebrew” with Mr. Agbaria                      the Revival of Hebrew”
                                                      (Fellman).
                                                      “The Past and Future of Hebrew”
                                                      (from Fair Observer).
F 11/2  Student discussion group 10 on Rossen                                          Student discussion
        and Agbaria                                                                    group 10 on Rossen
                                                                                       and Agbaria: Email
                                                                                       memo by 9pm Thu.
                                                                                       night
M 11/5  Lecture 11: “Jewish Folklore” with Dr. Itzik “Problems and Tasks of Jewish
        Gottesman                                     Folklore and Ethnology” (Patai
                                                      1946).
                                                    7


W 11/7  Lecture 12: “How Judaism Became an          Note location: RLP (CLSA) 1.302E
        American Religion” with Dr. Rachel          (Public lecture).
        Gordon
                                                    “Three Religious Communities:
                                                    Unity and Tension” in
                                                    Protestant, Catholic, Jew”
                                                    (Herberg 1955).
F 11/9  Student discussion group 11 on Gottesman                                     Student discussion
        and Gordon                                                                   group 11 on
                                                                                     Gottesman and
                                                                                     Gordon: Email
                                                                                     memo by 9pm Thu.
                                                                                     night
M 11/12 Unit wrap-up                                                                 PAPER #2 DUE
                                                                                     hard copy, stapled
                                                                                     Each student bring
                                                                                     1 comment or
                                                                                     reflection from
                                                                                     your paper to share
                                                                                     regarding Jewish
                                                                                     Identity
                                         Unit 3: Jewish Ethics
W 11/14 Lecture 13 with Dr. Tatjana Lichtenstein: Watch: Ethical dimensions of
        “Background on the Holocaust in Eastern the Holocaust (film, posted on
        Europe”                                     Canvas).
F 11/16 Lecture 14 with Dr. Tatjana Lichtenstein
        “Considering Ethical Dimensions of the
        Holocaust”
M 11/19 Student discussion group 10 on                                               Student discussion
        Lichtenstein lectures                                                        group 12 on
                                                                                     Lichtenstein
                                                                                     lectures: Email
                                                                                     memo by 9pm Sun.
                                                                                     night
W 11/21 NO CLASS Thanksgiving BREAK
F 11/23 NO CLASS Thanksgiving BREAK
M 11/26 Lecture 15 on Exodus and Ethics with Dr.    Selections from the Hebrew
        Jonathan Schofer                            Bible (Tanakh):
                                                    Exodus. 20; Exod. 21:28-29;
                                                    Exod. 21:35-36; Exod. 21:33-34;
                                                    Exod. 22:4; Exod. 22:5
                                                    Mishnah Baba Qamma 1:1,
                                                    Mishnah Sanhedrin 7:4 and 9:1;
                                                    Mishnah Avot 1:1-4 and 2:11
                                                  8


W 11/28 Lecture 16 on Ethical Character and the    “The Redaction of Desire,” 28-
        Jewish Concept of the “Evil Impulse” with 38. 45-46 (Schofer 2003)
        Dr. Jonathan Schofer
F 11/30 Student discussion group 13 on Schofer                                    Student discussion
                                                                                  group 13 on
                                                                                  Schofer: Email
                                                                                  memo by 9pm Thu.
                                                                                  night
M 12/3  Lecture 17: “Moral Agency in Biblical      Selections from the book of
        Literature” with Dr. Jonathan Kaplan       Deuteronomy
W 12/5  Lecture 18: with Dr. Jonathan Kaplan       Selections from the book of
                                                   Jonah
F 12/7  Student discussion group 14 on Kaplan                                     Student discussion
                                                                                  group 14 on Kaplan:
                                                                                  Email memo by
                                                                                  9pm Thu. night
M 12/10 FINAL PARTY with food, course evaluation,                                 PAPER 3 DUE
        unit wrap up                                                              hard copy, stapled
                                                                                  Each student bring
                                                                                  1 comment or
                                                                                  reflection from
                                                                                  your paper to share
                                                                                  regarding Jewish
                                                                                  ethics
                                                 9
