                                                     Syllabus
                         Accounting 312: Fundamentals of Managerial Accounting
                                                    Spring 2020
Class Hours:      MW 8:00-9:30 (Unique #: 02210)                Location: UTC 1.104
                  MW 9:30-11:00 (Unique #: 02215)                           UTC 1.104
Instructor:       J. William Kamas                              Office: GSB 5.126H
   E-mail:        j.kamas@mccombs.utexas.edu
   Office Hrs:    See Canvas
TA:               Raegan Bass                                   Office:          See Canvas
   E-mail:        raeganbass@utexas.edu                         Office Hrs:      See Canvas
Required Materials
1. MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING, by Ronald W. Hilton & David E. Platt (12h edition, McGraw-Hill Education,
     ©2019)
2. McGRAW-HILL CONNECT and COURSESMART, on-line study and homework managers
  https://connect.mheducation.com/class/j-kamas-coordinated-spring-2020_1
3. ACC 312 CASE PACK, from UT Copy Center (GSB 3.136). Available in early February.
CANVAS will be used for course management and any additional readings or study materials will be
posted there. I also will use Canvas for communicating with the class.
During the first week of class, you must ensure that:
• you can access the class site on Canvas and have set up your communication preferences;
• your Connect access is functioning properly.
This course is supported by UT’s Peer-Led Undergraduate Studying (PLUS) program. PLUS study groups
provide an opportunity to collaboratively practice skills and knowledge you need for success in this course.
Attending study groups regularly is a great way to ensure that you are keeping up with the material so you
don’t fall behind; feel free to attend any study group at any point in the semester. Groups will start in early
February and meet Sunday-Wednesday; more information on times and locations will be available through
Canvas and announced in class. Additional information on PLUS, including an introductory video, may be
found at http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/support/plus.
E-mail and Canvas
The use of email and Canvas is required for this course. I will frequently communicate with the class with
announcements and guidance via email. I will use the email addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas. If
you need to update your email address with the University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal
info/all my addresses, change your email address. Before each class, I will post on Canvas our lecture outline
notes. You should print them out and bring them to class.
Any outside-of-class announcements that I make (e.g., corrections or clarifications of items discussed in class,
syllabus changes, assignment changes, etc.) will be sent to you via e-mail through Canvas. It is possible that
substantial content will be posted on Canvas or sent via e-mail. It is your responsibility to regularly check your
e-mail and the class Canvas site.
1|P a g e


 Learning Objectives
 If you stay engaged with the course by participating in class, reading the assigned text, completing the
 assigned work, and preparing well for cases and exams, you should obtain the results listed below:
                Expected Result                        What We’ll Do                 How We’ll Measure the Results
       Understand how accounting         ..Discuss chapter readings, cases, and   Interesting and lively class
       systems provide data useful for   current topics together in class.        discussions about cases and
       management decisions in all       ..Relate Managerial Accounting to what   application of materials, including
       business areas.                   is going on in the business world.       current business news.
       Gain experience structuring       ..Work practice problems together in     Homework, cases, and exam
       business problems and             class and discuss them.                  performance (grades).
       analyzing management              ..Prepare business cases for class
       decisions.                        discussion and develop
                                         recommendations.
  This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning Flag. QR courses are designed to equip you with skills that
  are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your
  adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
  use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
  Class Preparation and Success
  You are encouraged to ask questions in class, both to seek technical clarification of points discussed and to
  understand how a particular topic relates to your personal interest in business.
  Class attendance and doing the homework are two keys to success in this class. Students who do well are
  generally those who attend class regularly and can participate in class discussions because they have come
  prepared. Although problems may seem fairly intuitive when we do them in class, you will be surprised how
  hard it is to set them up and solve them on your own. Practice is key.
  Your McGraw-Hill Connect on-line package includes a Smartbook feature that allows you to test your
  knowledge of each class topic. Completing these Smartbooks is optional, but a helpful study tool.
  Classroom Standards
  A 2017 study by McCombs marketing professor Adrian Ward showed that having your phone present (even
  when it’s turned off!) takes up some of your brain power. Other recent studies have shown that using
  computers or tablets in class leads to worse performance. So, although you will use your computer
  extensively for class-related work (optional Smartbook quizzes and required Connect homework), during
  class there will be no computer or tablet use, and your phone should be silenced and put away
  BEFORE class starts. There is a 2-point penalty (final exam score) for any abuse of the computer policy.
  Other class rules:
          • Be prepared to do calculations in class. Your phone calculator is fine in class, but it will not be
             allowed on the exam so you might do better to practice with a financial calculator. We recommend
             the HP 10bII+ financial calculator because it is (1) also useful for ACC 311 and FIN 357, (2)
             relatively inexpensive (about $35), (3) non-programmable and therefore acceptable for exam use.
          • No extraneous conversation or disruptive behavior.
          • You should arrive on time. On the rare occasion when you don’t, please enter and set up quietly.
          • If you must leave early, please notify me in advance.
  You MUST come to the class section in which you are officially registered, unless you’ve made
  arrangements with me beforehand. Class limits are set to ensure a quality experience for everyone. Also,
  during the semester we might do some activities in class, perhaps in teams, and the activities could be
  required for course credit as described below.
2|P a g e


  Assessment
  Course grades will be determined using the following assignments and weights:
                 Two (non-cumulative) Midterm Exams
                     Lower midterm grade                     15%
                     Higher midterm grade                    25%
                 Final Exam (cumulative)                     30%
                 Three Case Quizzes                           9%
                 Other Assignments.                           6%
                 Homework Problems (via Connect):            15%
                  Total                                     100%
    The BBA Program recommends a mean GPA of 3.0-3.2 for this course, but the actual grades assigned will
    be based on what you earn. All sections of ACC 312 follow the same grading policy, and you may assess
    your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-, 80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and
    below 60% = F. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing "extra credit" work either
    before or after the end of the semester. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances and
    according to university policy.
    Grade Appeals: If you believe a grading error has occurred, you must appeal within one week after the item
    is returned to the class or the grade is posted on Canvas or Connect. I only handle grade appeals in
    writing. After one week has passed, no appeals will be considered.
    Exams
    Exams are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. There will be two non-cumulative
    midterm exams. Midterm exams will be closed book/notes and will be held on the dates and times
    indicated in the Class Schedule. All students in all sections of ACC 312 will take the exams at the same
    time. We will try to return the graded exams one week after the exam date. Calculators that are
    programmable or can store text are NOT allowed for exams and will be confiscated.
    There will be a common, cumulative final exam given for all sections of ACC 312 at the end of the term.
    The final exam will be closed book/notes and we will advise you of the date for the final exam as soon as
    we receive it. Do not make travel arrangements until you are certain of your exam schedule! Anyone with a
    non-standard exam schedule (SSD or other approved exception) MUST make exam arrangements with me
    at least one week in advance, and before making any travel arrangements. No early exams will be given
    FOR ANY REASON, including to accommodate travel schedules.
    Alternate exams: If you have another UT class or UT exam at the same time as one of the midterm exams,
    an alternate exam will be given, generally on the day after the scheduled exam. Similarly, if you have
    another UT final exam that directly conflicts with our scheduled final exam, there is a provision for an
    alternate exam. However, in all cases permission to take an alternate exam is at my discretion and the
    request must be made at least one week in advance. Note that conflicts such as classes at other
    educational institutions and work schedules will not constitute an acceptable reason to take an alternate
    exam. If you also have a class or exam conflict with the alternate midterm exam, we can, with my prior
    approval, make arrangements for you to make up the exam. Individual makeup midterm exams must be
    taken within 72 hours of the original exam date. These exams will be given at the Testing Center located
    on the fifth floor of the McCombs School, and I will work with you to schedule it. If you do not take the
    makeup exam as scheduled, you will receive a 0 on the exam.
    If you miss an exam due to a severe illness or other emergency, you should notify me before the exam, if
    possible, and you must provide prompt notification and proof of emergency to Student Emergency Services
    (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of emergency and will provide me
    official acknowledgement of the emergency. However, I have final authority to determine if your absence is
    excused. If so, and if it is feasible for you to take the scheduled alternate exam or an individual makeup
3|P a g e


    midterm exam (see prior paragraph), you may do so. Otherwise, students with an excused absence from a
    midterm exam will be required to shift the weight of that exam (“lowest midterm” weight of 15%) to the
    weighting of the other midterm exam (from 25% to 32.5%) and the final exam (from 30% to 37.5%).
    Unexcused absences will result in an exam grade of 0.
    Case Assignments
    We will discuss three cases during the course to provide context and additional dimensions to the concepts
    we are studying. We will spend the whole class addressing the case on the day indicated in the Course
    Schedule, so coming to class well prepared is critical. Read the case carefully and prepare answers to the
    questions in the case (you may discuss the case in groups). These answers will not be handed in. Each
    case class will begin with a 5-10 minute closed-packet quiz on the case. At the discretion of the instructor,
    your quiz grade may be adjusted up or down based on your participation in the case discussion. Students
    who leave class after the quiz and therefore don’t participate in the case discussion, will receive a zero for
    that case quiz grade. You MUST come to the section in which you are officially registered to receive credit
    for any quiz or in-class assignment.
    No make-up case quizzes will be given, however in the event of a pre-excused absence, you may avoid a
    0 by submitting a five-page paper (double spaced, 12-pt Times Roman font, 1” margins, due within one
    week) addressing a topic of my choosing.
    Homework (two types, both done in Connect)
    Homework must be completed individually in Connect, however you are permitted to collaborate
    with classmates on figuring out how to structure the solution to assigned questions. There are two
    types of homework in this class, both administered via Connect:
    •     During your preparation before class, it is recommended, but not required, that you complete the
          Smartbook module for that class, denoted by the SB icon in the Connect assignments list. This will
          guide you through the textbook, and you will be provided an opportunity to answer comprehension
          questions. Although optional and not for a grade, this is a good way to assess your understanding of
          the course material.
    •     Each week, Review Problems covering that week’s class material will be due to be submitted in
          Connect. The Course Schedule lists these problems. Your Review Problems grade is the percent of all
          points on Review Problems that are correct as submitted. Your answers to these problems must be
          submitted in Connect by 8:00 p.m. on Sunday of that week. A solution will be provided in Connect
          after the submission window ends.
    Late homework will not be accepted. Also, note that for most questions, Connect will change the numbers
    in the problem for each student, so your data will differ from the textbook and your solution will not be
    identical to your classmates’ solutions. Connect will auto-grade these questions, provide solutions to the
    Review Problems (after all sections of ACC 312 have submitted their homework), and indicate areas where
    you need to do additional study.
    If you have difficulty using Connect or encounter a problem with the technology, contact the Connect Help
    Desk (click Help from within Connect). If you have questions about how to solve the exercises or
    problems, please use the Discussion Board on Canvas, see the TAs during their office hours, or come see
    me during my office hours.
    Please note that no homework assignments will be dropped. However, LearnSmart will offer multiple
    opportunities to demonstrate your mastery of the material, and we have configured Connect to allow you
    multiple opportunities to check your work on Review Problems prior to submission. Therefore, you have
    ample opportunity to do well on homework assignments.
4|P a g e


     Other Assignments
     Other graded work may also be assigned, depending on my assessment of class progress and
     preparation. Examples would include (but are not limited to) announced and unannounced in-class
     quizzes, quizzes in Canvas, extra problem assignments, extra case work, in-class check questions, and
     chapter outlines. You MUST come to the section in which you are officially registered to receive credit for
     any in-class assignment. Assignments may be different for the 8am section versus the 930am section.
    Class Recording
    Electronic Class Recordings are Prohibited without my express consent - with the exception of the students
    who are permitted to do so as part of a reasonable accommodation received by Services for Students with
    Disabilities, students may not electronically record class. This prohibition includes the use of audio and
    video recordings. If you ask for my express consent to record class and it is given, such recordings may
    only be used for your personal educational use and may not be distributed to other persons. Any student
    who violates these limitations is subject to discipline under Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules. If you need
    to record a particular class session, you must ask me specifically before class
   Notification Regarding BBA Recruiting Conflicts
   Conflicts occasionally arise between classes and the search for employment. We understand how important
   the job search process is to you, and McCombs provides many resources in support of career exploration
   and search. However, UT is first and foremost an educational institution and your BBA degree will be the
     credential that certifies your education. As such, education will take precedent whenever such a
   conflict arises.
   All companies that recruit at McCombs are informed of this fact. Should a conflict arise, we recommend the
   following steps:
     • Note that a job-related conflict, whether a current job or a potential one, is usually not an acceptable
          reason for missing an exam or taking a make-up, and may not be acceptable in other circumstances
          either. If any doubt exists, check with your instructor.
     • If no exception is provided, inform the company that an academic conflict exists and request an
          accommodation.
     • If no accommodation is provided by the company, and you have done everything within your power to
          resolve the situation, contact BBA Career Services and request their assistance in resolving the
          situation.
     Note that while we do have influence with the companies that recruit at McCombs, not all conflicts can be
     resolved and we have little or no influence with companies that do not recruit through the Recruit McCombs
     system.
     Finally, be aware that it is not unreasonable for an employer to expect you to go to some lengths to show
     your interest in them. In a recent example, several students completed an exam at 9 PM and were
     expected to attend an on-site interview in Houston the next morning at 8 AM. A 5:30 AM flight from Austin
     was available and the students were expected to be on it. This is reasonable, and if you think it is unfair,
     you probably need to reconsider what you believe are the reasonable expectations of a good job and
     career in business.
5|P a g e


                                              Important Notifications
                                             Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                             Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives will be well served by this course,
that students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit. Please let me know right away if
this ever is not the case.
                                                 Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project
in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
                                         Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you
have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me
for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic
brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic
dishonesty.
                                                 Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
          buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
     • If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
6|P a g e


           Using Your Calculator for ACC 312 Homework Assignments and Exams in Connect
                          Carefully observe the rounding instructions in Connect.
            If no specific guidance is provided, do not round to less than four decimal places.
Please make sure your calculator does not round to less than four decimal places (e.g., 0.2078 does not round
to 0.208 or shorter). Four decimal places will be adequate for any homework or exam problems.
Here are the instructions for the recommended HP 10bII+ calculator (if you have a different calculator, check
your manual or search on-line). The default on this calculator is two decimal places, which is too short for
many problems.
Instructions for HP 10bII+:
7|P a g e
