Professor: Dr. Lauren Gutterman
lgutterman@utexas.edu
Office hours on Zoom by appointment
TA: Anneleise Azua                                                   TA: Zoya Brumberg
avazua@utexas.edu                                                    zoyabrumberg@utexas.edu
Office hours on Zoom by appointment                                  Office hours on Zoom by appointment
                     Introduction to American Studies: Closer to Home (78395/80820)
                                          AMS F310 / HIS F315 G
Course Description:
AMS 310 is designed to provide an introduction to the interdisciplinary field of American Studies, the
study of American history, culture, and politics. Though not a comprehensive U.S. history survey, this
course will cover a broad time period, beginning at the turn of the twentieth century and extending into
the present day. “Home” will serve as our central theme and organizing framework, allowing us to track
changes and ideas in the American past in three major ways. First, we will examine “home” in a literal
sense, as a dwelling place or lack thereof, to help us uncover persistent forms of racial and economic
inequality. Second, we will consider “home” in a metaphorical sense, as a powerful and enduring symbol
of the nation as a whole, drawing our attention to issues of immigration and citizenship. Finally, we will
consider “home” in an ideological sense, as a place where ideas about family, gender roles, and sexuality
cohere. Throughout, this course will examine shifts in what it has meant to be American, the ways in
which that identity has worked to bring people together and push them apart, to bestow power and
privilege on some while taking them away from others. Hopefully, students will come away from this
course with a firm grounding in the diverse methods of American Studies research, a richer understanding
of the American past, and a deeper sense of the multiple meanings of home in the present.
Goals:
• To introduce you to a range of materials and methods that can be used to analyze American history,
  culture, and politics.
• To gain a better understanding of American history over the course of the 20th century.
• To learn how to identify and construct arguments.
• To understand the ways in which the domestic sphere is always connected to the broader world.
Major Questions:
• What is American Studies?
• Who does the term “American” include? Who does it exclude?
• How has “home” functioned as a symbol in American political, cultural, and social dialogue?
• What can a focus on the home reveal about transformations in this nation over the past century?
• Where are you most “at home?” How have your homes (in both literal and metaphorical senses)
   impacted you?
Required Reading:
Mae Ngai, The Lucky Ones: One Family and the Extraordinary Invention of Chinese America (2012)
Arthur Miller, Death of a Salesman (1949)
Lorraine Hansberry, A Raisin in the Sun (1959)
Alison Bechdel, Fun Home: A Family Tragicomic (2007)
*All books are available for purchase through the University Co-op and through online vendors. Used
copies of these texts are easily accessible and all are available on Kindle.
                                                                                                           1


Evaluation:
Participation: 10%
4 online reading quizzes: 15%
Essay 1: 20%
Essay 2: 25%
Essay 3: 30%
Participation: Your participation grade will be based on your participation on the Canvas discussion
boards, as well as your participation in your Zoom mini-groups.
Each PowerPoint lecture will include a question that asks you to reflect on that lecture’s argument and
themes. For each week of our course you are required to post 1 response to a question posed on
PowerPoint, and you are required to respond to someone else’s discussion board post (since there are 6
weeks in the course you will have a total of 12 discussion board posts, including 6 of your own remarks
as well as 6 responses to other students). Discussion board posts are due by noon on Friday.
Discussion board responses are due by 5pm on Friday. Discussion board remarks and responses
should be approximately 1 paragraph long. Note: You cannot post a remark and respond to a peer on the
same day.
Please complete the Doodle at this link by Friday June 5th at midnight with your availability to
participate in a Zoom discussion mini-group: https://doodle.com/poll/rcu5wwsgexep5dbk. Zoom mini-
groups of around 12 students will meet for 45 minutes one day a week. The TAs or Professor will attend
and lead each discussion session. These live mini-groups will provide you an opportunity to discuss the
week’s lectures and reading material with your peers and to ask questions of your instructors.
Participating regularly in these discussion mini-groups will be critical to your success in the course.
However, you will not be penalized if you are unable to attend. In other words, participating in Zoom
mini-groups can only help you.
Online reading quizzes: There will be one online reading quiz for each of the four central texts in this
course. You will be able to take these quizzes whenever you choose within the section of the course to
which they correspond. They include 10 multiple choice, multiple answer, and True/False questions. You
will have one hour to complete each quiz. Please take your time to read and think through each question!
Essays: You will have three essay assignments in this course. You will be given two essay prompts in
advance. You will only have to answer one of the two questions. The first two essays will be 3-4 double
spaced pages. The final essay will be 4-5 double spaced pages. In answering the essay prompts you will
have to incorporate an example from the reading/s for that section of the course. You will also have to
incorporate and define at least three key terms from lectures (key terms are listed on the first page of each
PowerPoint presentation).
Grading scale:
        100-93 = A                   92-90 = A-                  89-87 = B+                    86-83 = B
        82-80 = B-                  79-77 = C+                    76-73 = C                    72-70 = C-
        69-67 = D+                   66-63 = D                   62-60 = D-                     59-0 = F
Additional Notes:
Cultural diversity flag: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. The
purpose of the Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag is for students to explore in depth the shared
practices and beliefs of one or more underrepresented cultural groups subject to persistent
                                                                                                            2


marginalization. In addition to learning about these diverse groups in relation to their specific contexts,
students should engage in an active process of critical reflection. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of at least one underrepresented cultural group in the U.S.
(https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/cultural-diversity).
Class conduct: Students are expected to be respectful and polite to all classmates and instructors.
Students who engage in disruptive or disrespectful behavior on Zoom or Canvas may be asked to leave
the class.
Academic honesty: Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is
considered plagiarism, a serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe penalties. Copying
someone else’s work, buying a paper and submitting it as your own, copying and pasting text (even with
changes), or borrowing images from an online source, are some examples of plagiarism. Even if you
plagiarize accidentally, you will be held responsible and penalized.
Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional. When you are
unsure about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor what is appropriate in the context of
your assignment. Consultants at The University Writing Center (http://uwc.utexas.edu/) can also help
you determine whether you are citing sources correctly—and they have helpful guides online for using
direct quotations (http://uwc.utexas.edu/handouts/direct-quotations-using-and-framing/)
 and paraphrasing (http://uwc.utexas.edu/handouts/paraphrasing/). Reviewing those skills will help you
feel confident that you are handling sources professionally in your writing.
You can read the University’s definition of plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty in Sec.
11–402 of the Student Conduct Code (https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/). For more information, visit
the Dean of Students’ site (https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/).
Plagiarism Detection Software: All assignments in this course will be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that
compares submitted material to an archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism.
Other methods may also be used to determine if a paper is the student’s original work. Regardless of the
results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member will make the final determination as to whether or
not a paper has been plagiarized.
Students with disabilities: Any student with a documented disability that requires academic
accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) through the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement at: 471-6259 (voice), or 471-4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or
hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
Please submit this official letter to me within the first week of class (by Thursday, June 11). For all
other SSD information, please see: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Emergency situations: Now more than ever, I recognize that many of you may encounter emergency
situations that impact your learning in this course. If you have any issue at all that gets in the way of your
coursework, I encourage you to email me directly. I want to do whatever I can to help you succeed in this
class. In addition, please be aware of the Student Emergency Services office on campus
(https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/) which “helps students and their families during difficult
or emergency situations. Assistance includes outreach, advocacy, intervention, support, and referrals to
relevant campus and community resources.” If you don’t feel comfortable talking to me or any of your
other professors, you can contact this office and they will reach out to your instructors and let them know
that you are in an emergency situation and require flexibility with deadlines, etc.
                                                                                                              3


**I reserve the right to make changes to this syllabus if needed.
Weekly Schedule:
Thursday, June 4        Introduction/What is American Studies?/Thinking “Home”
Part I. Home/land: 1880s-1920s
Friday, June 5          Immigration, Americanization, and the “Unassimilable” Asian
                        Read: The Lucky Ones, author’s note, and chapters 1-2
Monday, June 8          Imperialism and Domesticity
                        Read: The Lucky Ones, chapters 3-5
Tuesday, June 9         Industrialization and Urban Inequality
                        Read: The Lucky Ones, chapters 6-8
Wednesday, June 10      American Indians and Forced Assimilation
                        Read: The Lucky Ones, chapters 9-10
Thursday, June 11       Progressivism and the Settlement House Movement
                        Read: The Lucky Ones, chapter 12 and Epilogue
Friday, June 12         “True Americanism” and the Second KKK
                        *Special accommodations letters due today.
Monday, June 15          Essay preparation, instructors available for meetings.
Tuesday, June 16         Essay #1 due 5pm, The Lucky Ones quiz due 11:59pm.
Part II. Homebound: 1945-1960s
Wednesday, June 17      The GI Bill and the Boundaries of Citizenship
                        Read: Death of a Salesman – Act I
Thursday, June 18       Suburbanization and the Mass Consumption Economy
                        Read: Death of a Salesman – Act II
Friday, June 19         Civil Rights
                        Read: A Raisin in the Sun– Act I
Monday, June 22         Black Power
                        Read: A Raisin in the Sun– Act II
Tuesday, June 23        The Bracero Program
                        Prep for essay on Friday.
Wednesday, June 24      Gender and Sexual Non-conformity
                        Prep for essay tomorrow.
Thursday, June 25       Essay preparation, instructors available for meetings.
                                                                                    4


Friday, June 26       Essay #2 due 5pm.
Sunday, June 28       Death of a Salesman and Raisin in the Sun quizzes due 11:59pm.
Part III. Home Free? 1980s – 2000s
Monday, June 29       The Tax Revolt and the New Right
                      Read: Fun Home, chapters 1-2
Tuesday, June 30      Economic Inequality and the American Dream
                      Read: Fun Home, chapters 3-4
Wednesday, July 1     Family Values and the Culture Wars
                      Read: Fun Home, chapters 5-6
Thursday, July 2      The HIV/AIDS Epidemic
                      Read: Fun Home, chapter 7
Friday, July 3        Independence Day Holiday.
Monday, July 6        9/11 and Homeland Security
Tuesday, July 7       Debating the DREAM Act
                      Prep for essay on Thursday.
Wednesday, July 8     Essay preparation, instructors available for meetings.
Thursday, July 9      Essay #3 due 5pm, Fun Home quiz due 11:59pm.
                                                                                     5
