                                                                                                 FALL 2019
MATERIALS CONSERVATION: FIELD METHODS
ARC 385T | TUESDAY 8:00A-11:00A
LOCATION: WMB 3.116
INSTRUCTOR:      RACHEAL LUTE
                 racheal@utexas.edu
                 OFFICE: WMB 3.112b
                 OFFICE HOURS: TUESDAY 11:00A-1:00P
                 or by appointment
OVERVIEW
This course provides an introduction to architectural materials conservation, focusing on on-site
examination and testing of historic structures. In addition to reading assignments and classroom lectures,
students will gain practical experience in conducting conditions surveys and on-site testing. Each student
will work on an independent project that includes research and survey work.
PREREQUISITES
Construction I or equivalent and Materials Conservation: Lab Methods, or with permission of instructor.
READINGS
A list of the required reading assignments will be provided during the first class session. Reading
assignments will include excerpts from the required text as well as articles uploaded to Canvas. Reading
assignments for each session should be completed prior to class. Additional readings may be assigned
throughout the semester.
REQUIRED TEXT
Building Pathology: Principles and Practice (2nd Edition 2008) by David Watt. An electronic copy of this
text is available through the University Library.
OPTIONAL TEXT
Conserving Buildings: A Manual of Techniques and Materials by Martin E. Weaver (Revised Edition 1997)
RECOMMENDED REFERENCES
For the assignments and class discussion, you will need to be familiar with terminology relating to
architectural design, history and technology. The recommended reference is A Visual Dictionary of
Architecture by Francis D.K. Ching (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold: 1995).
SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT
Digital camera, binoculars and a clipboard for 18” x 24” elevation drawings are recommended.
                                                     1


                                                                                                 FALL 2019
ACADEMIC COURSE GOALS
Students completing the Field Methods course will gain the following:
       Understanding of the materials and systems of historic structures
       Understanding of the deterioration processes that affect those materials
       Terminology for describing resulting conditions
       Experience in conducting surveys of existing conditions and in identifying sources of deterioration
       Knowledge of non-destructive evaluation methods
GRADING POLICY – SHOULD I INCLUDE A GRADE FOR INDIVIDUAL PRESENTATIONS?
The final grade will be based on the weekly assigned reading questions, preliminary project, midterm
exam, independent research project and class participation. Grading percentages are:
       Preliminary Project             15%
       Midterm                         20%
       Historic Context Draft          10%
       Final Project                   25%
       Attendance and participation    10%
       Final Exam                      20%
GRADES
       A 93 - 100
       A- 90 - 92
       B+ 87 - 89
       B 83 - 86
       B- 80 - 82
       C+ 77 - 79
       C 73 - 76
       C- 70 - 72
       D+ 67 - 69
       D 63 - 66
       D- 60 – 62
       F 59 and below
Make-up examinations and grades of “Incomplete” are given only in cases of illness or other personal
emergencies.
LATE WORK POLICY
Assignments are expected to be completed by due date at the time specified on the assignment.
Assignments submitted after the due date and time will receive a 10% grade deduction. In other words,
assignments which would have been rated A or exemplary will be graded as B, or instead of 100%, the
grade will be 90%. Work submitted after two days past the original due date will not be accepted and will
receive a zero.
                                                     2


                                                                                                     FALL 2019
ASSIGNMENTS
Preliminary Project
This exercise involves identifying building materials and conditions of the Littlefield Home, a 19th century
residence located on the University of Texas campus. Elevation drawings will be provided. Requirements
for this project include:
         Identification of materials and conditions on the elevation drawings
         Written description of the building, including character defining features, materials and
          conditions. This project will be due on October 8th.
Independent Research Project
For this semester-long project, you will study the materials and conditions of an historic building in Austin.
The independent research project requires researching the history of the building and investigating
factors related to existing conditions. Requirements for this project include:
        Identification of materials and conditions on elevation drawings. Format: Adobe InDesign or
         Illustrator, or CAD.
        Illustrated glossary of materials and conditions. Format: digital images, approximately 1 MB in
         size, saved as jpg files.
        Written description of the building’s history, character defining features, materials and
         conditions, factors related to deterioration, treatment and work recommendations. Format: 6-8
         pages of single-spaced text (10-12 size fonts) with references cited.
        Presentation of your work in class. Format: PowerPoint
Elevation drawing pin-ups and presentations are scheduled for November 19th and completed projects
are due on December 6th. A draft of the historic context/history of your chosen building is also due on
November 19th.
NOTE: We use Adobe software in this course. When accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you
will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not required to purchase Creative Cloud services to
sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to create a free Adobe ID. That can be done here:
https://accounts.adobe.com/
EXAMINATIONS
There will be a take-home midterm examination that will be administered during the week of October 22,
and will be due October 29th. The final exam for this course will be cumulative and will be administered
during the last class period on December 3rd.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused
absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will
be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances,
                                                      3


                                                                                                       FALL 2019
absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue, family emergency, or other
instances that are coordinated in advance, ie conference attendance, etc. . The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to
determine due dates. If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be
counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or
absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences;
Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is
excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after
the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the
absence as possible so that arrangements can be made. By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor
of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly
enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and
procedures on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for help:
        In-house CARE counselor (see below)
        For immediate support
             o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                  M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5 th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
             o CMHC Crisis Line:
                  24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
        Free services at CMHC:
             o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
             o Mental health &amp; wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
             o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
                                                        4


                                                                                                     FALL 2019
              o   Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the
colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who
are struggling emotionally and/or academically. Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for
the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may
directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-
6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to
the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be
discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can
be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously.
If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
        Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
         buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
         assembling outside.
        Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they
         may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the
         building.
        Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
         week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
        Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
         Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
         offices.
         Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
         www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                       5


                                                                                                     FALL 2019
COURSE SCHEDULE
Week 1, September 3
Introduction
This introductory session will include an overview of the course and a review of resources that are
available. We’ll discuss course requirements and assignments. We will also review the concept of the
building envelope and its functions.
Week 2, September 10
Materials, and Deterioration: Part I – Wood, Metals and Glass
This session will focus on the material properties and deterioration processes affecting architectural
metals, wood, and glass in historic structures. We will also discuss conditions that result from exposure
to weathering and how these “symptoms” are related to deterioration processes. There will also be
discussion on how these materials relate to specific building systems.
Week 3, September 17
Materials, and Deterioration: Part II – Masonry and Cementitious Materials
This session is a continuation of the previous session on materials and weathering. This week we will
focus on masonry and cementitious materials.
Week 4, September 24
On-site Investigation
This session will focus on surveying existing conditions of historic buildings. Our discussion will cover
project planning, including background information, materials and methods or recording conditions, and
recognizing deterioration patterns. We will conclude the class with a visit to the Littlefield Home in
preparation for the preliminary project.
Week 5, October 1
Developing a Conservation Plan
This session will provide information about the development of a conservation plan. Topics will include
conservation ethics, practical matters such as scheduling and project budgets and the importance of
preventative maintenance. We’ll discuss mock-ups and test areas to evaluate materials and
workmanship as well as cleaning, conservation treatments and repair work.
Week 6, October 8
Field Trip
A field trip to the Anna Hiss Gymnasium will be scheduled for this session. Robert Hengst, PMCS project
architect, will discuss the current preservation/rehabilitation efforts being conducted on this University
of Texas building.
Prior to the tour, class will convene with a pin-up of Littlefield Home projects.
Week 7, October 15
Outdoor Sculpture
During this session, objects conservator Catherine Williams of Silver Lining Art Conservation will discuss
materials and existing conditions of outdoor sculpture and her work in maintaining and treating the UT
Landmarks collections. We’ll consider the differences and similarities between conserving works of art
and historic buildings. A brief tour will follow the classroom lecture.
                                                        6


                                                                                                   FALL 2019
Week 8, October 22
Take-home Mid-term Exam
We will not meet in class this week. Instead students will complete a take-home exam which will cover
theoretical concepts and field assignments related to architectural conservation.
Week 9, October 29
Report Writing
In this session we will review the information that is obtained during field evaluation and testing and
discuss methods for reporting the data. Our discussion will include Historic Structure Reports and how
the results of field evaluation and testing are used to develop project specifications and maintenance
procedures for historic buildings.
Week 10, November 5
Modern Heritage
After a discussion of building materials and systems of buildings constructed in the recent past we will
review several case studies and the philosophical and practical issues related to preservation.
Week 11, November 12
Historic Resources Surveys
In this session we will review the practice of conducting large-scale historic resources surveys. Topics
covered will include planning and execution of historic resources surveys and overall value of the
information collected.
Week 12, November 19
Student Presentations
During this session, there will be a review of elevation drawings, and students will provide presentations
of their independent projects. Written drafts of historic context of each project are also due at this time.
Week 13, November 26
Substitute Materials
While it is considered undesirable, the use of substitute materials is sometimes necessary in
preservation projects. The historic and contemporary use of substitute materials as well as the practical
problems and philosophical implications of this practice will be discussed.
Week 14, December 3
Final Exam
December 6
Final submission of Independent Projects due.
                                                      7
