Sarah L. Lopez
Assistant Professor
School of Architecture – CRP, Architecture, LLILAS
ARC 386M/ CRP 388/ LAS 388
Graduate Course
Wednesday. 9-12PM
e. sll@utexas.edu
t. 512-471-0147
Migratory Urbanism: The Spaces of Transnational Subjects in American Cities and
Migrant Homelands (1890-present)
Migration is an inherently spatial phenomenon; the study of migration is the study of
places, people, processes, and the state. This course addresses the history of 20th century
international migration—with a focus on US-Mexico migration post WWII—through the
lens of the built environment. The aim of this course is to bring migration theories and
histories into the realm of architecture and planning to equip spatial practitioners with
tools for thinking through how contemporary movement interfaces with the production of
space. An interdisciplinary approach to the study of migration will incorporate urban and
architectural histories, political economy, urban theory, ethnographies of individuals,
families, and communities, material culture, and film to explore how U.S. cities and
towns (as well as other countries) and border regions are influenced by the continuous
flow of people, ideas, dollars, and desire. We will engage concepts such as assimilation,
transnationalism, diaspora, spatial practices, ritual infrastructure, spatial hybridity, and
urban design from below. We will investigate international remittance development,
multi-scalar migrant neighborhoods, and housing. Students will learn methods for
conducting primary research on migration and places, and write short papers on
contemporary or historical migration as it relates to/produces Austin’s built environment.
Course Goals:
* reading the city at text / sources for urban narratives
* relating migration patterns to local constructions of place
* linking macro policy and large-scale urban trends to immigrant experience
* unpacking the socio-spatial and place-making
* historicizing contemporary migration
* building a people-centered theory about the production of the built environment
Course Requirements:
1. Class Attendance: Students are expected to attend classes regularly and to participate
in class discussions of the readings. I expect full attendance at every session. Absences
must be explained by email. Unexcused absences will result in a penalty. More than two
will automatically lower your final grade but one whole grade. Arriving more than 5
minutes late to class without a valid excuse will count as ½ of an absence.


                                                             Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
2. Readings and Reading Questions
Reading response-question (weekly). Please send me a reading question by midnight the
day before class. I may or may not bring them up in class, but it is a good way for me to
track your particular interests and curiosities. Throughout the semester, some students
will lead discussion of weekly readings. TBD.
*Canvas course website for syllabus, handouts, and readings, please find everything
under “modules.”
3. History of a migration group for walking tour: In groups of 2, please identify a migrant
group that lives in Austin (or the North Lamar area) and trace the historical
reasons/events in their homeland that may have spurred emigration. We will try to
dedicate some class time to this search. Be prepared to discuss case informally during
tour.
4. Multiple Methods for Understanding North Lamar: In preparation for our walking
tour, students will use a particular method (i.e. Google Maps, Street View, Sanborns,
Census Data, Directories, Historic Newspapers and/or Websites of local businesses and
cultural organizations) to do preliminary analysis of the area. Some students may choose
to do formal analysis of building massing and footprints.
5. Original Paper or Visual Document: Students will identify a building, block, or even
small neighborhood in Austin that is or has been shaped by the migration of individuals, a
group, or a particular cultural aesthetic, either currently or historically. A fine-grain
analysis of this one location will utilize the primary sources we explore in class (historic
and contemporary maps, city directories, archival newspapers, images, or buildings) as
well as interviews and/or oral histories.
The paper should be a minimum of 12 pages, double spaced, 12-point font, not
including images and maps, and not exceed 15. Alternatively, if you are more
interested in mapping/visual explorations, you will conduct a mapping project that
utilizes cognitive mapping, Sanborn mapping, city directory mapping (or another
method of your choice) to illustrate patterns in space related to migration.
6. Optional presentation: Students that want to discuss their research and get feedback
before they submit their paper will present in class on the last day; we will discuss the
case study as a group. While this is optional, I recommend that students who feel that
they are involved in a research process take this opportunity to work their ideas out in
spoken form. Also, if I am concerned about a student’s progress, I will ask the student to
take this opportunity.
Grading Structure
Attendance and Participation (weekly questions, discussion): 45%
Short Assignments (North Lamar preparation): 20%
Final paper: 35%
                                                                                                2


                                                            Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
Office Hours: either Wednesday 12-1 p.m. or email to set up appt., Sutton 2.118.
sll@utexas.edu
This course is not only about intellectual exploration, but also creativity. I encourage
students to ask open-ended questions about migration, and to pursue their research in an
exploratory manner.
Final Notes, Do’s and Don’ts
*Do not use IPhones or IPads in class, even to access articles, unless we are conducting
  web searches as a group, or you have discussed this with me.
*Turn off your cell-phone.
*The art of writing notes with pen and paper should never be lost. I encourage students to
bring in pads of paper, come in with open minds, talk and listen.
**I reserve the right to change the syllabus according to group discussion/needs. Please
look out for e-mails I send or updates regarding any changes to the syllabus.
                                                                                               3


                                                           Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
 Week 1: August 29
Theories and Categories: Macro-view of Migration and Space
The contemporary movement of goods, ideas, people, and capital is primarily understood
through globalization and transnational discourses. International migration to the U.S. is
perceived through the lens of ethnicity and the nation-state. Outlining key frameworks
used in globalization literature, urban history, and immigration history reveals the need
for historicized and situated research on migration and place.
        1) Why migration and space/cities, what does migration and urbanization look
            like today (macro immigration/urban processes)?
        2) The current moment: discussion of ‘Zero Tolerance’ and the Trump
            Administration
        Reading:
        None
        Going Further:
        Pierce, Mary and Benton-Short, Lisa, ed. Migrants to the Metropolis (1-7, 15-22,
        23-47).
        Castells, Stephen and Miller, Mark J. eds., The Age of Migration
Week 2: September 5
Methodological Approach to Migration and Material Evidence
This week we explore migration in its broadest sense, and couple this exploration with an
introduction to cultural landscape and built environment methods. Migration trends
directly influence urban and rural environments; migration makes places. What is the
work that the built environment does to and for us?
        1) Migration writ large
        2) Landscapes as evidence, limits to cultural landscape studies, and theorizing
            migration + architecture.
        Reading:
            • Christiane Harzig and Dirk Hoerder, with Donna Gabaccia, “Migration in
                Human History—the Long View,” in What is Migration History
                (Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2009): 8-52. (for reference, glance at 8-34, skim
                35-50)
            • Paul Groth and Todd Bressi, “Frameworks for Cultural Landscape
                Studies” in Understanding Ordinary Landscapes (New Haven: Yale
                University) :1-24.
            • Dell Upton, “Architecture and Everyday Life,” New Literary History, vol.
                33, no. 4 (Autumn, 2002): 707-723.
            • Mirjana Lozanovska, ed. “Conclusion,” in Ethno-Architecture and the
                Politics of Migration (217-233).
                                                                                              4


                                                            Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
        Going Further:
        Steve Cairns, ed., Drifting: Architecture and Migrancy. (Intro to page 8)
        Dell Upton, “The Power of Things: Recent Studies in American Vernacular
        Architecture” American Quarterly, vol. 35, no. 3 (1983): 262-279.
Week 3: September 12
Assimilation and Architecture (late 19th and early 20th century)
How have migrant groups used architecture and building practices to influence social
cohesion and social life? How have they used architecture to project certain public
images and representations of their “ethnicity?” What role does architecture and material
culture play in assimilation, if any?
        Session 1: The Material Culture of Assimilation.
        Reading:
            • Thomas Hubka, “The Worker’s Cottage in Milwaukee’s Polish
                Community: Housing and the Process of Americanization, 1870-1920,”
                Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture, 33-52.
            • Steven Moffson, “Identity and Assimilation in Synagogue Architecture in
                Georgia, 1870-1920,” Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture, 151-165.
            • Spickard, “Immigration, Race, Ethnicity, Colonialism,” Almost All Aliens,
                2007, 13-33.
        Going Further:
        Edward Chappell, “Acculturation in the Shenandoah Valley: Rhenish Houses of
        the Massanutten Settlement,” in Common Places (University of Georgia Press,
        1986): 27-57.
        Ralph S. Bourne, Trans-national America, The Atlantic, 1916.
        Lizabeth Cohen, “Embellishing a Life of Labor,” in Common Places (261-280)
        Arjun Appadurai, The Social Life of Things
*spend time discussing built environment methods, and “what is in a plan?”
Week 4: September 19
Assimilation and Cities: Mexican migration in Los Angeles and Chicago during the
first half of the 20th century
What did migration look like pre-WWII in America’s industrializing cities? What urban
features shaped and where shaped by migration? This week we approach the question of
migrant assimilation through Mexican immigrants’ incorporation into two of Americas
largest and most Latino cities, Los Angeles and Chicago. We will focus on: 1) economic
and political factors shaping migration, spatial integration into Anglo America, inter-
ethnic conflict, and the “Mexican problem” and 2) railroads, industry, agriculture,
                                                                                               5


                                                            Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
streetcars, and city-building to understand how early migrant neighborhoods relate to city
form. We will also examine “assimilation” as a sociological concept.
        1: Americanizing Mexicans in a once-Mexican town: LA and assimilation
        2: Chicago’s Mexicans, the Chicago School (spatial assimilation as a sociological
        concept)
        Reading:
             • Kelly Lytle Hernandez, Mexican Immigration to the U.S.,” 25-29. (for
                reference)
             • George Sanchez. 1993. Becoming Mexican American, Ethnicity, Culture,
                and Identity in Los Angeles, 1900-1945 (Chapter 3: 63-83).
             • Gabriela Arredondo. Mexican Chicago: Race, Identity, and Nation 1916-
                39. (Chapter 2: 37-79)
             • Louis Wirth, “Urbanism as a Way of Life,” Journal of American
                Sociology, 1-24 (*only half are assigned this reading)
             • George Simmel, The Mental Life and the Metropolis, 23-31 (*only half
                are assigned this reading)
        Going Further:
        George Sanchez, “Economic Development and Immigration, 1890-1920,” Walls
        and Mirrors: Mexican Americans, Mexican Immigrants, and the Politics of
        Ethnicity, 39-68.
        Perea Juan, ed., Immigrants Out! The New Nativism and the Anti-Immigrant
        Impulse in the United States, Intro (1-12), Part 1 (13-43, 44-60 Statue of Liberty)
        Thomas Guglielmo and Cybelle Fox, “Defining America’s Racial Boundaries:
        Blacks, Mexicans, and European Immigrants, 1890-1945” American Journal of
        Sociology, vol. 118, no. 2 (2012): 327-379.
*Assignment: half the class will read Urbanism as a Way of Life, the other half will read
The Mental Life and the Metropolis. Two students from each group will launch a
discussion of the reading to the other group. We will discuss urbanism as a concept, and
how urbanism relates to solidarity at the turn of the century.
Week 5: September 26
Post WWII Urban Decline, Latino Urbanism, and Contested Public Spaces
What have been the dominant narratives that explain Mexicans and Mexican-Americans
roles in U.S. cities and urbanism? How are those narratives changing and why does it
matter?
        1: Overview of distinct phases of Mexican migration and settlement and related
        sociological categories
        2: The Power of Place
                                                                                               6


                                                          Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
       Reading:
           • Ramon Gutierrez, “What is in a Name? The History and Politics of
               Hispanic and Latino Panethnicities,” Latino Studies Reader, 2016, 19-20
               and 27-49 (skim).
           • Dolores Hayden. 1997. The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public
               History. (Chapters 1 and 2: 2-43)
           • James Rojas, “Enacted Environment: The Creation of Place by Mexicans
               and Mexican Americans in East Los Angeles,” in Everyday America,
               1999, 275-292.
       Going Further:
       Andrew Sandoval Strausz, “Latino Landscapes: Postwar Cities and the
       Transnational Origins of a New Urban America,” Journal of American History,
       Dec. 2014: 804-831.
       Mike Davis, Magical Urbanism
       Doug Saunders, Arrival City, “Arriving at the Top of the Pyramid: Los Angeles”
       (76-100).
       John Chase, Margaret Crawford, Kaliski John, Everyday Urbanism (Monacelli
       Press, 1999).
       Nancy Fraser, “Rethinking the Public Sphere”
*potential USGS on-line map exploration
Week 6: October 3
Transnational Activism and the Remittance Landscapes in Mexico
Migration changes the landscape, the politics, and the cultural worlds of migrant
hometowns. A major material outcome of this is the rise of the remittance house.
Migrants have also collectively initiated community projects. What is the remittance
landscape according to Lopez, and dissimilation according to Fitzgerald? Why do we
need to address other nations to understand the U.S.?
       1: Migrant Hometown Associations and migrant activism. (HTAs)
       Short film: The Sixth Section.
       2: Remittance Landscapes
       Reading:
           • Casa Michoacán declaration of intent (2)
           • David Fitzgerald, “Stranger of Prodigal Son?” in A Nation of Emigrants,
               (125-152)
           • Lopez, “The Remittance House” (35-70) OR “El Jaripeo” (97-133) in The
               Remittance Landscape: Spaces of Migration in Rural Mexico and Urban
               USA. (*note, half will read “Remittance House” and half will read “El
               Jaripeo” to cross-discuss)
                                                                                             7


                                                               Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
         Going Further:
         Websites:
         World Bank
         Inter-American Development Bank
         Architectura de Remesas
         Sam Quinones. 2007. Antonio's Gun And Delfino's Dream: True Tales of Mexican
         Migration.
         NYT- Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala and Dilip Ratha, “To Help Africa: Sell diaspora
         bonds/ Homeward Bond”
         Sanchez, “Where is Home? The Dilemma of Repatriation,” Becoming Mexican-
         American.
         Pierre Bourdieu, “Structures, Habitus, and Practices,” in The Logic of Practice.
         Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction.
         Ellen Pader, “Spatiality and Social Change: Domestic Space in Mexico and the
         U.S.”
*Potential in class exploration of Digital Immigrant Stories, primary source, on line:
http://ihrca.dash.umn.edu/dil/. Similar sources:
http://immigrants.mndigital.org/exhibits/show/immigrantstories-exhibit/classroom
Week 7: October 10
Transnationalism: Chinese and Italian Migration and Place-Making (late 19th and
early 20th century) This week we expand discussions of transnational or remittance
landscapes in Mexico the US by looking at the influence of migration in China and Italy.
We ask: who is doing this kind of research? Why is this important?
         1: Chinese Migration
         2: Italian Migration
         Readings:
             •    Donna Gabaccia, Intro (xv-xxi), Ch. 2 (11-34), Ch. 5 (65-85), in From
                  Sicily to Elizabeth Street: Housing and Social Change Among Italian
                  Immigrants, 1880-1930 (State University of New York Press, 1984).
                  (*only half read Gabaccia)
             •    Donna Gabaccia, “Is Everywhere Nowhere? Nomads, Nations, and the
                  Immigrant Paradigm of United States History,” Journal of American
                  History, vol. 86, no. 3 (1999). (*only half read Gabaccia)
             •    Madeline Hsu, Intro (1-15), Ch. 2 (16-54), Ch. 6 (156-175), in Dreaming
                  of Gold, Dreaming of Home: Transnationalism and Migration Between
                  the United States and South Chine, 1882-1943. (*only half read Hsu)
             •    Paul Kramer, Geopolitics of Mobility: Immigration Policy and American
                  Global Power in the Long Twentieth Century,” American Historical
                  Association, 2018: 393-438. (*everybody)
                                                                                                  8


                                                            Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
        Going Further:
        Donna Gabbacia, Foreign Relations
        Denis Byrne, “The Need for a Transnational Approach to the Material
        Heritage of Migration: The China-Australia Corridor,” Journal of Social
        Archaeology 0 (0), 2016, 1-25.
        Mark Choate, Emigration Nation: The Making of Italy Abroad, 2008.
        Yong Chen, Chinese San Francisco, 1850-1943: A Trans-Pacific Community,
        2000.
        *website on Chinese remittance landscapes: http://www.cangdongproject.org
        *website on southeast Asian stories:
        http://immigrants.mndigital.org/exhibits/show/immigrantstories1975/stories
*Note: We are splitting up readings. Choose: Italian or Chinese? Everybody read Paul
Kramer, but only half read Gabbacia, and the other half read Hsu. We will also do
Google Earth exploration in class together and discuss North Lamar. Research some
aspect of North Lamar this week, TBD, due October 17th.)
Week 8: October 17
Spatial Practices: Ritual Infrastructure and Hybridity in Sweden and Chicago
And Urban Design From Below
Today’s immigrant populations may or may not have opportunities to build architectural
monuments. Yet, they are shaping the built environment in important ways. What is the
relationship between spatial practices, built space, and planning? How have migrants
exerted agency over their built environment past and present? How—and do they—
migrant communities build solidarity into place? What is the relationship between
planning from below and above?
        1: Ritual Infrastructure
        2: Urban Design From Below
        Readings:
            • De Certeau, “Spatial Practices: Walking the City,” in Practice of Everyday
                Life, 91-110.
            • Arijit Sen. Transcultural Placemaking: Intertwined Spaces of Sacred and
                Secular on Devon Avenue, Chicago. (31-62)
            • Mack, “Urban Design From Below: Immigration and the Spatial Practice
                of Urbanism” Public Culture 26, no. 1 (2014): 153-85.
            • Domenic Vitielo, Migrant Metropolis and American Planning, (245-255)
        Going Further:
        Simone, “People as Infrastructure”
        Mack, The Construction of Equality: Syriac Migration to the Swedish City
        (Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press, 2017, Intro, Ch. 4 (135-170), Ch. 5
        (171-210)
                                                                                               9


                                                               Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
        Rubén Hernandez-León. Metropolitan Migrants: The Migration of Urban
        Mexicans to the United States. (Chapter 5: 154-183)
        Christian Zlolniski. 2006. Janitors, Street Vendors, and Activists: The Lives of
        Mexican Immigrants in Silicon Valley (Chapters 3: 73-105)
*Time in class to discuss and present about North Lamar Tour, and potential exploration
of “first days” in the U.S. primary source on-line (http://www.firstdaysproject.org).
Week 9: October 24
 “Mapping North Lamar”: Urban Tour (time and place to meet TBA)
To what extent is this a social landscape? To what extent is this a commercial landscape?
Can we separate the two?
        Readings:
            • Stewart Brand, How Buildings Learn (1-23, mostly photos)
            • Singer, The Rise of 21st Century Gateways, (Intro. 3-25)
            • Fiscal Policy Institute: Bringing Vitality to the Main Street (for reference
                only)
*Come to tour having researched the history of one migrant group represented in the
area, be prepared to informally discuss.
Week 10: October 31
Migrant Suburbs: From “Chinatown” to Ethnoburb
From working the land, to ethnic clusters, to fragmented living, migrants have been
remaking U.S. suburbs throughout the second half of the twentieth century. We return to
the idea of assimilation and acculturation but in a new context. How can we compare the
migrant laborer to the migrant resident in the context of suburbanization? First, we
address migrant visibility and invisibility as it relates to their occupation, and their
location in U.S. cities and suburbs. Next we explore how migrants are remaking entire
metropolitan regions by tracing the evolution from “Chinatowns” at the turn of the 20th
century to the emergent “ethno-burbs” in the 21st.
        1: As Labor (networks, informality, invisibility)
        2: As Residents
Readings:
    •   James Duncan and Nancy Duncan. 2004. Landscapes of Privilege: The Politics of
        the Aesthetic in an American Suburb (Chapter 8: 203-250)
    •   NYT, “Ailing Midwestern Cities Extend a Welcoming Hand to Immigrants”
    •   Becky Nicolades and James Zarsadiaz, Design Assimilation in Suburbia: Asian
        Americans, Built Landscapes, and Suburban Advantage in Los Angeles’s San
        Gabriel Valley since 1970 (332-371)
                                                                                                 10


                                                             Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
        Going Further:
        Willow Aman, Trespassers? Asian Americans and the Search for Suburbia.
        Josi Ward, “Dream Oriental Romance: Reinventing Chinatown in 1930s Los
        Angeles”
        Fong, First Suburban Chinatown.
        Michelle, Global Diasporas and Traditional Towns: Chinese Transnational
        Migration and the Development of Vancouver’s Chinatown.
*discussion about paper topics, digest tour
Week 11: November 7
Designing for Displacement, Deportation, Detention (Economic Migrant, Refugee,
Asylum Seeker)
Migratory urbanism is also about how we think about migrants and their relationship and
right to be in U.S. cities. Despite migrants’ pivotal role in building American (U.S.)
cities, many migrants do not have a “right to the city.” How does the production of
migrant illegality shape their access and right to space? How can we think this through by
addressing the spaces of incarceration and detention that are used to quarantine migrants?
        1: Encountering Ellis Island
        2: Displacement
        3: Immigrant Detention Centers and Immigration Prisons
            Reading:
            • David Harvey, “Right to the City?” (1-15)
            • Jenna Loyd and Alison Mountz, Intro (1-30), Militarizing Migration (54-
                86), “Not a Prison,” (87-116), Boats, Borders, and Bases: Race, the Cold
                War, and the Rise of Migration Detention in the United States (2018)
            • Should Designers Try to Reform Immigrant Detention? City Lab, 2018, 1-
                13.
            • Migration Policy Institute, Unauthorized Migrants by Country of Birth,
                2015 (for reference only)
            Going Further:
            Lauren Martin and Matthew Mitchelson, “Geographies of Detention and
            Imprisonment: Interrogating Spatial Practices of Confinement, Discipline,
            Law and State Power,” Geography Compass, 459-477.
            Loinel Beehner, “Are Syria’s Do-It-Yourself Refugees Outliers or Examples
            of a New Norm?”
            DeGenova, “The legal production of Mexican/migrant “illegality,” Latino
            Studies, 2 (2), 160-185.
            New York Times Magazine, “Deported”
            Loic Waquant, “Prison as a Surrogate Ghetto”
                                                                                               11


                                                           Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
            Cervcantes-Gautschi, “Wall Street and the Criminalization of Immigrants”
            Feltz and Baksh, “Business of Detention” in Beyond Walls and Cages
            Chak, Architecture of Detention
            Saskia Sassen, Expulsions
            Raphael Sperry, “Is Justice Architecture Just?”
            James Scott, Seeing Like a State
            Wong Wing vs. United States
            Kelly Greenhill, Weapons of Mass Migration: Forced Displacement,
            Coercion, and Foreign Policy (Cornell University Press, 2010)
            Saskia Sassen, Expulsions
            Dan Canon, “A System Designed to Make People Disappear,” Slate, 1-4.
            “Office of Inspector General: Immigration and Customs Information Did not
            follow Federal Procurement Guidelines When Contracting for Detention
            Services”
            Repatriation and Deportation of Mexicans:
            https://teachbocolatinohistory.colorado.edu/primary-source-sets/repatriation-
            and-deportation-of-mexicans-1932-1936/
*Discuss 1951 UN Convention, 1967 Protocol, 1980 Refugee Act, and paper topics.
Week 12: November 14
Designing for Refugee Urbanism and Sanctuary
Bring Questions to Class, Closing Discussion
What do we learn from this exploration of migrants and city-place building? What roles
should cities play in creating a space for migrants and refugees?
       Readings:
            • Legal Resource Center, “The Rise of Sanctuary: Getting Local Officers
                out of the Business of Deportation in the Trump Era”
            • Nancy Fraser, Scales of Justice: Reimagining Political Space in a
                Globalizing World, 2009 (Intro, 1-11, Ch. 2 12-29) (Ch. 5
                Transnationalizing the Public Sphere, 76-99, for reference only)
            • UN Declaration of Human Rights
       Going Further:
       Agamben, Homo Sacer
       Jonathan Darling, “Cities of Sanctuary” (7)
*discuss paper topics
Week 13: November 21 (THANKSGIVING)
                                                                                             12


                                                            Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
Week 14: November 28
Student Presentations
Students are asked to give very informal presentations of their paper topics as a way of
closing the course with a discussion of change in Austin, past and present, due to
migration. What surprises did explorations of Austin unearth and what do they tell us
about the role of migrants in building, inhabiting, and envisioning the city? How does this
relate to the professional world of space-makers?
Week 15: December 5
NO CLASS
Source List:
Throughout the course we will read texts that use a myriad of sources. We will also take
an urban tour to situate our study of migration and cities in Austin’s built environment.
This source list is divided into built environment and migration sources. Throughout the
semester we will review some of these sources so that you can develop your writing and
researching toolkit.
Built Environment Sources:
-city maps
-fire insurance maps/ Sanborns
-plat maps
-cognitive maps
-demographic maps
-zoning maps
-architectural plans
-building history
-city directories
-institutions (ethnic associations, schools, churches, labor unions)
-historic newspapers
-city planning and redevelopment municipal documents
-real estate records, deeds
-wandering / drift
-photographs (aerial and grounded)
Migration Sources:
-census data
-immigrant organization archives (ex. Mexican Community Committee of South
Chicago)
-diaries, letters, journals
-oral history
-ethnic associations
-religious institutions
                                                                                              13


                                                         Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Fall 2018
-policy debates
-non for profits
-participant observation and interviews (ethnography)
- Immigration Statistics Yearbook: https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/yearbook
Immigration Syllabus: http://editions.lib.umn.edu/immigrationsyllabus/
ICE Raid List Locations
Austin Sanctuary Network Members
Texas Department of Criminal Justice, Texas State Archives
AT UTexas Libraries:
https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/c.php?g=629103 (guide to immigration, including
“encyclopedia of American immigration, how the U.S. immigration system works, the
immigrant visa process, U.S. department of State visa glossary)
                                                                                           14
