Elaine K. Horwitz                 horwitz@austin.utexas.edu                          Spring 2019
Office: SZB 528C
Office Hours: Mondays 2 to 3 and Wednesdays 12 to 1 (or by appointment).
Students are invited to share their questions, concerns, joys, accomplishments, etc.
(There will probably be some modifications to the syllabus.)
                                           Course Description
    This course will provide an overview of theoretical and practical perspectives on language in
    education. Students will explore principles of discourse, phonology, morphology, syntax and
    semantics especially as they relate to second language acquisition. We will also cover language
    varieties, social conventions and linguistic structures. The focus of the course is to prepare pre-
    service teachers to meet the linguistic and academic needs of bilingual English learner (EL)
    students in K-12 classrooms.
    Topics include the analysis of English structures, identification of academic and linguistic
    learning needs of bilingual EL students, and strategies to promote language acquisition. Our
    beliefs about the English language and its acquisition shape the kinds of opportunities we
    provide our bilingual EL students and are therefore highly consequential to their academic
    trajectories. This course is structured to support the student in designing, implementing and
    reflecting on the academic language development of bilingual EL students in a variety of
    contexts.
                                              Course Goals
    By the end of the semester, students will be able to:
    1. Discuss the complexities of English.
    2. Explain English language structures and patterns.
    3. Critically analyze the linguistic features of a bilingual EL student’s oral language sample.
    4. Understand language as a sociopolitical and historical construct.
    5. Appreciate varieties of the English language and its ongoing transformation.
    6. Identify the linguistic challenges facing bilingual EL students in the academic context
    7. Design activities appropriate to bilingual EL students’ linguistic needs in the academic
        context
    8. Identify attitudes towards, and modes of inquiry regarding language
    9. Articulate theories of language (e.g. variation, phonology, social conventions, use/usage)
    10. Identify instructional strategies to address bilinguals’ academic & linguistic development.
                                           Required Reading
    ● Freeman, D.E. and Freeman, Y.S. (2014). Essential linguistics Second Edition: What
        teachers need to know to teach ESL, reading, spelling, and grammar. Portsmouth, NH:
        Heinemann.
    ● Course readings available on Canvas
                                              Grading
Critical Commentaries                   (15%)


SOPHOSI                                  (5%)
Tutoring (10h)                          (10%)
Group Presentation                      (10%)
Mid-Term & Final                        (30%)
Linguistic Analysis                     (30%)
100-93=A, 92-90=A-, 89-87=B+, 86-83=B, 82-80=B-, 79-77=C+, 76-73=C, 72-70=C-, 69-60=D,
Below 60=F
                                                 Canvas
Use of e-mail and Canvas are essential elements of this class. Successful completion of this course
requires that you record a language sample from your bilingual EL student for transcription and
analysis. Projects and assignments must be submitted electronically, posted to the class Canvas
website. E-mail will be used to communicate with me and other class members. A Canvas Site has
been established for this course; the site contains a copy of this syllabus, project guidelines,
readings which are not in your textbooks, and general course information. Announcements, updates,
and new documents will be posted throughout the course; students are expected to check Canvas
regularly. Students are encouraged to post their own presentations to the group presentation folder
on Canvas so others in the class may have access to them. Critical Commentaries should be
posted to Canvas by NOON on the day before each class session so that I can become familiar
with them before class. (More details about the commentaries below.)
                                               Attendance
Regular attendance and participation is expected.
    If you have to miss a class session, please talk to me before your absence about your plans for
    keeping up with the coursework and compensating. You are responsible for contacting a class
    member so that you are prepared for the next class session. When you come to class, please sign
    the attendance sheet.
    Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
    least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
    class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I
    will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
    absence.
    If you must be absent on a day when you are scheduled to present, it is imperative that you let
    me know prior to that class so that adjustments may be made.
Class sessions will include teacher presentations, small and whole group discussions, virtual
responses, and student presentations. Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the
assigned material. Your perspectives are appreciated, needed, and respected, and should be shared.
Students will respect the viewpoint of all class members. Students’ grades will depend in part on
ideas and understandings developed in class.


                                            CARE Counseling
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to need
support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE
Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your
academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White, LPC,
LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment,
call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please
include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on Mondays and
Wednesdays from 1 - 2 PM in JES A115 and Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 -– 2 PM in SZB
216. You will check–in at the Front Desk, and they will let Danie know you're waiting. All
services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without your written
consent. Come by and see us, we are here to listen.
                                    University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. All
students are responsible for reading and understanding the University of Texas Standard of
Academic Integrity and definition of plagiarism. By submitting an assignment to satisfy course
requirements, you are indicating that it is your own work. The failure to properly acknowledge use
of another’s work is plagiarism. References must be cited according to APA guidelines. Plagiarism
of any kind will result in a failing grade for the assignment and/or the class.
                                   Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). Students are responsible to provide a
copy of their letter to me at the start of the semester.
                                          Technology Etiquette
This is a discussion-based class where your input is expected and valued. Please turn off your cell
phones and close your laptops during class. If there is a need for everyone to be online, we will all
pull up our laptops together.
                                            Classroom Policies
Our classroom is a safe place to share and develop new ideas and gain understanding; respect of
colleagues’ questions is expected. This syllabus is a work-in-progress, dates and details are subject
to change. Any changes will be confirmed both in class and via class email. As mentioned earlier,
participation plays a critical role in understanding of the material.
                                                Writing Flag


ALD 329 carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you will write regularly throughout the semester,
complete a substantial writing project, receive feedback from your instructor and your peers to help
you improve your writing, and provide like feedback to your peers. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your
peers’ work. A substantial portion of your grade will come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.
                                               SOPHOSI (5%)
https://www.sophosi.com/
1. Visit www.sophosi.com or download the Sophosi app:
      ●   iOS (https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/sophosi/id1318340078?mt=8)
      ●   Android (https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.app.sophosi)
2. Create your educator login.
3. Add your certifications (including in-progress certs!), experience, and sports (if interested in
coaching) to complete your profile.
4. Start getting found by schools looking for educators like you! Also search for jobs, schools,
and districts to learn more about your options. Follow as many as you like!
               Critical Commentaries (15%): ~1 paragraph (1/2 page) per reading
CCs are designed to help you organize, synthesize, and connect course readings—to easily locate
and identify reference materials for exams and the final project. Critical commentaries should be
written in paragraph form and include the following information.
            1. Title – Full citation of the reading (in APA format)
            2. Brief Summary – 2-3 sentence summary of key points and note any details, key
                concepts, etc which particularly struck you.
            3. Response – Your opinion of and reaction to the reading. Did the text trigger a
                connection or reaction upon reading? Comment on, dialogue and interact with the
                text. Did you agree / disagree? Why? Did you gain any new insights from the
                reading? Was it helpful? Why / why not? How does it relate to other readings for this
                class or others? Does it relate to your work tutoring your English learner student?
            4. Key Question/Critical Concept—At least one idea per week that either (a) requires
                further clarification, or (b) you synthesized in a novel way and will share with your
                colleagues.
            5. CCs must be posted to Canvas by NOON the day before the day of class in
                which they will be discussed.


        **While informal, please carefully edit for spelling, grammar, syntax and clarity. ** You
        are welcome to bring hard copies to class to facilitate discussion.
                                      Tutoring (10 hours) (10%)
Tutoring organizers will speak to our class at the start of the semester (Woolridge, Linder and UT
International and Adult ESL programs); please either sign up with them and let me know where you
will be volunteering. All 10 HOURS are REQUIRED to receive CREDIT.
        a) A signature from your tutoring coordinator is required on your Tutoring Sign-in sheet
            each time you tutor. Include your tutoring coordinator’s contact (email/phone) on the
            form. Submit this form under the tutoring assignment on Canvas.
        b) You will also complete the Tutoring Log for each tutoring session in order to reflect on
            the experience and document how the time was spent. Submit this form under the
            tutoring assignment on Canvas (with the sign-in sheet).
        c) At the end of the semester, you will complete a Tutoring Reflection Form, also to be
            submitted on Canvas.
        SUBMIT THESE THREE DOCUMENTS TOGETHER ON CANVAS by 5/10/19
                                      Group Presentations (10%)
During the first session students will divide into groups and choose a presentation topic. Group
presentations will touch on one key aspect of the week’s readings. Group members must meet with
me during office hours, or another arranged time, prior to the scheduled presentation date to
generate ideas and materials for the presentation. Presentations should be engaging, connected to
the class readings, interactive, collaborative, and informative. Consider interactive, non-lecture
formats for these presentations. Make sure to start on time and work out any technical issues prior
to presenting. Please see Canvas for more detail. Please no PPT! 30 minutes
                                     Midterm & Final (15% each)
The exams will consist of short answer and essay questions. Maybe some multiple choice questions.
                        We will have occasional ungraded quizzes (0% each) : )
                                       Linguistic Analysis (30%)
Students will display their understanding of (1) the distinct structure and features of oral English,
and (2) the linguistic development of bilingual EL students by analyzing a language sample from a
tutoring session with their student. Language samples will include approximately10 minutes of
discussion around an academic or social topic. Claims made in the linguistic analyses must be
supported by references drawn from course readings as well as external texts.
Final projects will consist of 4 discrete sections:
1) Introduction
How do you connect with your student? What have you learned about yourself and your student
beyond our course teachings? What kind of EL/bilingual instruction does your student experience?


How has your tutoring experience influenced your perspective on language and culture in the
community? Connect to course readings as possible. (1.5-2 p.) (cont.)
2) Linguistic Analysis.
Critical analysis of your student’s linguistic development as represented in the language sample:
     1. Phonological development
     2. Morphological development
     3. Syntactic development (cont.)
     4. Semantic development
     5. Pragmatic competence (e.g., discourse routines, social conventions).
     6. Free choice: anything else that strikes you as important--Analysis of additional features not
          listed but studied this semester are welcome. (Maximum 5 pages; Minimum 10 references)
3) Recommended Classroom Practices.
     1.. Describe 2-3 recommended instructional strategies for working with your specific bilingual
          EL student. These teaching strategies should target improving content area development
         and comprehension based on your work together.
                                                                (1-2 pages; min. 4 references)
SOLOM Results and Discussion.
Throughout your classroom observations and tutoring sessions, take the time to chat in English.
Analyze the how and why of your participant’s SOLOM results. How (well) does the SOLOM
measure a learner’s use of: syntax, semantics, morphology, phonology, language use/usage? Which
features of the EL student’s oral language prompted the rater to place him/her at each level in each
domain? How well do ratings in the individual language ability areas reflect the overall assessment?
What questions did the SOLOM answer for you as a teacher? Were any areas of concern left
unaddressed? (1-2 pages; min. 2 references)
Reference list for all three sections combined
         Canvas upload (Final): Linguistic Analysis
                          Narrative (Parts 1-4 above)
                          Copy of completed SOLOM, less bilingual EL student name
                          Annotated Transcript of the language sample (scan or hard copy)
          Style Guide:
                         References in APA format (www.apastyle.org );
                         Appropriate use of headers and sub-headers to organize the written text
                         Double-spaced, 12 pt. font
                         One-inch margins
                         Last name/page number(s) in footer
                             All materials must be uploaded electronically
                            to Canvas (Narrative; SOLOM; Transcript) by
                                            Additional Details:
            Language Sample, Working with Your EL Student, Linguistic Analysis Project
                                                                                       (cont.)


      In the 2nd or 3rd week of your tutoring experience, you will record a language sample with
      your bilingual student.
      You will not be interviewing your student, rather you will be recording a regular tutoring
      session. You will then transcribe this language sample, both your language and your
      student’s, and use this as the base of your linguistic analysis. (cont.)
      Print out a copy of your transcript and bring this to class with you. You will use the
      language elicited from your learner to identify various linguistic features we examine in
      class. We will workshop our transcripts for examples of: Phonological development,
      Morphological development, Syntactic development, Semantic development, Pragmatic
      competence, and Semantic development.
      As you work with your EL student throughout the semester, reflect on his/her language
      growth and development. At the end of the semester, you will evaluate your student’s
      English proficiency based on the SOLOM rubric. The SOLOM allows a teacher to observe
      an EL student’s oral English skills in a natural context and identify the appropriate English
      language development stage through observation.
Day 1                                 Introduction, Overview                              1/23/19
      Beliefs about Language Learning
Day 2                       Language: Learning and Cognition                             1/30/19
   ●  Tutoring Activities
   ●  Freeman & Freeman (2014) How Linguists Study Language: Ch.1 (pp. 1-20)
   ●  Fillmore-Snow (2000) What Elementary Teachers Need to Know About Language
   ●  SOPHOSI
   ●  Some small syllabus up-dates
Day 3                         Language: Learning and Acquisition                            2/6/19
   ● Freeman & Freeman (2014) First Language Acquisition: Ch.2 (pp. 21-51)
   ● Horwitz (2013). What should I know about teaching academic English in content classes?
      Becoming a Language Teacher: A Practical Guide to Second Language Learning and
      Teaching. (pp. 25-59)
   ● Freeman & Freeman (2014c) Second and Written Language Acquisition: Ch.3 (pp.52-83)
      CC #1 Due at noon 2/5/19 (Freeman and Freeman chapters 2 & 3)
Day 4                   Language Policy, Bilingual EL Education                        2/13/19


   ● Macias, R. (2014) Benefits of Bilingualism: In the eye of the beholder? In R.M. Callahan &
      P.C. Gándara (Eds.) The Bilingual Advantage: Language, Literacy, and the Labor Market,
      Multilingual Matters: Clevedon, U.K.
   ● *SOLOM
   ● Hakuta, K. (2011). Educating language minority students and affirming their equal rights:
      Research and practical perspectives. Educational Researcher, 40, 163-174.
      CC #2 Due at noon 2/12/19 (Macias chapter and Hakuta article)
Day 5              Language and Pedagogy: Why Bilingual EL Students?                    2/20/19
                                   Language Use & Conventions
   ●  Goldenberg, C. (2008). Teaching English language learners: What the research does—and
      does not—say. American Educator, (Summer), 8-44.
   ●  Garcia-Medina (2010), Table 3.1 (review but no critical commentary necessary)
   ●  Callahan, R. (2015). Know more than one language? Don’t give it up! TheConversation.com
   ●  ELPS (2014) Texas English Language Proficiency Standards (review, no critical
      commentary necessary.)
      CC #3 Due at noon 2/19/19 (Goldenberg, Callahan article)
Day 6                Language as part of Bilingual EL Students’ Integration            2/27/19
                                 Social, academic and professional
                        Academic Achievement while Learning the Language
   ● Fillmore, L.W. (2000) Loss of family languages: Should educators be concerned? Theory
      into Practice, 39(4), pp. 203-210.
   ● Suárez-Orozco et al (2008). Networks of relationships. In Learning a new land: Immigrant
      students in American society. Harvard University Press.
   ● Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The standard language myth. In R. Lippi-Green, English with an
      accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, (pp. 53-62). New York,
      NY: Routledge.
      CC #4 Due at noon 2/26/19 (Fillmore, Suárez-Orozco and Lippi-Green articles)
Day 7 Access to Rigorous Academic Content in the L2                      3/6/19
   ● Horwitz, E. K. (2013). What should I know about teaching academic English in content
      classes? Becoming a Language Teacher: A Practical Guide to Second Language Learning
      and Teaching. (pp. 179-205)
   ● Rosa, J. & Flores, N. (2017). Do you hear what I hear?: Raciolinguistic Ideologies and
      Culturally Sustaining Pedagogies. In Paris, D., & Alim, H. S. Culturally Sustaining
      Pedagogies Teaching and Learning for Justice in a Changing Word. (pp. 175-190).
      Teachers College Press: New York.
      CC #5 Due at noon 3/6/19 (Horwitz and Rosa/Flores articles)
Day 8                           Midterm                                               3/13/19


                                  Spring Break March 18-22
Day 9                    Phonology, Reading, & Bilingual EL Students                     3/27/19
                           Sounds & Sound-Symbol Correspondence
   ● Freeman & Freeman (2014d) English Phonology: Ch.4 (pp. 89-118)
   ● Freeman & Freeman: (2014e) Implications from Phonology for Teaching a Second
       Language and for Teaching Reading: Ch.5 (pp. 119-145)
   ● Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The myth of non-accent. In R. Lippi-Green, English with an accent:
       Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, (pp. 41-52). New York, NY:
       Routledge.
   ● Language Sample Due (JUST THE AUDIO RECORDING)
       CC #6 Due at noon 3/26/19 (Freeman and Freeman chapters 4 and 5)
Day 10                  Morphology and Syntax and Bilingual Statements                4/3/19
   ● Freeman & Freeman (2014g) English Morphology :Ch.7 (pp. 180-208)
       Transcript of Language Sample Due
   ● Freeman & Freeman (2014h) Implications from Morphology for Teaching a Second
       Language and Teaching Reading: Ch.8. (pp. 209-229)
   ● Freeman & Freeman: (2014i) English Syntax:Ch.9 (pp. 230-264)
   ● Freeman & Freeman: (2014j) Implications from Syntax for Teaching a Second Language
       and Teaching Reading:Ch.10. (pp. 265-287).
       CC #7 Due at noon 4/3/19 Pick one of Freeman and Freeman Chapters 7 and 8 and one
       of Chapters 9 and 10
Day 11                 Semantics and Pragmatics                                          4/10/19
                     Language Use & Conventions
   ● Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010). Semantics. In Why
       TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, (pp. 81-88). Dubuque, IA:
       Kendall-Hunt.
   ● Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010). Pragmatics. In Why
       TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, (pp. 71-79). Dubuque, IA:
       Kendall-Hunt.
       CC #9 Due at noon 4/9/19 (Ariza articles)
Day 12 Assessment of Language and Bilingual Learners                             4/17/19
   ● Gottleib, M. (2006). Ch.3 Assessing Oral Language and Literacy Development In Assessing
       English language learners: Bridges from language proficiency to academic achievement,
       (pp. 41-61). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
   ● Sánchez, G. I. (1934). Bilingualism and mental measures. A word of caution. Journal of
       Applied Psychology, 18(6), 765–772.


       CC #10 Due at noon 4/16/19 (Gottleib and Sánchez articles)
Day 13                   Language Variation & Standard English                   4/24/19
                          Cultures, Contexts and the Classroom
    ● Garcia. O., Johnson S. I., & Seltzer, K. (2017). Translanguaging Classrooms: Contexts and
       Purposes. Carlson, Inc.: Philadelphia, PA. Chapter 1
    ● Delpit, L. (2002). The skin that we speak. New York: The New Press.
    ● Martínez, R. A. (2010). "Spanglish" as Literacy Tool: Toward an Understanding of the
       Potential Role of Spanish-English Code-Switching in the Development of Academic
       Literacy. Research in the Teaching of English, 124-149.
       CC #11 Due at noon 4/23/19 (Garcia OR Delpit and Martinez article)
Day 14                Review, Catch-up, and Linguistic Analysis Workshop             5/1/19
Day 15                          Final Exam                                            5/8/19
                  (We might do some other things during this session.)
DUE DATES
3/27/19 Language Sample (Audio Recording) BRING TO CLASS
4/3/19 Transcript of Language Sample, BRING TO CLASS
5/8/19 Tutoring Sign in Sheets, Tutoring Logs AND Reflection due by NOON
513/19 Linguistic Analysis and all supporting documents due by MIDNIGHT
