                                                  Digital Painting AET 339
                                                            20545
                                                         Heavy Process
                                                           Fall 2019
                                                          DFA 4.126
                                                 T Th 12:30 - 2:00 PM
  Instructor:                    Dax Norman
                                 daxnorman@utexas.edu
                                 daxnorman.com
  Office Hours:                  Mon and Tues: 10am-11 am in the Foundry,
                                 or by appointment
  I. Rationale:
  II.
 Digital Painting is imagination translation.        We make original ideas come to life in brush strokes.
 Digital Painting is an in-depth study of painting styles and mark making, applied to digital canvas, using Adobe
Photoshop.
Digital Painting explores both practical and expressive approaches, researched and applied in creative process for
making painterly digital art. Class assignments center on iterative approaches to style, art fundamentals, content and
surface. We will combine painting and social media via the creation of an art blog to document progress and share
projects.
  Course Aims and Objectives:
  Aims
This course seeks to empower students to apply multiple stylistic approaches from the history of
painting to original digital digitally painted images. Digital Painting focuses on the fundamentals of
painting with an emphasis on color, line, perspective, rhythm, composition, mood, texture and
lighting.
  We will explore mark making via myriad digital approaches to make unique, expressive digital art.
  Specific Learning Objectives:
  By the end of this course, students will:
• Create emotive response through the use of color.
• Use visual input to create life like and cartoon forms
• Use additive and subtractive painting methods to create understandable images.
• Understand translucent layering techniques
     •    Separate foreground, mid ground and background elements
     •              Create thumbnail sketches and concepts
     •    Illustrate original art concepts with forms and colors
     •    Demonstrate proficiency in creating painterly texture and lighting
     •    Exhibit proper use of perspective in creating environment concepts
                                                                11


     •     Demonstrate appropriate spatial relationships
     •     Demonstrate understanding of appropriate software in creation of digital paintings, while
           understanding myriad conceptual/ visual stylistic approaches
• Problem Solving—the ability to correctly identify problems, logically analyze alternatives, and decide upon an appropriate
   solution.
• Reliability/Responsibility—the ability to be consistently dependable and accountable in performance and expectations.
• Time Management—the ability to effectively organize, prioritize, and optimize time to accomplish tasks and meet deadlines.
• Awareness—understanding the fundamentals of page layouts.
• keep original blog to share unique artistic content via the internet via Art Blog
• research, thumbnails, roughs, comps and press-ready work.
• rendering, and hand-eye coordination.
•work ethic and presentation skills.
  III. Format and Procedures:
  This course will meet twice a week. During the first meeting, there will be a lecture that will include demonstration
  along with discussion. During the second meeting of the week, there will be group learning project with discussion.
  The in-class projects will review and practice the material covered from the week’s first class meeting. Active
  participation in weekly in-class group projects will be a major component of the professionalism and participation
  component of student grades for the course that will comprise a portion of the final grade.
                                                                   11


 IV. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
 through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes,
 communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
      Date                      Main Topic(s)                          Work to do at home              Evaluation
                                                                     to be completed before class
                 Course introduction.                          Weekly digital Painting
                                                               homework process. Finish
                                                               painting from class
                 Using the cintiq tablet, digital painting
                 basics. Let’s start painting!
                 Line vs Texture.
08/29
                 Hot Keys in photoshop                                                             student needs to
                   Speed painting, Improvisation.               Weekly digital Painting           post at least 2 WIP
                 Concept Art. Making fast design                homework process. Bring a         images to blog for
                 decisions.                                     picture from a magazine.
                 Abstract Expressionism, Helen
                                                                                                  process.
                                                                Finish in class painting          After class
                 Frankenthaler, Lee Krasner
                                                                using only 5% opacity on          Thursday (WIP 01)/
                 Basic design concepts:                         brush
                 Emphasis, Balance, Unity,                                                        before class each
                 Rhythm                                                                           Tuesday (WIP 02)
09/03, 09/05
                                                                Weekly digital Painting
                 Using reference/ Dada/ Surrealism.             homework process. Finish in
                 Leonora Carrington, Kay Sage,                  class painting
                 Dorothea Tanning.                             using only 10% opacity on brush
09/10, 09/12
                 Portraits: Rembrandt, Velasquez, Francis       Weekly digital Painting homework
                 Bacon. Chiaroscuro, how to control             process. Create artist statement
                 dark to light painting techniques.             first draft.
09/17, 09/19     Lighting.
                 Expressive Color: Van Gogh/ post                                                 Portfolio
                 impressionism.                                Weekly digital Painting homework   Presentation 01
09/24, 09/26                                                   process.
                 Expressionism,                                  Weekly digital Painting
                                                                homework process
                  Basquiat, Edvard Mucnh
10/01, 10/03
                 Landscapes. Impressionism.                    Weekly digital Painting homework
                 Developing well-composed paintings            process
    10/08,       demonstrating specific elements with depth,
10/10            mood, space and   form.
                 Exploring Scale/ Heironymous Bosch.
    10/15,                                                      Weekly digital Painting
                                                                homework process
10/17
                 Using Perspective: Cubism.                     Weekly digital Painting
 10/22, 10/24    General design and layout                      homework process
3/20             principles, approach
                 Personal Art: Frida                           Weekly digital Painting homework   Portfolio
    10/29,                                                     process
                 Still Life, Wayne Thiebaud                                                       Presentation 02
10/31
                                                                Weekly digital Painting
                 Fantasy Art, Fan art, internet Art             homework process
11/05, 11/07
                                                             22


              Pop Art: Warhol, Roy Lichtenstein, Weekly digital Painting homework
 11/12, 11/14 Movie Posters                        process
              Album Art.                            Weekly digital Painting
    11/19,                                          homework process
              Outsider Art.
11/21
                                                   Weekly digital Painting homework  Prepare work for
              Work In class on Final Project.      process. Refine Artist Statement. final in class
                                                                                     presentation.
                                                   Thanksgiving Holiday 11/28
    11/26,
11/28
    12/03,                                         Don’t forget to submit work to
12/05            Final Portfolio Presentation #3   the SDCT Student Showcase
                                                 22


Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to your requests for their feedback)
During this course, I will be asking you to give me feedback on your learning in informal as well as formal ways,
including through anonymous surveys about how my teaching strategies are helping or hindering your learning. It’s
very important for me to know your reaction to what we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these
surveys, ensuring that together we can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
V. My Assumptions
It is my belief that with hard work and a little bit of patience, anyone can be good at 3-D digital art. The learning
curve is slower for some than others, but do not be discouraged and you will get to where you wan t to be. With the
projects we create in this course, I advise students to make something that they can get really excited about. Think
about making short-term goals for your progress, and try to learn a new skill each day. The 3 -D digital art process is
very iterative, in that projects build upon one another, and many steps are repeated ad infinitum. With a fi rm plan in
place, it will be easy to create a road map for success.
Finishing projects is of the utmost importance. We are building bigger things out of all of the parts we constantly
design and implement in this course regularly. Pay attention to cours e announcements and supplementary materials
via canvas. Ask questions, come to office hours.
VI. Course Requirements:
          1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                    (a) Expected classroom behavior: take notes, ask many questions, and attend class for the entire
                         duration. Make a solid effort on each project outside of class, so that you may have many
                         questions to contribute to the discussion.
                    (b) Cell phone use, including texting, is unallowable. Keep cell phones stored during the duration
                         of class
                    Religious Holy Days
                    By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
                    the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
                    assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
                    complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
          2. Course Readings/Materials:
                    (a) Recommended Textbooks:
         Digital Painting Techniques: Practical techniques by Digital Art Masters
         BY: 3Dtotal.com
         ISBN-13: 978-0240521749               ISBN-10: 0240521749
                    (b) Supplies needed: Laptop computer capable of running Adobe Photoshop. Digital Drawing
                    tablet, sketchbook.
                    (c) URL for course website: animationdrawl.tumblr.com/tagged/paint
                    (d) → create an account for your class process blog
          3. Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
                     (a) Finished Assignments should be posted to canvas in the requested format before 9:00 AM on
                             the Due Date. I will accept resubmissions of artwork only if turned in on time.
                     (b) Late assignments will be lose 10 points for the first day late, 20 points if 2 days late, 40
                                                              33


      points off if 3 days late, and so on, with point subtraction doubling for each day of lateness
(c) Preliminary information on papers or projects, with due dates, shall be posted to canvas on
      the date of assignment
                                         33


                      (d) List of assignments that will impact the final grade: (projects include presentation component)
  Attendance:
  -Documentation of Painting Process.
  -Painting Portfolio 01
  -Painting Portfolio 02
  -Painting Portfolio 03
  -Professionalism
  -Project Presentation/ Artist Statement
                       (e) This course will consist of projects. Each of these projects in of itself represents at least one
                      aspect of the 3D digital production ART pipeline, and builds upon the last, culminating in a
                      finished multimedia work. (optimized for future output)
                      (f) Any changes in the syllabus, such as project due dates, will be announced in class as well as
                      on canvas.
             4. Use of Canvas in class
                    In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected
                    access at http://canvas.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
                    online, to post grades, and to submit assignments. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS
                    Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
    VII. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
                      The following are equally
                      weighted components of your final
                      grade:
  -Attendance:
  -Documentation of Painting Process. - includes research, notes sketches and iterations posted to your art blog
  -Painting Portfolio 01
  -Painting Portfolio 02
  -Painting Portfolio 03
  -Professionalism
  -Project Presentation/ Artist Statement: we will present work to the class multiple times throughout the semester
  .
                      Attendance, Professionalism and Participation (20%):-→
                      MISSING MORE THAN 3 CLASSES will result in an AUTOMATIC ZERO for this grade.
                      It is important that you finish all projects. I will accept resubmissions for project as long as
                      original was turned in on time.
    Letter Grade            Percentage
A                           93%-100%
A-                          90%-92%
                                                                 44


B+                         87%-89%
B                          83%-86%
B-                         80%-82%
C+                         77%-79%
C                          73%-76%
C-                         70%-72%
D+                         67%-69%
D                          60%-66%
F                          0%-59%
   IX. Academic Integrity
   University of Texas Honor Code
   The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
   opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
   honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
   X. Other University Notices and Policies
    Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
       • All students should become familiar with the University's official e -mail student notification policy. It is the
            student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e -mail address. Students
            are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
            communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
            mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions
                                                               44


          for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details
of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition or
diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.)
     ▪▪   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
          instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
          etc.).
     ▪▪   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
          required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
          transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     ▪▪   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
          reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
          http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
 discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provide d through a partnership
 among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
 Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512 -232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
   undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
   dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the st udent shows good cause for dropping more than
   that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
 Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm
 is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
          ▪▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
               exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
          ▪▪ If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
          ▪▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                     ❖❖ ❖❖     ❖❖     ❖❖
                                                            55


66