                            E s321   l  Shakespeare: Selected Plays-GBR
Instructor: Dr. Patricia García                            Cross-lists: None
Class Meeting Times: M-TH, time TBA (Great                 Areas: 1 (Single or Dual Author)
Britain)                                                   Flags: Global Cultures
Unique #: 80780                                            Restrictions: See prerequisites below
Semester: Summer 2019, 2nd term                            Computer Instruction: No
Instructor Contact Information:
Email:
Office hours: TBA
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English or rhetoric and writing.
Description: This course studies selected plays of William Shakespeare, and we will be fortunate enough
to view performances of the plays we study in Stratford upon Avon, Shakespeare’s birthplace and home
to the Royal Shakespeare Company, and at Globe Theater in London. We will also tour various
Shakespeare historical sites in Stratford. As we read the plays, we will analyze Shakespeare’s use of
dramatic action, imagery, and character to practice our critical thinking skills. As we view the plays, we
will examine the company’s performance choices as they expand our understanding of the play’s themes
and language. We will each keep a journal that records their responses to the reading and the viewing of
plays. Finally, in acting companies that we will form in class, we will present our own short
performances of selected scenes to experience Shakespeare beyond the roles of reader and audience.
Course Goals: By the end of the semester, you are expected to accomplish the following:
    • Read a diverse range of texts by one author and identify important stylistic and thematic concerns.
    • Identify the historical context and contemporary understanding of works studied.
    • Analyze the formal elements of these texts (figural language, style, genre, etc.) based upon literary
        methodologies.
    • Relate the various aspects of these texts to each other in order to comprehend their lasting
        influence.
    • Discuss the importance of these texts for values and choices in our contemporary moment.
Texts: Folger Shakespeare Library editions of the following plays: Measure for Measure, A Midsummer
Night’s Dream, Romeo and Juliet, 1 Henry IV, As You Like It.
Requirements & Grading: Journals 40%; Acting Company performance 30%; Reflective Essay 20%;
Participation 10%. Grading scale is below. To ensure fairness, only final averages .5 and above will be
rounded up. Thus, a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 79.5 through 83.4. The University does not
recognize the grade of A+.
A = 94-100; A- = 90-93; B+ = 87-89; B = 84-86; B- = 80-83; C+ = 77-79; C = 74-76; C- = 70-73; D+ = 67-69;
D = 64-66; D-= 60-63; F= 59 and below.


Policies:
Classroom Expectations:
    • We will observe civil classroom behavior at all times, especially during our discussions.
    • In addition to regular class attendance, students are expected to come prepared, bring the
        textbook to class, and complete all in-class projects.
    • Please make it to class on time. If you need to leave class early, please alert me to this before class
        begins.
    • If you miss more than 15 minutes of the class (due to a tardy or to leaving class early), you will be
        counted absent.
    • Please turn off or turn to silent mode all cell phones, and avoid texting during class.
    • Laptop/tablet policy: If you utilize a laptop/tablet/e-reader, please use it only for class
        purposes. Searching the web, chatting, working on other assignments, or other such
        activities is not an appropriate use of your laptop during class lectures, and I ask that you
        refrain from such activities. I will be monitoring laptop use during lecture and will ask you
        to shut your computer down if you are utilizing it other than for class purposes.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to
uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the
student's own work. Any academic dishonesty will be dealt with according to University policy, including
assessment of the stiffest penalty that the instructor may assess (e.g., a failing grade in the course). The
University may impose additional sanctions. Cheating in any form, including plagiarism and self-
plagiarism, will not be tolerated. If you are unclear about what constitutes plagiarism, ask the instructor.
For additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Personal Responsibility Statement: Each student will be responsible for the grades that he or she earns
in this course. Except under exceptional, documented conditions, no requests for grade modification
(including those for a grade of “Incomplete”) for personal circumstances outside the purview of the
course (e.g., probationary standing, financial aid eligibility, scholarship status, etc.) will be considered.
Please monitor your grades carefully throughout the semester. No extra-credit opportunities will be
offered, either for the entire class or on an individual basis.
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Students with disabilities who require
special accommodations need to get a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (512-471-6259 or 471-4641 (TTY) for users
who are hearing-impaired). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the
beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five (5)
business days before an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations
that will be needed. See the following website for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a


work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Canvas: Please check the Canvas course site regularly (at least twice a week) for class work and
announcements; email may also be used for announcements. You will also turn in written assignments
directly to the Canvas site. Finally, all email correspondence through out Canvas site should be related to
our course rather than personal information.
Syllabus: The instructor retains the right to vary the syllabus and schedule for the course.
Course Flag Information:
Global Cultures
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Description of Assignments
Journals (40%): You will be expected to complete 8 journals during the semester.
    • You should have 1 journal prepared for every Tuesday class meeting, beginning the first week of
       class (see dates on Canvas), and the first 4 should be completed no later than our third week of
       class (see calendar). This means that you will need to complete additional journal entries beyond
       the Tuesday journal.
    • Journals should be a minimum of 250-500 words (1-2 pages) and follow MLA format.
    • Journals should offer your response to the readings, class discussions, and/or performances and
       should be specific in nature in referencing scenes/line/performance of the play. Here are some
       questions to guide you:
           o What stood out to you in this scene, and how does this reflect the larger themes the play
               presents?
           o How did the discussion/performance/scholarly article etc. of the scene help you
               understand the scene better? How did it complicate, confirm, or challenge your
               understanding of the scene?
           o If you are writing about your company performance, you can discuss how you went about
               preparing for your role and how it helped you understand the play in new ways.
    • A rubric will be posted on Canvas.
Acting Company (30%): In groups, you will perform a scene from one of our assigned plays for the class.
The goals for this project are to have you experience performing Shakespeare as a way to gain a new
understanding of his language, style, and themes. You will learn from watching your peers’ varying
approaches to the plays, and probably learn even more in developing your own scenes.
    • More specific guidelines and a rubric will be posted on Canvas.


Reflection Essay (20%): You will write at 4-6 page reflection essay (1000-1500 words), MLA format
including a works cited page, that describes your experience reading, studying, discussing, and viewing
Shakespeare this summer, especially in our Oxford setting. To give this some focus, you will present your
reflection through an analysis of a specific scene from any of the plays we’ve covered. You should discuss
your reading of the scene and how our class experiences have helped develop your understanding of the
scene, the play, and the importance and relevance of Shakespeare today. A rubric will be posted on
Canvas. Due date TBA.
Participation (10%): Regular attendance and contribution to class discussion is expected, and your
participation grade will be based on both. You should prepare for classes by doing the appropriate
readings, actively participate in discussion, and working cooperatively with your peers. If you need to
miss class, please contact me as soon as possible. Excused absences are for illness and extraordinary
circumstances only. More than 1 unexcused absence will negatively impact your participation grade. If
necessary, reading quizzes will be used to ensure active participation.


Schedule of Readings and Assignments
Please note that this schedule is subject to revision as necessary.
 DATE    Readings/Performances                            ASSIGNMENTS
 7/15    “Reading Shakespeare’s Language” and
         “Shakespeare’s Theater” (Folger)
         Measure for Measure
 7/16    Measure for Measure                              Bring journal to class.
         Tour of Stratford
         Measure for Measure performance (RSC,
         Stratford)
 7/17    Measure for Measure
 7/18    Measure for Measure: A Modern Perspective”
         by Christy Desmet (Folger/Canvas)
 7/22    “Shakespeare’s Life” (Folger)
         I Henry IV
 7/23    I Henry IV                                       Bring journal to class.
         I Henry IV performance (Globe Theater,
         London)
 7/24    “I Henry IV: A Modern Perspective” by
         Alexander Leggat (Folger/Canvas).
 7/25    I Henry IV                                       Acting Company 1
 7/29    “The publication of Shakespeare’s plays”
         (Folger)
         Romeo and Juliet
 7/30    Romeo and Juliet                                 Bring journal to class.
         Romeo and Juliet performance (The Rose,
         Blenheim Palace)
 7/31    Romeo and Juliet: A Modern Perspective” by
         Gail Kern Paster (Folger/Canvas)
 8/1     Romeo and Juliet                                 Acting Company 2
                                                          Journals 1-4 due to Canvas
 8/5     A Midsummer Night’s Dream
 8/6     A Midsummer Night’s Dream                        Bring journal to class.
 8/7     “A Midsummer Night’s Dream: A Modern
         Perspective” by Catherine Belsey
         (Folger/Canvas)
         A Midsummer Night’s Dream Performance
         (The Bridge Theater, London)
 8/8     A Midsummer Night’s Dream                        Acting Company 3
 8/12    As You Like It


8/13 As You Like It                              Bring journal to class.
     As You Like It Performance (RSC, Stratford)
8/14 “As You Like It: A Modern Perspective” by
     Susan Snyder (Folger/Canvas)
8/15 As You Like It                              Acting Company 4
                                                 Journals 5-8 due to
                                                 Canvas.
TBA                                              Reflection Essay due to
                                                 Canvas
