International Advertising (ADV 334, Unique# 06460)
Monday, Wednesday and Friday from 9 – 10 am
Location: BMC 1.202
Note: The course syllabus is a general plan for the course; deviations announced to the class by the instructor
may be necessary.
 Instructor: Octavio Kano-Galvan                              TA: Pratik Shah
 Office: BMC 4.308                                            Office: Station 1A, BMC 4th Floor
 Email: Octavio.KanoGalvan@austin.utexas.edu                  Email: Pratik.Shah@utexas.edu
                                                              Office hours:
 Office hours: Monday and Thursday 10 – 11:30 am and
 by Appointment
                                                              Monday and Friday from 10.05 to 10.50 am and by Appointment
 “Globalization is the process by which markets integrate worldwide.”- Michael Spence, an economist
“Global is shallow, the local deep”- Ulf Hannerz, an anthropologist
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is designed for students to understand persuasive communication strategies for international markets.
Markets are no longer bound with their physical locations thanks to the rapid development of communication
technologies. Or are they? To successfully address the global market, marketers and advertisers need to fully
understand “local” challenges coming “deep” from cultural, economic, regulatory and competitive differences.
Based on a theoretical and practical understanding of the dynamic interplay between global and local forces,
students will acquire theoretical as well as practical understandings of how to accomplish global marketing
communication goals. Thus, the core objective of this class is to develop an ability to analyze and map out
persuasive communication strategies that are effective in international markets.
COURSE FORMAT
This course consists of lectures, in-class activities, two exams, peer evaluation and the final project (i.e., a
combination of an individual and team assignment). Students will also have an opportunity to apply what they
learn to real-world examples via the final project. There will be additional materials that are available on Canvas as
the semester progresses.


EXPECTATIONS
Students are expected to attend all lectures and actively participate in the in-class discussions. Please note
that any undocumented absence will not be excused. Students are expected to arrive to class on time and to stay
for the entire class period, or until dismissed. Random arrivals and exits are unprofessional and distracting.
Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence from class. NO LATE WORK WILL BE
ACCEPTED.
 REQUIRED TEXTBOOK
Mueller, Barbara (2017), Dynamics of International Advertising (3rd Ed.), New York: Peter Lang Publishing Co.
Note: Additional readings, movies or announcements may be posted, so be sure to check Canvas frequently.
 EXAMS
There will be two in-class exams during the regularly scheduled class period. Exams are designed to evaluate
students’ understanding of core concepts or ideas covered in the lectures, the textbook, class discussions, and in-
class activities.
 An optional, comprehensive final exam will be offered as a make-up option for anyone who has missed one of the
two in-class exams and for anyone who wants to improve their course grade. The final exam will replace the lowest
regular in-class exam, only if it is higher. Otherwise, it will not be included in the calculation of the final grade. You
must take the final exam if you have not taken one of the regularly scheduled in-class tests. The specific time/date
and the location will be announced.
 ATTENDANCE (IN-CLASS ACTIVITIES)
There will be an undetermined number of in-class activities (i.e., in-class exercises or quizzes). These assignments
are designed to help students keep up with the pace of the class and to improve their understanding of the course
material. These activities will be distributed and completed during class time. The in-class activities cannot be
made up unless the instructor excuses the absence in advance. If you are absent and have a valid excuse (i.e.,
serious illness or family emergency), you must bring the appropriate documentation on your first day back.
 INDIVIDUAL/GROUP ASSIGNMENT
The individual/Group assignment, solely by you and your group, requires you and your group to write a business-
style recommendation for the persuasive communication strategies of a US company. In this recommendation, you
need to analyze the markets in foreign countries or any market outside of the US. Based on this analysis, you need
to recommend and present to the class a persuasive communication strategy. Details for this assignment will be
distributed during the class.
 FINAL PROJECT (TEAM ASSIGNMENT)
The final project is designed for students to put into practice what they’ve learned and their own innovative
thoughts about international advertising strategies. The final project consists of two parts.
First, in the team assignment, you will collaborate with your peers in preparing a business-style presentation. To
persuade consumers in foreign markets, you first need to effectively persuade the CEO of the brand. With your


team members, you will prepare a presentation, and during class, your group will present your project. The quality
of both the contents of the project and the way in which you, as a group, verbally present your project will be
evaluated. One or Two classes will be dedicated to a discussion of the format of this project, grading criteria, and
real-world examples of the international advertising strategy project. Also, by the time the project is initiated, I will
hold extra office hours for you to discuss the progress of your project. Your team needs to submit a short progress
report in order to make sure that the project is on the right track.
 A detailed rubric for the individual assignment will be provided when the assignment is announced.
 Second, it is extremely important to successfully collaborate with your team members in the advertising industry.
This is because you are highly likely to work as a team throughout your career. Successful collaboration requires
your contribution to the overall project success. Thus, your performance in the team assignment will be assessed
based on the peer evaluations and the part of the project which you are responsible. So, you need to submit your
careful evaluations of your team members’ contribution to the final project.
 PARTICIPATION
To enhance students’ understanding in the marketing and advertising research processes and methods, you need
to participate and contribute in class.
*Please note that the credit(s) that you will receive for this activity is part of the total grade as you can see below. It
is NOT extra credit in addition to your total grade.
 COURSE EVALUATION
Your grade in this class will be based on:
 Attendance (In-class exercise)        10 %
 Two Exams (each 18%)                  36 %
 Participation                         14 %
 Final Project
                                       20 %
 Individual Contribution Grade
                                       *This is assessed based on the peer evaluation
                                       20 %
 Team Grade
                                       *This grade is shared by all the team members
 Total                                 100 %
 The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
A= 94-100, A-=90-93, B+=87-89, B=84-86, B-=80-83, C+=77-79, C-=70-73, D+=67-69, D=64-
66, D-=60-63. *Grades will not be rounded up or down. For example, an A- is inclusive o fall scores 90.000
through 93.999%.


COURSE SCHEDULE
The following schedule is tentative in the sense that if we hit on a topic that sparks a great deal of interest, we
will stay with it longer than the schedule below would seem to allow. This means we all need to stay alert to
changes in the schedule, project assignments, and so on. To ensure each class is successful, it is essential for you
to attend class and to work on the assigned project prior to class.
Changes to the schedule may be also made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility
to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with
as much advanced notice as possible).
The syllabus is a living document and will need to maintain a degree of flexibility to adapt to changing
circumstances.
 January 22 and 24:                       Introductions and class presentation
                                          Chapter 1 Growth of International Business and Advertising and
 January 27,29 and 31:
                                          Chapter 2 The International Marketing Mix
                                          Chapter 3: The International Marketing and Advertising Environment
 February 3, 5 and 7:
                                          and Chapter 4: The Cultural Environment
 February 10, 12 and 14:                  Team 1 and 2 presentations and teams questions
                                          Chapter 5: Coordinating and Controlling International Advertising
 February 17, 19 and 21:
                                          and Chapter 6: Creative Strategy and Execution
                                          Chapter 7 Advertising Media in the International Arena and Chapter
 February 24, 26 and 28:
                                          8: Research in the International Arena
 March 2, 4 and 6:                        Team 3 and 4 presentations and teams questions
 March 9, 11 and 13:                      First Exam and Team 5 and team questions
 March 16, to 21:                         Spring Break (SXSW Conference and Festivals)
 March 23, 25 and 27:                     Teams 6 and 7 presentations and teams questions


 March 30 April 1 and 3:                     Teams 8 and 9 presentations and teams questions
 April 6, 8 and 10:                          Teams 10 and 11 presentations and teams questions
                                             Chapter 9: Advertising Regulatory Considerations in the International
                                             Arena and Chapter 10: Ethics and Beyond Corporate Social
 April 13, 15 and 17:
                                             Responsibility and Doing Business in the Global Marketplace
 April 20, 22 and 24:                        Second Exam and Team 12 presentation and teams questions
 April 27, 29 and May 1                      International case study discussion*
 May 4, 6 and 8:                             International case study discussion*
 GLOBAL CULTURES FLAG
This course is designated with the Global Cultures flag. That is, in this course, students will explore the practices,
beliefs, and histories of various non-U.S. cultural groups with the goal of encouraging students to reflect on their
own cultural experiences, within a global context.
 UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HORNOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
 POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying
academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement
or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment and submission of essentially the same written assignment for
two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
 By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty
damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.


DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
Please notify me in advance of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-related
need. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Student with Disability at 512.471.6259
(voice) or 512.232.2937(video phone), or at http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
 RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY (ABOUT ABSENCE)
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holiday, including
travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
excused within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holiday, should inform the instructor as far in advance
of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence.
 Please do visit the following website in advance for more information and the possible documentation that is
required for your absence
notification.http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php
DEADLINE & STANDARDS
Enlisting aid from anyone outside the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and will be dealt with
accordingly.
 IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
 TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT
Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms.
When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1.    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2.    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
           become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3.    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible


Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about
reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
 I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such
misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin,
sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity,
and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
      •    Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
           The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual misconduct
           and discrimination.
                 o    File a report of discrimination via online form
                 o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
      •    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
           The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing federal
           civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal financial
           assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the
           Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
      •    Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
           The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that
           make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected class,
           including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-
           669-4000.
