                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                                  Steve Hicks School of Social Work
Course Number: SW N387R36                               Professor’s Name: Joan Asseff, LCSW-S
Unique Number: 87620                                            Pronouns: she, her, hers
Semester: Summer 2020                                   Email address: jasseff@utexas.edu
Meeting Time/Place: M/W, 1:30 – 4:00 pm                 Preferred Phone: 512-627-5008
via Zoom                                                Office Hours: Group Office Hours:
Office: SSW 3.124C (office hours via                    M, 1:30-2:30 pm and individual office hours
Zoom)                                                   by appointment.
                            SOCIAL WORK IN HEALTH CARE
I.       STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This elective practice course is designed to explore aspects of social work practice in healthcare
settings with a biopsychosocial and family-centered perspective. The foundation of the course is
social work values and ethical decision-making process as illuminated in the NASW code of
ethics. Practice issues to be explored include: the subjective experience and reactions to living
with illness, change and adaptation, grief and loss, trauma and it’s connection to pain and chronic
conditions, values and ethical dilemmas, economic justice and access issues in health care,
disenfranchised populations and cultural humility and awareness. The complexities of health care
social will be examined in various settings including: inpatient, outpatient, clinics, home care
agencies, hospice and community-based centers. The current shifting role of social work in the
interdisciplinary medical setting will be discussed. Students will be encouraged to think about
their roles in facilitating health and wellness to individuals, families and communities. The role
of individual differences (i.e. gender, race/ethnicity, spirituality, etc.) and societal/cultural beliefs
in relation to situations involving illness will be highlighted. Skill development will focus upon
all phases of the helping process, including attention to the unique aspects of termination with
clients coping with illness. Examination of personal attitudes and experiences involving grief and
loss will facilitate increased self-awareness.
II.      STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
Demonstrate an understanding of the historical significance of social work in medical settings and
explore the current range of opportunities for practice.
Demonstrate an understanding of contemporary health care issues related to societal, political and
organizational changes in health care.
Demonstrate an understanding of the impact and meaning of illness, life-threatening conditions,
grief and bereavement for children, adults and families.


Demonstrate an understanding of the common psychosocial and spiritual challenges faced by
individuals, families and communities confronting illness.
Demonstrate an understanding of the cultural factors at work in the clinical interface with
individuals in medical settings.
Demonstrate an understanding of the Adult Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study and the link
between childhood trauma and the risk of chronic health conditions, including chronic pain.
Demonstrate an understanding of the health care issues as they relate to cultural diversity, social
justice, and disenfranchised populations.
Demonstrate an understanding of the nature of illness, its multidimensional aspects and the
interrelationship between environmental, social, psychological, and biological factors in its cause,
course and outcome.
Demonstrate an understanding of the clinical dimensions of clinical practice in the context of
health care and multidisciplinary practice.
Develop a reflective awareness of the practitioner’s experiences of health and illness and the
importance of selfcare.
III.     TEACHING METHODS
This course is designed to include a variety of teaching methodologies to achieve the expectation
of student mastery of theoretically-grounded advanced practice skill competencies in the group
work method, with emphasis on children, adolescents, and families. Learning activities may
include readings, writings, discussions, lectures, guest speakers, social media, in-class group
activities, student presentations, self-reflection, community experience, and experiential exercises.
IV.      REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
Optional Text (All chapters from the text will be made available on Canvas.)
Allen, K.M. & Spitzer, W.J. (2016). Social Work Practice in Healthcare: Advanced
            Approaches and Emerging Trends. Sage.
All additional readings will be available on Canvas.
V.       COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Course Structure
         The course is structured in a hybrid (asynchronous and synchronous) format. Students
         will complete a module before or on Monday of each week, which will include a variety
         of exercises (readings, pre-recorded lectures, discussion boards, etc.). Students will have


       the option to attend group office hours on Mondays from 1:30 to 2:30 pm to ask
       questions about any course material and/or assignments. Attendance during Monday
       office hours is 100% optional (except for the first day of class) and any important
       themes/information from group office hours will be briefly reviewed by the
       instructor during each Wednesday class. On Wednesday of each week, students will
       complete a module prior to class and attend a live, synchronous class from 1:30 pm
       to approximately 4 pm on the Zoom application, which will include a variety of
       formats (lecture, experiential exercises, guest speakers, etc.). Students will also have an
       opportunity to ask questions during the Wednesday class.
Class Attendance and Contribution                                                            10 pts
Class contribution grade will be determined in two ways:
       Due to the format and content of the course, regular and punctual attendance is
       imperative. The class experience is co-constructed and students are expected to attend
       class regularly and to participate in an interactive framework between collegiate students
       and professor. Students are expected to complete the class modules prior to class and
       should be well prepared to participate in discussions and experiential learning
       assignments. Failure to attend class and demonstrate thorough comprehension of the
       readings will be considered in assigning the final grade. Punctuality is an important
       professional practice. Class will begin on Zoom promptly at 1:30 pm on Wednesday
       of each week. Students will be allowed one unexcused absence unless otherwise
       approved by the instructor. Please communicate with the instructor prior to class
       regarding any anticipated absence if at all possible. When attending class in Zoom,
       students are expected to keep their video function on to demonstrate active listening,
       except for brief periods as needed. Brief breaks with your video function “off” are
       definitely fine. If a student misses more than the allotted excused absence, the professor
       reserves the right to lower that student’s grade by one point for each class missed beyond
       the one allowed. All three of these aspects of class contribution: attendance, punctuality,
       and on-going participation will factor into the 10 points for attendance and contribution.
Discussion Boards: (4 Discussion Boards X 2.5 points each)                                   10 pts
       Discussion Board questions will be assigned to support readings and on-line activities.
       Discussion Board questions are posted on Canvas in specific modules throughout the
       semester and students will respond to Discussion Board questions on Canvas. Discussion
       Board responses are due by the beginning of class on the day they are assigned (see
       course schedule for due dates). Discussion Board grades are primarily based on
       completion and the demonstration of social work ethics and relational skills in all
       interpersonal written communication. Students will respond to questions in each
       Discussion Board AND reply to at least two of their peers’ responses. There will be five
       Discussion Boards, but students only need to complete four. The fifth Discussion Board is
       a bonus opportunity worth two points.
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale Assignment: Due: June 24th                            20 pts


       The purpose of this assignment is for students to engage in active learning of suicide
       assessments. It is vital that all social workers in the health care field have the skill to
       assess patients for suicidality and optimize healthcare resources by directing people to the
       right level of care. Students will participate in an online training on learning to assess for
       suicide ideations by familiarizing themselves with the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating
       Scale (CSSRS). The CSSR Scale is a tool used in healthcare settings to assess the
       severity of suicidality and better identify those at risk. Students will complete an online
       training and write a one-page paper reflecting on their experience using the scale and
       answer the following question: Is the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale culturally
       sensitive?
       Instructions:
       -Students will complete the brief online training for the Columbia Suicide Severity
       Rating Scale (link included in assignment description on Canvas).
       -Students will read the following article, assigned in the course module for 6/22.
       Posner, K., Brown, G.K., Stanley, B., et al (2011). The Columbia-Suicide
           Severity Rating Scale: Initial validity and internal consistency findings from
           three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. American Journal of Psychiatry,
           168 (12), 1266-1277.
       -Students will write a two to three-page reflection paper on your experience with the
       training in addition to answering the question: Is the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating
       Scale culturally sensitive or a culturally competent assessment tool? Cite at least two
       additional sources to support your determination and at least two sources you used to
       conceptualize/define cultural sensitivity or cultural competence. Each paper should have
       a minimum of 5 sources, including (Posner et al., 2011). See Canvas for a grading rubric.
Ethnographic Interview: Due July 8th                                                           30 pts
       Social work in health care often involves the care and treatment of individuals with
       chronic diseases. The purpose of the interview is to understand what it means to “live
       with” a chronic or serious physical illness from the perspective of the person, also known
       as the informant, who has a chronic or serious illness or is a primary caregiver of
       someone with a chronic/serious physical illness. In ethnography, since informants are
       living day-to-day with the illness, they are considered the “experts”, and you should
       approach the interview from the position of a naïve learner. It is important to let the
       informant teach you about their experience and to identify what they think is important
       for you to learn about the daily life of one who is living with a chronic, disabling or
       terminal illness.
Part A: The Interview
   Select an informant who is NOT well known to you and is currently experiencing a chronic,
   disabling and/or terminal physical illness or is the primary caregiver or significant other of


    someone who has a chronic, disabling and/or terminal illness. You may interview a family
    member if they are not part of your immediate family and if you have not explored this topic
    with them in the past. Unlike a clinical interview which focuses on gaining information for
    assessment and intervention, the ethnographic interview approach focuses on three main
    dimensions from the informant’s viewpoint:
         -The meaning of the illness
         -The types of strategies used to cope with the illness
         -The way in which the informant organizes their world in the context of the illness
    Confidentiality must be upheld and discussed with the informant before the interview occurs.
    Assure the informant that their name will not be used in any way in your verbal or written
    work.
  Interviews are generally 1 to 2 hours long. You may take detailed handwritten notes during the
  session IF agreeable to the informant, BUT you may not record the interview. The interview
  should be fairly open yet focused enough so that you can develop an understanding of what
  it’s like to live with the person’s illness/disability/or terminal illness.
  Acquaint yourself with the informant’s illness PRIOR to the interview. Develop an
  interview guide to help you during the interview. The following are suggestions for what you
  might want to cover/include in your interview guide:
             How did the informant first notice that something was wrong or experience
             symptoms?
             What were the informant’s initial feelings/response to symptoms and/or diagnosis and
             what did those mean for the informant?
             How did the informant make sense of his/her illness (i.e., what kinds of
             explanations/theories about “why me?”)
             How does the informant’s culture, ethnicity, age, gender, race, socioeconomic class,
             sexual orientation, gender identity, philosophical or religious beliefs affect his/her
             illness experience?
             How do they cope with the illness on a daily basis?
             What is the impact of the illness and of receiving medical treatment oneself, family
             life, work, career plans, social relationships, etc.?
             What is their experience of accessing health care and of interactions with health care
             providers?
Part B: Written Report of the Interview
Summarize the informant’s experience of being chronically ill as you
uncovered/discovered/understood it from your interview. Write a 5 page paper (using APA 6th
edition), including at least 3 direct quotes from the informant, and 3 relevant citations from the
social work literature (2000-2020) that addresses ALL the questions below:
         1. What is your understanding of the condition/illness/disease of the informant?
                  a. List sources you utilized to gain that understanding.


       2. Discuss the impact on the psychosocial life of the informant from his/her viewpoint.
       How does she/he cope with the illness/what strategies does he/she use to cope with/adapt
       to the illness?
       3. What was the most compelling thing you learned about the informant’s experience
       from an insider’s perspective? How will you incorporate this learning in your practice as
       a professional social worker?
       4. In retrospect, in general, how well do you think you elicited information from the
       informant about his/her illness experience/role as caregiver? Looking back, what areas do
       you wish you had covered in the interview but did not?
       5. How “connected” did you feel to the informant and why, and what part of the
       interview was the most difficult for you to “stay with” and why?
       6. How was the health care service delivery system/provider/agency/managed care
       system barriers and/or resources for the informant and/or family? Analyze how these
       systems enhanced, challenged, or were neutral influences on the well-being of the
       consumer and family.
       7. Attach your interview guide to your paper and submit both in to the professor.
       *See Canvas for an assignment rubric.
A Real World Challenge Assignment: Due July 22nd                                             30 pts
Reducing Health Disparities in Your Community
(Assignment adapted from Teaching Tolerance www.tolerance.org)
       The goal of this assignment is to increase student awareness of how local or statewide
       solution-focused ideas can make a positive impact on an identified health disparity.
       Teams will be formed within the cohort to research and choose a health disparity for their
       classroom presentation. The challenge involves convincing fellow classmates (in their
       role as community members) to consider the solution proposed by the group to reduce the
       identified health disparity. Possible areas include, but are not limited to: COVID19,
       HIV/AIDS, cancer, obesity, access to healthcare, infant birth weight, maternal mortality,
       infant mortality, life expectancy, depression, environmental disparities, suicide rate and
       heart disease. This will be achieved by demonstrating its impact on both specific groups
       and the community as a whole. Research the related statistics for at least 2 socially
       disadvantaged groups. Examine the impact on the groups and the community as a whole.
       Think about the specific populations your group has researched and what could
       realistically work. You may also need to research what has been done before.
       PROJECT DATES:
       6/17 – Students will email their topic or area of interest to the class TA for the purpose of
       group placement.
       6/22 – Project groups will be announced by course instructor, with 4-5 members each.
       6/29 – In order to avoid duplicate areas of research, groups will email Professor Asseff 2
       health disparity topics they wish to investigate and propose a solution for. Project
       proposals will be confirmed by 6/31.
       7/22 – Final presentations are due. The format of the presentation is entirely up to the
       group. Powerpoints are not required and creativity is encouraged. Presentations should


        be a total of 25 minutes, including time for questions and answers. Proposals should
        include:
                    • Statistics to support your case about the health disparity
                    • A clear explanation of the impact to the people and community affected
                    • A workable solution, idea or program to reduce or end the health disparity
        *See Canvas for a grading rubric.
VI.     GRADES
        Grading Scale
        Attendance and Contribution                           10
        Discussion Boards                                     10
        Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale                20
        Ethnographic Interview                                30
        Health Disparity Assignment                           30
        TOTAL                                               100 %
   The following scale will be used to determine your final letter grade:
                94.0 and above         A
                90.0 to 93.999         A-
                87.0 to 89.999         B+
                84.0 to 86.999         B
                80.0 to 83.999         B-
                77.0 to 79.999         C+
                74.0 to 76.999         C
                70.0 to 73.999         C-
                67.0 to 69.999         D+
                64.0 to 66.999         D
                60.0 to 63.999         D-
                Below 60.0             F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Class Participation: Students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in an
interactive framework between collegiate students, professor and invited guest speakers.
Students are expected to complete the readings prior to class and should be well prepared to
participate in discussions and experiential learning. Failure to attend class and demonstrate
through discussions that one has comprehended (or attempted to understand) the readings will be
considered in assigning the final grade.
Use of Zoom Application: All students will use their UT approved Zoom account to attend class
and office hours. When attending class in Zoom, students are expected to keep their video
function on to demonstrate active listening, except for brief periods as needed for personal tasks.


Brief breaks in your video feed are acceptable and students are welcome to take brief breaks as
needed. A formal 10 minute break will also be provided in the middle of class. If you anticipate
disruptive sounds in your immediate area, please set your audio to mute unless you are speaking.
Otherwise, students are encouraged to “unmute” as much as possible to facilitate interactive
discussion.
Attendance: Punctuality is one of the many important standards of professional behavior. Class
will begin promptly at 1:30 each Wednesday. A student is considered absent if they arrive more
than 10 minutes late to class, leave early, or are unable to come to class without prior
communication with the course instructor. More than one unexcused absence may result in a
reduction by one letter grade. If a student is going to be absent, efforts should be made to contact
the professor in advance. Students are responsible for any material missed due to absence.
Late Assignments: Except in the case of emergencies, and then only with the permission of the
professor, late assignments will not be accepted without penalty. Students are expected to turn
in all required assignments on the agreed upon due date to Canvas by the beginning of class.
Assignments turned in after class begins will be considered late. If accepted, late assignments
will be assessed point penalties at the rate of two (2) points each day late. If the due date is a
problem, the student can communicate with the instructor and negotiate another due date in
advance.
Writing Assignments: The ability to write in a professional manner is very important for social
workers, particularly in settings where they work as members of interdisciplinary teams. Written
work must be typed, edited for grammatical, spelling and typographical errors. Work will be
graded based on the American Psychological Association (APA – 5th edition) guidelines for
references and citations, unless otherwise stated in the guidelines for the assignment.
Class Performance: If students have concerns about their class performance, the professor is
more than willing to work with them to help improve their understanding of the class material of
the assignments prior to the end of the semester. Final grades assigned in the course are not
negotiable.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations


no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.


Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a


religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated, or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
*Other methods of teaching, such as TED talks and videos may be added onto Canvas
throughout the semester. Students are expected to check the Canvas modules for
additionally assigned material.


**Please note that all assignments will be posted on Canvas with requirements and
instructions.
   Date                Topic                   Class/                       Readings
                                        Assignments Due
  June 8   Overview of course           Class: Canvas       Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
           syllabus, assignments,       Module and 1:30       work practice in health care:
           expectations, etc.           pm Office Hours - Advanced approaches and emerging
                                        **Attendance         trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
           NASW Health Care             required for the     Publishing. (Chapters 1 & 2).
           Standards                    first day of office
                                        hours only.         NASW Healthcare Standards, pages 5-
           What IS healthcare social                        16 & 22-24.
           work?
                                                            *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
 June 10 Healthcare Social Work         Class: Zoom         Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
           Theories                                         Pgs 69-80
           Recognizing and
           Addressing Social
           Determinants of Health                           National Academies of Sciences,
                                                               Engineering, and Medicine (2017).
           Recognizing and                                     Communities in action: Pathways to
           Addressing Health                                   health equity. Washington, D.C: The
           Disparities                                         National Academies Press. Doi:
                                                               10.177226/24624. (pages57-88;
                                                               99-164).
                                                            Videos:
                                                            “Unnatural Causes: In Sickness and In
                                                            Wealth”
                                                            “Unnatural Causes: when the Bough
                                                            Breaks
                                                            *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
 June 15 Evidence Informed              Class: Canvas       Rice, S. (2014). Hospitals often ignore
           Interventions Related To:    Module and              policies on using qualified medical
               • Working with           optional office         interpreters. Modern Healthcare.
                  diverse patients      hours via Zoom.         Retrieved from: http://www.modern


            •   Using an interpreter                         healthcare.com/article/2014-
            •   Practicing cultural  Assignments:            830/MAGAZINE/308309945.
                inquiry/humility     Discussion Board
                                     #1 due by the      Weinstein-Moser, E. (2008). Spirituality
        The Influence of             beginning of class     in social work – the journey from
        Spirituality in Healthcare                         fringe to mainstream. Social Work
            • Assessing                                    Today, vol. 8(2), pg.32. Retrieved
                Spirituality                               from: www.socialworktoday.com/
                                                           archive/marapr2008p32.shtml
                                                        Saguil, A. & Phelps, K. (2012). The
                                                          Spiritual Assessment. American
                                                          Academy of Family Physicians.
                                                          Retrieved from: www.aafp.org/afp
                                                        Video: Racism is Making us Sick TED
                                                        Talk:
                                                        https://www.ted.com/talks/david_r_willi
                                                        ams_how_racism_makes_us_sick?langu
                                                        age=en
                                                        *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
June 17 Evidence Informed Care of    Class: Zoom        Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
        Children and Families:                          Chapter 12
            •   Practice Issues in   Assignments:       Texas Children’s Hospital (2015).
                the Care of          Email Health Care  Guide to Communicating with Patients
                Children and         Disparity area of  and Families. Baylor College of
                Families             interest to class  Medicine: pages 12-24.
            •   Assessment           TA in preparation
            •   History Gathering    for A Real World   Fogg, N., Lauver, L, & Badgett, V.
                                     Challenge          (2013). The Pediatric Bill of Rights.
        Health Care Issues for       Assignment.        Society of Pediatric
        Young Adults                                    Nurses, 1-2.
            •   How to Incorporate                      *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
                Effective Family
                Involvement
            •   Child Abuse,
                Rights of Minors


June 22 Suicide Assessments and   Class: Canvas    Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
        Planning                  Module and          work practice in health care:
                                  optional office    Advanced approaches and emerging
        Substance Use and Abuse   hours via Zoom.    trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
                                                     Publishing. (Ch 13).
        Mental Health Treatment   Assignments:
        and First Aide            Professor Asseff Posner, K., Brown, G.K., Stanley, B., et
                                  will post groups    al (2011). The Columbia-Suicide
        Maternal Mental Health    for A Real World    Severity Rating Scale: Initial validity
                                  Challenge           and internal consistency findings from
                                  Assignment on       three multisite studies with
                                  Canvas.             adolescents and adults. American
                                                     Journal of Psychiatry, 168 (12), 1266-
                                                     1277.
                                                   Video: Why Maternal Mental Health
                                                   Matters, TED Talk
                                                   *See Canvas for any pre-recorded
                                                   lectures.
June 24 Hospital Based Social     Class: Zoom      Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
        Work Practice/Emergency                    Chapter 8
        Department Social Work    Assignments:     Moody, H. (2004). Hospital Discharge
        Interventions:            Columbia Suicide   Planning. Journal of Gerontological
                                  Severity Rating    Social Work, 43 (1), 107-118.
            •  Care coordination  Scale Assignment
            •  Biopsychosocial    Due              Discharge Planning: Fundamentals for
               assessments                         the Hospital and other Acute Health
            •  Discharge planning                  Care Settings
            •  Interdisciplinary
               teams                               *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
June 29 Social Work Intervention  Class: Canvas    Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
        in Primary Care           Module and       Chapter 7
                                  optional office
        Social Work Intervention  hours via Zoom.  Video:
        with Chronic Health                        “Unnatural Causes: Bad Sugar”
                                  Assignments:
        Documentation in                           *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
        Healthcare Settings


                                   -Discussion Board
                                   # 2 due by the
                                   beginning of class
                                   -Email Professor
                                   Asseff your top
                                   two health care
                                   disparity topics
                                   for your A Real
                                   World Challenge
                                   Assignment group.
 July 1 Gerontological Health Care Class: Zoom        Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
                                                      Chapter 11
        Dementia
                                                      McGovern, J. (2015). Living Better
        Social Work Practice in                         With Dementia: Strengths-
        Long Term Care:                                 Based Social Work Practice and
            • Assisted Living                           Dementia Care. Social Work in Health
            • Skilled Nursing                           Care, 54, pages 408–421.
                Facility
            • Home Health                             Zimmerman, S., Connolly,R., Zlotnik,
                                                         J.L., Bernklug, M., & Cohen, L.
                                                         (2012). Psychosocial care in nursing
                                                         homes in the era of the MDS 3.0:
                                                         Perspectives of the experts. Journal
                                                         of Gerontological Social Work, 55
                                                         (5), pages 444-461.
                                                      *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
July 6  Evidence Based Clinical    Class: Canvas      Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
        Approaches for Healthcare  Module and         Pgs 81 – 94
        Social Work                optional office
                                   hours via Zoom.    Emmons, K. & Rollnick, S. (2001).
        Documentation: Best                             Motivational Interviewing in Health
        Practices for Healthcare   Assignments:         Care Settings: Opportunities and
        Settings.                  Discussion Board     limitations. American Journal of
                                   # 3 due by the       Preventative Medicine, 20(1), 68-74.
                                   beginning of class
                                                      Peitzmeier S.M., Potter J. (2017)
                                                        Patients and Their Bodies: The
                                                        Physical Exam. In: Eckstrand K.,
                                                        Potter J. (eds) Trauma, Resilience, and


                                                     Health Promotion in LGBT Patients.
                                                     Springer, Cham
                                                   Common Medical Abbreviations for
                                                   Social Workers.
                                                   *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
 July 8 Palliative Care            Class: Zoom     Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
                                                   Chapter 9
        End of Life Care (Hospice) Assignments:
                                   Ethnographic    Barros, C. (2012). Notes for the new
        Communicating with         Interview due     hospice social worker, Journal of
        Seriously Ill Patients                       Social Work in End-of-Life &
                                                     Palliative Care, 8(3), pages 207-210.
                                                   Voluntary Stopping Eating and
                                                   Drinking (VSED). (2020). Compassion
                                                   Choices. Retrieved from:
                                                   https://compassionandchoices.org/end-
                                                   of-life-planning/learn/vsed/
                                                   Video: Centra Hospice – Except for 6
                                                   *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
July 13 Self Determination in      Class: Canvas   Searight H.R. (2019) Why Is There
        Health Care:               Module and        Such Diversity in Preferences for
                                   optional office   End-of-Life Care? Explanations and
            •   Advance Care       hours via Zoom.   Narratives. In: Ethical Challenges in
                Planning –                           Multi-Cultural Patient Care.
                Honoring Choices                     SpringerBriefs in Ethics. Springer,
            •   Guardianships                        Cham. Chapter 6
            •   HIPAA 1996 –
                Health Information                 Dingfield & Kayser. (2017). Integrating
                Portability &                         Advance Care Planning into
                Accountability Act                    Practice. Chest, 151 (6), 1387-1393.
            •   Social Work
                Practice on an                     Drolet, Marwaha, Hyatt, Blazar, &
                Ethics Committee                      Lifchez. (2017). Electronic
                                                      Communication of Protected Health
                                                      Information: Privacy, Security
                                                      and HIPAA Compliance. Journal of


                                                         Hand Surgery, 42 (6),411-416.
                                                      Video:
                                                      “Honoring Choices”
                                                      View the following Advance Care
                                                      Planning Documents: Medical Power
                                                      of Attorney, Directive to Physicians,
                                                      Durable Power of Attorney, Declaration
                                                      for Mental Health Treatment, Texas
                                                      MOST form
                                                      *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
July 15 SSI, SSDI, Medicare and    Class: Zoom         No assigned readings: Preparation for A
        Medicaid                                      Real World Challenge Presentations.
        Telehealth, Tele-Mental                       *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures
        Health and COVID19                            and additional COVID 19 related
                                                      updates.
July 20 Evidence Informed          Class: Canvas      Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
        Interventions in           Module and         Chapter 10
        Public/Community Health    optional office
        and Population Health      hours via Zoom.    Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016).
        Management                                    Chapter 16
        Social Work Practice in    Assignments:       Video: Social Work in Integrated Care
        Integrated Behavioral      Discussion Board
        Health                     # 4 due by the     *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
                                   beginning of class
July 22 A Real World Challenge,    Class: Zoom        No Assigned Readings
        Health Disparity
        Presentations              Assignments:
                                   A Real World
                                   Challenge, Health
                                   Disparity
                                   Presentations Due
July 27 Preparation for Healthcare Class: Canvas
        Simulation                 Module and


                                          optional office     See Healthcare Simulation preparation
             Wrap up from previous        hours via Zoom.     materials and assigned roles on Canvas
             classes                                          and emailed to each participant.
                                                              *See Canvas for pre-recorded lectures.
 July 29     Healthcare Simulation and    Class: Zoom         See Healthcare Simulation preparation
             Semester Wrap Up.                                materials and assigned roles on Canvas
                                          Assignments:        and emailed to each participant.
                                          Discussion Board
                                          # 5 due by the
                                          beginning of
                                          class-**Optional
                                          for bonus
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social work practice in health care: Advanced approaches and
         emerging trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publishing.
Barros, C. (2012). Notes for the new hospice social worker, Journal of Social Work in End-of-
        Life & Palliative Care, 8(3), pages 207-210.
Davenport, L. & Schopp, G. (2011). Breaking bad news: Communication skills for difficult
         conversations. JAAPA: Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants, 24
         (2), 46-50.
Dingfield & Kayser. (2017). Integrating Advance Care Planning into Practice. Chest, 151 (6),
        1387-1393.
Drolet, Marwaha, Hyatt, Blazar, & Lifchez. (2017). Electronic Communication of Protected
         Health Information: Privacy, Security and HIPAA Compliance. Journal of Hand
         Surgery, 42 (6),411-416.
Emmons, K. (2001). Motivational Interviewing in Health Care Settings: Opportunities and
         limitations. American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 20(1), 68-74.
Fogg, N., Lauver, L, & Badgett, V. (2013). The Pediatric Bill of Rights. Society of Pediatric
        Nurses, 1-2.
Moody, H. (2004). Hospital Discharge Planning. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 43 (1),
         107-118.
NASW Healthcare Standards. Retrieved from: https://www.socialworkers.org/LinkClick.
         aspx?fileticket=fFnsRHX-4HE%3D&portalid=0.


National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2017). Communities in action:
        Pathways to health equity. Washington, D.C: The National Academies Press. Doi:
        10.177226/24624, pages 57-88; 99-164.
Posner, K., Brown, G.K., Stanley, B., et al (2011). The Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale:
        Initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with
        adolescents and adults. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168 (12), 1266-1277.
Rice, S. (2014). Hospitals often ignore policies on using qualified medical interpreters. Modern
         Healthcare. Retrieved from: http://www.modern
        healthcare.com/article/2014-830/MAGAZINE/308309945.
Saguil, A. & Phelps, K. (2012). The Spiritual Assessment. American Academy of Family
        Physicians. Retrieved from: www.aafp.org/afp.
Searight H.R. (2019) Why Is There Such Diversity in Preferences for End-of-Life Care?
        Explanations and Narratives. In: Ethical Challenges in Multi-Cultural Patient Care.
        SpringerBriefs in Ethics. Springer, Cham.
Texas Children’s Hospital (2015). Guide to Communicating with Patients and Families. Baylor
        College of Medicine: pages 12-24.
Weinstein-Moser, E. (2008). Spirituality in social work – the journey from fringe to mainstream.
        Social Work Today, vol. 8(2), pg.32. Retrieved from: www.socialworktoday.com/
        archive/marapr2008p32.shtml.
Zimmerman, S., Connolly,R., Zlotnik, J.L., Bernklug, M., & Cohen, L. (2012). Psychosocial care
         in nursing homes in the era of the MDS 3.0: Perspectives of the experts. Journal of
         Gerontological Social Work, 55 (5), pages 444-461.
