        QUEERING
        ARCHITECTURAL                                                                         ;^       )
        TASTE
           OUR BUILDINGS?
               OURSELVES? ARC 386M (01049)
                                    WGS 335 (44764)
         This reading and research seminar centers around the invisible forces behind our aesthetic realm.
         Using a queer lens, we will identify and unpack the aesthetic value systems inherent in
         architecture and its adjacencies. The seminar asks: What is the relationship between predominant
         taste cultures, kitsch, and queerness? How does existing scholarship define queer architecture?
         How does it define queer space? How does architectural style confer an aesthetic value system,
         and how can we come to recognize and reappropriate its tools for proposing alternative ways of
         seeing, making, and identification? Is there a white architecture? Is there a brown architecture? Is
         there a queer, or a straight architecture? We will focus on unpacking the values of Modern
  Fall 2 Architecture and its construction of a certain kind of beauty. If the prevailing conception of
         019
  ARC beauty      is not a reflection of how we see ourselves, whose beauty is it? How does this conception
        327R
 Fri, 9 of      (0073change over time in architectural discourse, particularly in the overturning of styles
       :3 abeauty     8) / A
Sutto 0and  mtastes?         Rare
      n Hal - 12:30What p m
                               C 3these
                                   86M stories telling us and what remains untold?
            l 3                         (0104 is it anyway?
                .112or her-story, whose-story
         His-tory                            9) / W
                                                     GS 3
                                                          35 (44
                                                                 764)
                                                                                   Unive
                                                                                         rsity o
                          intimate seminar                                                       f Te
                                                                    Offic      adam Instructor xas at Aus
                            grad and upper                                e Hou     .m              :                 ti
                                                                               rs & L iller@aus Adam Mill n
                                                                                     ocatio        tin.ute            er
                           level undergrad                                                   n: b y app    xa s . e d
                                                                                                        ointm u
                                                                                                                 ent


Fall 2019                                                                         University of Texas at Austin
ARC 327R (00738) / ARC 386M (01049) / WGS 335 (44764)                                  Instructor: Adam Miller
Fri, 9:30 am - 12:30 pm                                                        adam.miller@austin.utexas.edu
Sutton Hall 3.112                                   Office Location & Hours: WMB 4.122A by appointment
                                     Our Buildings? Ourselves?
                                    Queering Architectural Taste
Course Description
This reading and research seminar centers around the invisible forces behind our aesthetic realm.
Using a queer lens, we will identify and unpack the aesthetic value systems inherent in
architecture and its adjacencies. The seminar asks: What is the relationship between predominant
taste cultures, kitsch, and queerness? How does existing scholarship define queer architecture?
How does it define queer space? How does architectural style confer an aesthetic value system,
and how can we come to recognize and reappropriate its tools for proposing alternative ways of
seeing, making, and identification? Is there a white architecture? Is there a brown architecture? Is
there a queer, or a straight architecture? We will focus on unpacking the values of Modern
Architecture and its construction of a certain kind of beauty. If the prevailing conception of
beauty is not a reflection of how we see ourselves, whose beauty is it? How does this conception
of beauty change over time in architectural discourse, particularly in the overturning of styles
and tastes? What are these stories telling us and what remains untold?
His-story or her-story, whose-story is it anyway?
Learning Objectives
We will approach subjects such as gender, sexuality, and race. Discussing these issues may be difficult,
but they should be. Students should expect to take ownership of their comments during discussion and at
times one’s comments may be challenged by others. It is the goal of the course to confront our
preconceptions through respectful and sometimes difficult discourse. Speak up when you agree or
disagree. This is a collegial space, and it is expected to listen to one’s peers and respond with respect. It is
part of my job to ensure a safe learning environment of kindness, mutual respect, and professionalism.
We are in this together.
As architecture is fundamentally an interdisciplinary medium, this seminar will investigate readings and
objects of inquiry drawn broadly from history, theory, art, film, fiction, and architecture. Students will
develop intellectual tools for reconciling and contesting, integrating or resisting these stories around our
built environment, and importantly, crafting a story of one’s own. It isn’t expected that everything is
immediately illuminated alone, but through discussion we can develop as a group a deeper
comprehension.
Students will investigate what is included and omitted from the aesthetic discourses through
weekly responses, object stories (referred to as ‘fetishes’ here), a research presentation, and a final
research paper. Readings will include texts from gender studies, queer theory, philosophy, architecture
history, and architects’ own manifestos to better understand for whom and how the prevailing canonical
architecture came to write its own identity—and how we can write and create one for ourselves. Readings
of interest will include excerpts on the performance of gender, architecture’s performance of identity via
ornament and color, and the intersection between style, taste, and the values of success and failure in the
architectural discourse.


                                                                                Queering Architectural Taste | 2
Typical Class Structure
9:30 am – 11:00 am | First Half: Each class will begin with students distributing printed copies of their
week’s reading response to the class. 5-10 minutes will be allotted to read the responses as an opportunity
to spark discussion. The instructor will lecture on background information of the readings as needed. The
student discussion leader will then direct conversation on the material of the week. The discussion leader
may choose to call upon certain students and or respond to the class’s reading responses as they see fit. It
is not a requirement to direct conversation in response to others’ reading responses. If no student is
assigned discussion lead, the instructor will take the role of discussion lead.
11:00 am – 11:15 am | Break
11:20 am – 12:30 pm | Second Half: Object Fetish Presentation. Students assigned to present their Object
for the week will commence the second half of class (approximately a 10-minute presentation each). The
Object presenter will then guide discussion around the material of the Object presentation, and/or may use
objects (buildings or art) from the readings on which to focus the class’s attention. The Object presenter
will solicit questions from the class, in a manner similar to the discussion leader but will use visual and/or
auditory objects presented on a screen to ground discussion and encourage a close reading from the class.
If no student is assigned Object Fetish presenter, instructor will present.
Required Texts
All readings will be posted on a shared Google Drive folder and must be printed and brought to class on
the assigned dates. See the schedule below for readings/viewings and dates.
Requirements and Expectations
All assignments are due on the day and at the time that has been assigned. Late assignments will be
penalized a third of a grade a day (thus, an A- will become an B+ etc), including each weekend day. I will
take your commitment, effort and participation in this course into account when it comes to determining
final grades. Final grades are not negotiable. All class policies subject to change, with notice.
Readings: Readings are due on the day they are listed in the syllabus. Please arrive to class with sufficient
notes on the readings to be ready for engaged, rigorous class discussion. Students are responsible for any
reading/viewing missed as a result of absence.
Assessment: Final grades will be based on weekly reading responses, leading two discussions, an Object
Fetish presentation, completion and quality of the essay assignments, and regular class participation.
         Reading Responses                         20%      (each class; emailed + printed)
         Object Fetish Presentation                15%      (sign up for one date)
         Reading Discussion Lead                   20%      (sign up for two dates)
         Research Essay                            25%      (proposal draft 12/6; final 12/13)
         Participation                             20%
Essay Format: Essays should be sent as Word Documents (not pdfs, Google docs, or anything else),
double-spaced with 1-inch margins and 12-point Times New Roman or similar font. They should include
an appropriate heading on the top of the first page (name, professor’s name, course, date). Please also
include a witty or provocative title. Page numbers should be included on the top right of each page after


                                                                               Queering Architectural Taste | 3
the first. You must have in-text citations and a works cited page in MLA format for any texts you cite, as
well as a list of figures page for any visual material. Your works cited page does not count toward the
page requirement or word count.
Attendance: Attendance is mandatory. This class is designed to rely on in-class group discussion, so it is
extremely important for students to be present and on time for every class. Three unexcused absences can
result in a non-passing grade.
Participation: Students are expected to participate in class discussion and activities, in addition to
completing assignments and readings before each class. Discussion is core to the educational value of
seminar. Though participating in an interdisciplinary seminar may seem intimidating at times, you are not
alone. Remember that your voice and experience is valuable to the discussion, so please speak your mind.
Mistakes are encouraged and confusion is part of the process. No one is an expert—do not be afraid to
speak up. During class, pose a question, respond to a peer, to the reading, or integrate an experience or
object with the discussion.
Honor Code & Plagiarism: If you are unsure how to incorporate a source into a document, discuss it with
me in a timely manner before handing in the assignment. It is expected of every student to abide by the
UT Honor Code. Dishonesty and/or the poor treatment of your classmates will not be tolerated. The UT
Honor Code (or statement of ethics) and an explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism and
cheating can be found at: https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-
discipline-and-conduct/
Diversity Statement: Every student in this class will be honored and respected as an individual with
distinct experiences, talents, and backgrounds. Issues of diversity may be a part of class discussion,
assigned material, and projects. The instructor will make every effort to ensure that an inclusive
environment exists for all students. If you have any concerns or suggestions for improving the classroom
climate, please do not hesitate to speak with me or to contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 617-
824-8528 or the Campus Climate Response Team online via http://diversity.utexas.edu/ccrt/reportform.
Special Accommodations & Accessibility Statement: At the beginning of the semester, students with
disabilities who need special accommodations should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared
by the Services for Students with Disabilities Office, and accommodations will need to be discussed at
that time. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be provided, students should contact
the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY. Five business days before an exam or assignment, the
student should remind the instructor of their accommodation needs.
Safety & Security: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. To find more information regarding
emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures go to: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX: This new law requires all employees of Texas universities to report sexual harassment, sexual
assault, dating violence, and stalking to a Title IXCoordinator. An employee who fails to report an
incident may be subject to criminal offense (misdemeanor) and the university is required to terminate
their employment. The reporting obligations and penalties take effect January 1, 2020. Reports can be


                                                                                 Queering Architectural Taste | 4
made by phone: (512) 471-0419; email: titleix@austin.utexas.edu; or online: https://titleix.utexas.edu/file-
a-report.
Laptops & Devices: Except during assigned presentations, and in situations where an educational need
exists, there will be no laptops, tablets, phones, screens, texting, or emailing allowed in class. If you have
a specified educational need to use a device for note-taking purposes, please contact me to make
arrangements.
Email Policy: Emails sent after 6 pm may not be answered until the following morning. If you expect or
need a response on the same day, please make sure to email me before this time.
Assignments
Reading Responses: Write a short response (~150-200 words, around one paragraph) to each week’s
readings and/or films. Email the response to the instructor by 8 pm on Thursday before class (email
Adam.Miller@austin.utexas.edu). Responses must be printed and brought to class with enough copies for
the instructor and all students in the class to facilitate discussion. During class students will read each
other’s responses. Responses should be open-ended, can come in the form of a thought-provoking
argument, reflection, or comparison, or pose a directed question. This is an opportunity to take task with a
passage, quote, or image drawn from one or more of the readings/films. If a passage is troubling or
confusing, this is an opportunity to direct input during discussion. As readings and discussion objects are
interdisciplinary it is natural to feel confused at times. Do not be afraid to ask questions, make mistakes or
ask for help. These responses are integral to develop our collective class discourse, so show us your
thought process, draw us to your past experiences or adjacent aesthetic objects that support, challenge, or
enliven the primary reading or object. The writings must cite at least one quote or image. Please provide
page numbers; for films, contextualize sufficiently and, if possible, provide a time stamp.
Discussion Leader Presentation (2 dates; sometimes in groups of 2): You will take an active role in
stimulating discussion for the first half of class. Instead of writing the typical reading response, lead
discussion and prepare a handout. At the start of class, present on that day’s readings and/or films (sign-
up sheet passed around first and second days of class). Certain dates may have two discussion leaders. If
there are two presenters, work together, using points of agreement or disagreement as inspiration. This
assignment can be thought of as an extended reading response, where interpretation and asking questions
is key. Prepare a 1-page handout (2-page for two presenters) with enough printed copies for the class,
which draws attention to a quote, passage, or image from each reading/film assigned for that week. The
handout is due during the start of class as printout and emailed to the instructor before class. Your
handout should direct us toward items of inquiry you want to address with the class. What did you find
interesting? Alarming? Boring or beautiful? This handout can be thought of as a reference to guide
discussion and need not exhaustively summarize readings. You may begin the presentation with a brief
presentation on the background information on the context of the piece as needed, taking no more than
several minutes. You can think of this as an opportunity to direct discussion using a framework or
interpretation. Lead us into your thought process, which may include points of agreement, disagreement,
or even areas of confusion, and show us points of interest.
Object Fetish (media presentation, sign up for 1 date): 10-15 min visual and/or auditory presentation.
What are you obsessed with? Does a particular object bring you great pleasure, disgust, or spark another
feeling entirely? Taking pleasure in something can be a way to resist the normative structure of time and
its teleological progress. A fetish or a pleasure can bring us to “a present which is not a transition, but in
which time stands still, and has come to a stop,” affectively allowing us to see “now something whole and
complete” (Agamben 102, 104). This is an opportunity to bring an outside object to the attention of the


                                                                               Queering Architectural Taste | 5
class not found in the readings/films. This presentation can draw from any media or genre: in other words,
the object does not have to be a building, though of course buildings are welcome. This presentation can
draw lateral associations between the themes or theories of that week (or the broader class in general) and
an object about which you are passionate. During your presentation show us how it relates to the themes
of the class, using a comparative method if necessary, or extrapolate an idea or passage from the course to
make meaning for your object. During your presentation you may attempt to ask or answer certain
questions such as: What makes this a queer object or queer building? What does the object tell us about
itself, its author, and about ourselves? For whom is the object made? Why was it made, and when? How
does it fit into a system of meaning or carve an edge for new meaning? What affects does it produce? Is it
beautiful, ugly, kitsch, camp, or none of the above? Does it succeed or fail at producing a certain effect,
reaching a certain audience, answering or asking certain questions? You may choose to address these
questions or propose your own.
Essay Proposal (due 10/25): Print one copy to bring to class and email to instructor before class.
Choose a topic, and see Final Essay section below for guidance on selecting one. This proposal should
include a witty title, a 1-page enticing description (200 words), a hypothesis (1 paragraph), and a
bibliography, and figures (figures, or images are encouraged but not required). Do not include filler in the
bibliography. Pose a problem or question or identify a gap in the scholarship.
Final Essay (draft due 12/6; final due 12/13):
           Graduate Requirement: 10-15 pages (not including works cited or figures)
           Undergraduate Requirement: 6-8 pages (not including works cited or figures)
This essay should be a well-researched story about an object, space, or people in a place or time which
builds on or extrapolates from the themes of course. The topic is entirely up to you. It could take the form
of a close reading of a building. It could read like a manifesto. You can tell a narrative. For all the stories
we have told in the class, which ones have yet to be told? Shed new light on the edges of the architectural
discourse, oppose a predominant narrative, or bring something in contact with the language of the course
about which you are passionate. Tell another side of the canon or throw the canon out the window. Write
an off-modern story, describe a mode or method for ambiguating a kind of architecture, space, or people
in a place. It is an opportunity to use theory and history from the course, but it is only a requirement to
use one reading established in the course. Use the readings as a guide, but not a prescriptive framework:
come to your own conclusions. You are encouraged to challenge the prevailing conceptions for what the
discourse wants us to care. The style in which you write is open to you, but what is important is a rigorous
and well researched argument, story, narrative. Take a risk with a new idea with supporting documents,
sights and sounds. If you are a visual thinker, feel free to create drawings or other representations which
supports your argument and researched readings. See above Essay Format section for requirements on
citations and formatting.


                                                                          Queering Architectural Taste | 6
                                               Schedule
Week 1:
8/30 |   Introductions, syllabus review, discussion leader Sign up, Object Fetish sign up
         In class: Jennie Livingston, Paris Is Burning (film, 1h 11min)
Week 2: Whose Queer Space Is It Anyway, Pt 1
9/6 |    Last day for discussion leader sign up, Object Fetish sign up
         Aaron Betsky, Queer Space (pp. 1-97)
         Eve K. Sedgewick, “Epistemology of the Closet” Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader (pp. 45-61)
Week 3: Whose Queer Space Is It Anyway, Pt 2
9/13 |   Aaron Betsky, Queer Space (pp. 98-195)
         Andrés Jaque, “Grindr Archiurbanism” Log: 41 (pp. 74-84)
         Olivier Vallerand, “Introduction” diss. Making Homes Building (Self-) Identities (pp. 1-13)
Week 4: Sex Is Not for Kids: A Queer Future for Us
9/20 |   José Muñoz, “Introduction” Cruising Utopia (pp. 1-18)
         ….            “Performing Disidentifications” Disidentifications: Queers of Color and the
                       Performance of Politics (pp 1-34)
         Lee Edelman, “The Future is Kid Stuff” (pp. 18-30)
         Audre Lorde, “The Uses of the Erotic” Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader (pp. 339-343)
Week 5: Performing Genders, Seeing Race
9/27 |   Judith Butler “Introduction” Bodies That Matter (pp. xi-xxx) 19 pgs
         Roxane Gay “Bad Feminist: Take One” & “Bad Feminist: Take Two” 10 pgs
         Audre Lorde “The Master’s Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master’s House” 3 pgs
         Donna Haraway, “A Cyborg Manifesto” The Transgender Studies Reader (pp. 102-118)
Week 6: Locating A Queer Place and Time
10/4 |   Jack Judith Halberstam,
         …. “Queer Temporality and Postmodern Geographies” In a Queer Time and Place (pp. 1-22)
         …. “The Brandon Archive” In a Queer Time and Place (22-46)
         …. “Low Theory” The Queer Art of Failure (pp. 1-25)
         Lucas Crawford, “Introduction” Transgender Architectonics (pp. 1-15)
Week 7: Architecture in Black / Flesh and Skin
10/11 |  Darrell Fields, (excerpts) Architecture in Black (pp. 169-183)
         Mario Gooden, “Space as Praxis as Identity” from
               Dark Space: Architecture, Representation, Black Identity (pp. 42-62)
         Anne Anlin Cheng “Her Own Skin” Second Skin (pp. 1-15)
         ….                  “Ornamentalism” Critical Inquiry: 44 (pp. 415-446)
         Gayatri Chakravorti Spivak “Who Claims Alterity” Art Theory (pp. 1-7)


                                                                           Queering Architectural Taste | 7
Week 8: Discontents on the Edge, Finding the Fringes of the Modern
10/18 |   Svetlana Boym, “The Off-Modern” The Svetlana Boym Reader (pp. 387-405)
          Giorgio Agamben “Infancy and History” Infancy and History (pp. 24-30)
          ….                  “Time and History” Infancy and History (pp. 100-105)
          Jurgen Habermas “Modernity: An Incomplete Project” Art Theory (pp. 1-13)
Week 9: The Architecture of Power
10/25 |   Essay Proposal due in class, and emailed to (Adam.Miller@austin.utexas.edu)
          Louis Althusser “Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses” Essays on Ideology (pp. 1-60)
          Michel Foucault “Panopticism” Race/Ethnicity v2.1 (pp. 1-12)
          ….                “Of Other Spaces: Utopias and Heterotopias” October: 1984 (pp. 1-9)
Week 10: Discerning Taste
11/1 |    Dick Hebdige, “Subculture and Style” Design Studies (pp. 206-208)
          Pierre Bourdieu, “The Aesthetic Sense as the Sense of Distinction” from
               Design Studies (pp. 198-200)
          Sarah Thornton, “The Social Logic of Subcultural Capital” Club Cultures (pp. 154-164)
          Dave Hickey, “Buying the World” Dedalus Fall 2002 (pp. 69-87)
          George P. Landow, “Ruskin’s Theory of Typical Beauty” (pp. 1-14)
Week 11: Dragging Modernity: The Duck and The Decorated Shed
11/8 |     Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, Seven Izenour,
               “Part II: Ugly and Ordinary Architecture” Learning from Las Vegas (85-165)
Week 12: Bad Taste… Never Felt So Good!
11/15 |   Susan Sontag, “Notes on Camp” Against Interpretation (pp. 275-292)
          Adam Nathaniel Furman, “Outrage: The Prejudice Against Queer Aesthetics” 1p
          ….                        “Vibrance Matters” RM 1000: Timeless (pp. 225-236)
          John Waters, Female Trouble (film, 1h 29min) (watch at home)
Week 13: I’d Rather Be Crude Than Beautiful
11/22 |   Adolf Loos, “Ornament and Crime” (excerpt) Art Theory. (pp. 1-10)
          Anne Anlin Cheng, “Housing Baker, Dressing Loos” Second Skin (pp. 49-82)
          ….                   “Skins, Tattoos, and The Lure of The Surface” Second Skin (pp. 23-33)
          Kyla Tompkins, “Crude Matter, Queer Form” ASAP/Journal 2.2 (pp. 264-268)
          Andrew Zago, “Awkward Position” Perspecta 42. (pp. 209-222)
          Alexander Nehamas, “The Art of Being Unselfish” Dedalus Fall 2002 (pp. 57-68)
Week 14: Thanksgiving Break
Week 15: Last Day of Class
12/6 |    Essay Draft due (emailed to instructor and bring four copies) + Peer Writing Workshop
Post-Class: 12/13 | Final Essays due (email to Adam.Miller@austin.utexas.edu)
