                     ALD 327: Sociocultural Influences on Learning
                                        Spring 2020
                                   Unique Number: 09495
                                University of Texas at Austin
                            Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
                                    M/W/F: 11:00 – 12:00
                                          SZB 278
Instructor: Beth Link
Pronouns: she/her/hers                                   Artwork: Still I Rise by Deborah Roberts
Office Hour: Monday 2-3:00 or by appointment
Office: SZB 528E
Email: bethlink@utexas.edu
*This syllabus is subject to change
Required Texts
   • Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African
       American Students
   • Te-Nehisi Coates, Between the World and Me
   • Course Packet (can be purchased from Jenn’s Copies)
Note: Please bring course packet or print texts to all class meetings.
Course Goals and Objectives:
How do we learn about the world? How is our identity shaped through schooling? In what ways
does sociocultural knowledge and ideas about what is “standard” and “normal” affect our
understandings of self and others?


This course explores these questions among others through readings, critical dialogue,
service learning, creative projects, embodied activities, and personal reflections. We will
investigate the intersection of culture, education, and society in order to consider the
roots and effects of racial, gender, and class inequities in education and society. We will
examine sociocultural issues by interrogating curriculum, education policy, pedagogy,
schools’ relationship with communities, and teacher identity. Throughout this course we
will pay special attention to populations who have been historically and persistently
marginalized in US schools. While you may not agree with every reading or idea we
discuss, it is important that you respectfully engage with all texts/ideas with an open and
curious mind. It is expected that during this course everyone will question their
own/others’ beliefs in respectful ways grounded in a practice of listening and critical self-
reflection. We will engage in frank and critical conversations about race, gender, class,
sexual orientation, and identity throughout this course-if you are uncomfortable with
talking about these issues this course may not be a good fit for you.
Cultural Diversity Flag:
This course has a flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity
courses are intended to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. A large part of this course involves looking at issues from
many different perspectives and being open to viewpoints that may differ from your
own. Much of your grade will come from assignments covering the experiences,
beliefs, and histories of cultural groups that experience historical and persistent
marginalization.
Teaching Philosophy:
I believe that learning is a process. To truly learn we must be open to taking risks,
moving towards discomfort, and questioning what we think we know. Listening and
patiently considering the views of others moves us beyond arriving at the “right”
answer towards a more complex, nuanced, and messy understanding of the world. I
believe that to really grow we must not only take in new information, but we must also
struggle to process this information and reflect on how it fits with what we previously
knew and understood. We are all involved in a process of continual learning and
unlearning. This process is powerful, uncomfortable, and full of possibility. As learners
we may make mistakes along the way and that is part of the process too.
        I believe that teaching is a big responsibility. There is no job more important.
Therefore it is imperative that we engage with these issues in order to be ethical
practitioners confronting injustices for our students and for ourselves. As your teacher
and a fellow learner I am dedicated to listening to you, holding space for you, and
helping you engage in the process of learning/unlearning. I believe in the growth and


potential of all students and will do my best to cultivate an environment where
everyone’s voice can be heard and understood. To make this a space for important
conversations about difficult topics we should approach our work together with grace
and a grounding of respect for the humanity of your peers. I expect you to come
prepared to be reflective, discuss ideas, and ask questions.
                                  COURSE POLICIES
Participation:
This course relies on your participation and effort. Your grade will reflect how engaged
and present you were in class discussions, activities, and group work. I understand that
some folks might identify as shy (I do too!) but I would challenge everyone to be present
and share their thoughts each day. Your opinions, critiques, and reflections matter. In
order to participate fully you will need to read and reflect prior to our meetings, remain
present throughout the class period, and bring hard copies of your texts to class every
day. Your daily, active, and engaged participation is worth 15% of your final grade.
Canvas
I will be in touch with you over Canvas so be sure you have set it up to receive alerts and
notifications. You might also check to make sure it forwards correspondence to your
email. You are responsible for checking your email often during this course to receive
updates and announcements.
Attendance:
This course depends on your presence and engagement with your peers and with the
course readings. Therefore it is important that you arrive on time, are mentally present,
and prepared to discuss the material assigned. I know we all have lives outside of class
and things tend to come up. Make sure you understand the attendance policy so you
know what to expect and can communicate with me.
    • You may miss 3 classes (as long as you are not scheduled to present), but will lose
        participation points if it is unexcused
    • Each additional absence will result in 2 points deducted from your final grade
    • 9 or more absences will result in a failing grade.
What counts as an excused absence?
    • Illness with doctor’s note provided
    • Religious holiday with a note 2 weeks in advance
    • If something else comes up that you think should count come talk to me


Lateness
Two late arrivals equals one absence. If you know you’ll be late let me know ahead of
time. It is important that you are here and on time out of respect for our community.
Electronic Devices:
This course is fueled by your active engagement with the text and with your peers.
Therefore I will not allow laptops, cell phones, or other electronic devices to be used
during our class discussions and presentations. Out of respect for our community you
will put your laptops away and expect to show up and be present for one another in
this space. You will need access to your course texts during discussions so plan to bring
a hard copy of the readings to class each day.
Names and Personal Pronouns:
I am happy to refer to you by the name and pronoun you identify most with. Let me
know what name and pronoun you prefer (She / He / They / Ze / Etc) and I will change
it in my records.
Academic Integrity:
All the work you turn in should be your own. If you are referring to other sources or
quoting an author you must cite it both in text and in a work cited page. This course
uses APA and I recommend visiting Purdue Owl’s online citation guide to answer any
questions about specific citations. Plagiarized work is unacceptable and will be
reported. Talk to me if you are unsure of how to cite something or have questions.
Late Work:
Late reading responses are not accepted. All other written assignments decrease in
value by 25% every additional day they are late.
     • Worth 75% of points if turned in later on the same due date
     • Worth 50% of points if turned in the following day
     • Worth 25% of points if turned in 2 days late
     • 3 or more days late will result in no points for that assignment
Policy on Children in Class:
I support parents and guardians attending school and want to help you succeed in this
course. While UT does not have an official policy on children in the classroom, I will
detail my personal policy below (thanks to Dr. Katie Payne and Dr. Melissa Cheyney for
creating a road map for this policy)
     • All babies exclusively breastfeeding are welcome in class as often as you need
        to support the breastfeeding relationship.


     •   For older children and babies, I understand that illness and unforeseen
         circumstances come up that may result in lapses of childcare. I know this can put
         caregivers in a difficult position of having to miss class or arrange for alternate
         childcare. While this is not meant to be a long-term solution, you are welcome
         to bring your child to class to cover any unforeseen gaps in childcare coverage.
     •   If you do end up bringing your child to class, I request that you sit near to the
         door so that if your child needs special attention or is disrupting learning for
         others you may step outside. Non-parents should find alternate seats if
         caregivers with children need the chairs closet to the door.
     •   Please talk to me if you need accommodation with deadlines or if there are
         other ways I can support you.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and
stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to
fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms.
When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees”
or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of
Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report
any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related
incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting
options contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
 If a fire alarm is pulled or an evacuation notice is given we are required to exit
 promptly. Here are the University’s evacuation policies:
     • Know where the exits are. Be aware that the closest exit might not be the way
         you entered.


     •  If you require assistance in the event of an evacuation talk to me during our first
        week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, listen for my instructions so we can evacuate
        quickly.
Do not re-enter a building unless the Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services has given you instructions to do so.
                               STUDENT RESOURCES
Writing Center:
Writing can be challenging. The folks over at the writing center are here to support
you. The Sanger Learning Center has a writing center that can help you generate ideas,
organize your thoughts, and tell a compelling story. They also can help with editing
and citations.
Services for Students with Disabilities:
This course welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If you have
circumstances that might make our learning environment or activities challenging let
me know how I can best support you. If you have accommodations or medical
information you need to share with me please let me know. I am committed to making
this an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do that if you
communicate your needs early on in the semester. I promise to keep our discussions
confidential. If you have a documented disability please contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Counseling and Mental Health Center:
We all could benefit from some extra support during tough times. You are not alone.
The University has resources that can help, and learning how to ask for help is an
important part of the college experience. If you or anyone you know is experiencing
feelings of being overwhelmed, dealing with difficult life events, or feeling anxiety or
depression please get the support you need.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are concerned about someone who is acting differently, you may use the
 Behavior Concerns Advice Line. Call 512-232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


Identity Based Support and Discussion Groups:
   • Asian Voices, Tuesdays 4:45-6:15, Bellmont 220A
   • Black Voices, Wednesdays 2-3:30, GWB 4.112
   • Latinx Voices, Mondays 11-12:30 GWB 1.138
   • Queer Voices, Wednesdays 12:30-2, WCP (formerly SAC) conference room
   • Finding Our Voices: A Women of Color Discussion Group, Mondays 12:30-2,
       SAC 2.112
*Find more groups and additional information at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Other Resources:
   • ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
   • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
   • Nurse Advice Line: 512-475-6877 All day every day
   • Gender and Sexuality Center: http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/
   • Multicultural Engagement Center:
       http://diversity.utexas.edu/multiculturalengagement/
Tips on engaging with the texts:
   • Pre-read and look for the organization of main ideas first
   • Underline/highlight passages you find interesting or important
   • Circle words you want to look up or people who seem important
   • Write thoughts or questions in the margins (unless it’s a library book J)
   • After reading look through again to reflect on the case the author made
           o Do you agree/disagree?
           o What questions do you still have?
           o Write down some thoughts while they are still fresh in your mind
                              COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
Self-Reflective Journals                                                     50 points
You are required to have a journal for this course. Every class will end with 5 minutes of
personal reflection time. This is meant to be a private moment of processing,
questioning, checking in with yourself and exploring new ideas and thoughts while they
are fresh in your mind. For our purposes digital journals will not be permitted, the
process of connecting with the page and the materials is important here. I welcome
journal responses that incorporate visual imagery as well as text. This journal is meant to
be a record of a growth and dialogue with yourself over time. Journals will be graded for
completion and depth of reflection throughout the course.


Weekly Reading Responses                                                    140 points
Every week on Canvas (unless otherwise noted) you should expect to turn in a critical
response to the readings. These critical responses are due the day before class (on
Sunday by 11:59pm) on Canvas. Your responses should include:
    • Minimum 1 paragraph (4+ sentences) with specific quotes or text references
        (with APA citations in text)
            o A strong response might contain…
                   § Connections to SPECIFIC course texts/ideas/discussions-give
                       details
                   § Reflections on how this pertains to your own experience with
                       teaching and schooling, what new thoughts does this text bring
                       up?
                   § A well-reasoned argument using evidence to support why you
                       agree or disagree with the author’s stance
    • 1 question you are wondering about
            o A strong question is…
                   § Open Ended and specific
                   § Shows that you are engaging deeply with the text
                   § Goes beyond platitudes and cliches
                   § Moves past virtue signaling towards shifts in perspective
Examples of strong questions:
    • Yosso gives us a roadmap to move beyond deficit thinking, but I wonder what
        training teachers could receive to help them recognize “resistant capital” (p. 80),
        which is so often seen as a problem?
    • The Anyon piece makes me wonder how can we advocate for changes
        that move us towards equity if class inequity is baked into the education system?
        What goals should individual teachers have, and what can we do through
        collective action?
This response should reflect a deep and critical engagement with the texts and ideas.
You will loose points if your reflection does not demonstrate a deep engagement with
the texts. Submit a text entry on Canvas. No late assignments will be accepted.
Autobiographical Essay                                                150 points
In this personal autobiographic essay you will reflect on your own identity and past
experiences and connect those to the topics we’ve discussed in class. How has your own
identity development (racial, gendered, classed etc…) been influenced by the social and
cultural processes in education we’ve been studying? Are there formative experiences
from your education (Pre-K through college) that informed your identity development?


How were certain paths or ideas made visible or invisible in your own educational
experiences? Be sure to connect at least 3 course readings in your essay.
Service Learning
This course includes a 15-hour service-learning component, which you need to
complete in order to receive credit for class. It’s your responsibility to contact one of
the sites on the Service Learning Opportunities list (or an equivalent site with my
approval) to complete your volunteer service learning. You’ll need the supervising staff
member at your site to sign off on the form certifying that you have completed the
required hours.
Service Learning Analysis
Preparatory Assignments                                                 60 points total
Service Learning Reflection (20 points)
• Describe the context of your service learning. What is the mission of this
    organization? How does their work connect to social justice that aims to transform
    the social conditions of the community it serves?
• What is your role at the site?
Interview Proposal (20 points)
• Which parent, elder, or community member do you plan to interview? Why did you
    select them?
• Submit 5 questions you plan to ask that help you uncover their community/cultural
    wealth.
Service Learning Abstract (20 points)
    • Which approach do you plan to take? Why did you choose it?
    • Briefly explain your concept or key ideas.
    • How will you tie the interview/community cultural wealth gleaned from your
        interview into your project?
Analysis                                                                       150 points
This assignment gives you a chance to apply the ideas from the course. In preparation
for this assignment you will turn in a brief reflection, an interview proposal, and an
abstract to prepare you for this longer assignment (see above).
    1. Interview
        • Arrange a minimum 20-minute interview with a parent or community
            leader/elder to learn about their family/community history and their values
            concerning education and schooling. Before the interview submit 5 interview
            questions for approval. Please select a parent or community member who is
            comfortable speaking with you (even if through an interpreter) and someone


            who gives consent to you recording or taking notes in order to complete
            your class assignment. You may wish to use quotes, so records are important.
        • Analyze your interview recording and notes to find evidence of their
            individual and/or community cultural wealth from their perspective.
        2. Choose one creative response from the options below to apply the ideas
            from the course to your learning in the community
               • Option 1: Lesson Plan and Reflection
                       o Based on the assets identified through your interview, how
                          might you create a classroom lesson that acknowledges, values,
                          and provides space for this cultural wealth in the classroom?
                          Consider how you might highlight these assets and engage
                          with ideas from the course in a k-12 classroom setting. This
                          lesson can take place in the actual classroom or in the
                          community, can involve any discipline/s, and can engage
                          imagined resources and support. I will provide you with a
                          lesson template, and you will add a brief reflection.
               • Option 2: Creative Response and Reflection
                       o Design a visual way to illustrate the assets identified in your
                          interview and connect them to your own learning experience at
                          the site, and our course texts. Artistic mediums could include
                          painting, photography, zines, film/animation, sculpture, comics
                          etc…or you may choose to develop a musical, dance, or
                          theatre-based response. Creative Responses should be paired
                          with a reflection bringing in ideas from the course. The
                          involvement of photographs/filming of participants and
                          community members may require an additional consent form.
               • Option 3: Written Reflection
                       o Consider what you have learned at this site and through your
                          interview. What forms of cultural/community wealth did your
                          interview reveal? Did you see evidence of these assets in your
                          service learning? Tie in ideas from the course.
Opening Presentations                                                          100 Points
Working with a small group you will facilitate a 25-30 minute class dialogue during one
Friday session. This should involve some elements of presentation, but should mostly be
facilitating thought-provoking discussions and/or activities that push the class to explore the
themes and readings on a deeper level. This presentation should not be a summary of the
text, but rather analyze the text to explore an extension or a connection you see. How might
these ideas connect to education/social issues today? How might you extend these ideas to


analyze popular media/culture/trends? How could we explore these issues further through
an artistic or embodied activity? All group members should have equitable roles in the
presentation. Your presentation should have some visual component: power point, prezi,
artifacts, photos, video clips (under 2 minutes) etc. Be prepared to turn in your lesson plan
on the Monday before your present.
A portion of your grade will also come from being present in class to support your peers
and give feedback during their presentations. It is important that you attend all of these
presentations and are generous with your engagement to receive full points.
Final Reflective Essay                                                        200 Points
In this final essay reflect on what you have learned in this course (discussions, service
learning, activities, and readings). How has this course affected your thinking about
teaching and learning? This reflection is open-ended and should honestly describe your
own intellectual and emotional growth during this course. You may wish to look back over
your journal for evidence of this growth. Please be specific and pinpoint 3 readings,
dialogues, or experiences that challenged you or shifted your perspective in some way.
Assignment                                        Points (out of 1,000)
Self Reflective Journals                           50
Weekly Reading Responses                          140
Service Learning Reflection                        20
Service Learning Interview Proposal                20
Service Learning Abstract                          20
Service Learning Analysis                         150
Autobiographical Essay                            150
Opening Presentation                              100
Final Reflective Essay                            200
Participation                                     150
Grade Scale
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F


                                SEMESTER SCHEDULE
 Date             Topic                          Readings                    Due
1
      Introductions                  James Baldwin: A Talk to
      What are sociocultural         Teachers
      influences?
      How do sociocultural factors
1/22- influence education?
1/24
2
      Power and Ideology in          Jeannie Oakes et al: Ch. 2:      RR #1
      Schooling                      History and Culture (pp. 30–52)
      What is the history of                                          W-Letter
1/27- Education in America?          David Wallace Adams-
      What are the purposes of
1/31  schooling?
                                     Fundamental Considerations:
                                     The Deep Meaning of Native
                                     American Schooling 1880-1900
3
      Power and Ideology in          Peter McLaren: Selections from   RR #2
      Schooling                      Life in Schools
      How does ideology, culture,
      and class impact our work in
2/3-                                 Paulo Freire: Chapter 2 of
      schools?
2/7   How can educators critically
                                     Pedagogy of the Oppressed
      engage with knowledge and
      power?
4
      Power and Ideology in          Jean Anyon: Social Class and     RR #3
      Schooling                      the Hidden Curriculum of Work
      How are systems of
2/10- dominance and control          Pedro Noguera: Selections from
      reproduced in education?
2/14  What are the possibilities for
                                     City Schools and the American
      sharing power in schooling?    Dream-chapters 2-3
5
      Race, Identity, and            Ta-Nehisi Coates: Between the    RR #4
      Education                      World and Me (part I)
      What assumptions do                                             F- Service
      educators bring into schools?
2/17-                                Lois Weiner: Challenging Deficit Learning
      Whose knowledge counts,
2/21  whose is discounted?
                                     Thinking                         Reflection
                                     Tara Yosso: Whose Culture Has
                                     Capital?


6
      Race, Identity, and            Ta-Nehisi Coates: Between the     RR #5
      Education                      World and Me (part II and III)
      How is identity constructed in
2/24- relation to power?             Watch: I am Not Your Negro
      How does race and ethnicity
2/28
      impact schooling?
7
      Race, Identity, and            Peggy McIntosh: Unpacking the     RR #6
      Education                      Invisible Backpack
      What ideas are made                                              F-
3/2-  in/visible in schools?         Sherry Marx: Selections from      Autobiographical
      How does power work
3/6   through people and
                                     Revealing the Invisible (1-6, 10- Essay
      institutions in unseen ways?   18 40-43, 52-75, 171-173)
      How might we disrupt it?
8
      Learning Gender,               Monique Morris- Selections        RR #7
      Desire, and Control            from Pushout
      What do we learn about                                           F- Journals
3/9-  gender in schools?             Michelle Fine- Sexuality,
      How do these gendered
3/13  notions impact students?
                                     Schooling, and Adolescent
                                     Females: The Missing Discourse
                                     of Desire
9
      Learning Gender,               C. J. Pascoe: Selections from     RR # 8
      Desire, and Control            Dude You’re a Fag- Intro (1-10)
      How is desire shaped by        Conclusion                        F- Interview
      schooling?
3/23-                                                                  Proposal
      How are our ideas of
3/27  “normalcy” influenced by
                                     Gloria Anzaldúa: Borderlands/La
      schooling?                     Frontera (Chapter 2)
                                     Cris Mayo: The Tolerance that
                                     Dare Not Speak Its Name
      Knowledge,                     Gloria Ladson-Billings-           RR #9
10    Curriculum, and                Dreamkeepers (Ch. 2 -4)
      Culture
3/30-
      What is the value in
4/3   expanding the single story?
      How can students’ culture
      inform curriculum/pedagogy?


      Knowledge,                   Gloria Ladson-Billings-        RR #10
11    Curriculum, and              Selections from Dreamkeepers
      Culture                      (Ch. 5 -7)                     F- Service
4/6-
      What is culturally relevant                                 Learning Abstract
4/10  pedagogy? What is it not?
      How does CRP disrupt our
      ideas about teaching and
      knowledge?
      Knowledge,                   Carter G. Woodson: The Mis-    RR #11
12    Curriculum, and              education of the Negro, pp. 3-
      Culture                      24
4/13-
      What role does curriculum
4/17  play in the social           Watch: Precious Knowledge
      reproduction of inequities?
      What does an empowering
      curriculum look like?
      Imagination, Care, and       Angela Valenzuela,             RR # 12
13    Possibility in the           Intro: 20-29
      Classroom                    Chapter 3 (pp. 75-113);        W- Service
4/20-
      How might we imagine a       Chapter 5 (pp. 161-181)        Learning Analysis
4/24  classroom space that moves
      beyond a desire to control
      and ‘manage’ students?
      What does care look like in
      the classroom?
      Imagination, Care, and       Kevin Kumashiro: Towards a     RR# 13
14    Possibility in the           theory of Anti-Oppressive
      Classroom                    Pedagogy
4/27-
      How is teacher identity
5/1   formed?                      Deborah Britzman: Cultural     F- Journals
      How does anti-oppressive
                                   Myths and the Making of the
      teaching look in our
      classrooms and communities?  Teacher
      Imagination, Care, and       Maxine Greene: Teaching as     RR #14
15    Possibility in the           Possibility
      Classroom
5/4-
      How can we sustain ourselves bell hooks- Teaching to        F- Final Paper
5/8   and our communities?
                                   Transgress: Engaged Pedagogy   Due
      What intentions/ideas will


guide you as you move                                Service Learning
beyond this course?   Audre Lorde- The               Comp Form
                      Transformation of Silence into
                      Language and Action
