                            Introduction to Health & Society
                            H S F301 (78629) / SOC F308S (83740)
                  Summer 2019 | MTWThF 11:30 – 1:00pm | ECJ 1.314
Instructor
Name: Nina Palmo, Ph.D.
Email: npalmo@utexas.edu
Office hours: Schedule an appointment at https://palmo.as.me
Office location: RLP 3.734
Teaching Assistant
Name: Randi Saunders
Email: randi.saunders@utexas.edu
Office hours: Tuesdays 10:00-11:00am & Wednesdays 1:30-2:30pm
Office location: RLP 2.622L
Course description
The principle objective of Introduction to Health & Society is to offer students a broad overview
of health and society from a variety of disciplinary perspectives. We will examine how social
forces influence health and disease, including cultural, economic, and demographic
considerations. We will explore why rates of disease vary among different populations and how
cultural and structural inequalities affect morbidity and mortality rates and determine access to
healthcare. How do economic factors, politics, and historical biases against specific populations
shape modern-day experiences of health and illness? We will also examine how social forces
shape the very definitions of health, illness, and disease categories, and thereby medical
diagnoses and treatments. Finally, we will explore contemporary issues in health and health
care and how these issues affect us as individuals and as a society. This course is built around
lectures (including guest lectures), class discussion, and film screenings.
Course objectives
The goals of the course are for students to be able to analyze contemporary health issues from
a variety of disciplinary perspectives, to explain how social and economic forces shape health
behaviors, and outcomes, and to critically evaluate assumptions, motives, and evidence that
individuals and groups use to make specific claims about health and illness.
Required materials
The majority of readings will be posted on Canvas, as there is no textbook for the course.
However, two purchases are required.
    • Gawande, Atul. Being Mortal: Medicine and What Matters in the End. Picador, 2015.
    • Squarecap subscription ($12 per semester)
    • You will also need access to a Netflix subscription twice this semester
                                                                                                 1


Squarecap
Attendance and participation will be measured using Squarecap. Every student should sign up
for a subscription at squarecap.com. During each lecture, I will pose questions to the class that
you will answer through Squarecap using a laptop or smartphone. (If you do not have one of
these devices or the cost presents a hardship, please see me.) You will be able to answer these
questions through a regular browser window on a laptop, through a mobile browser on your
phone, or through the Squarecap app. Ideally, you should use the campus Wi-Fi rather than
your phone’s data plan for this.
Office hours
To ease scheduling and reduce waiting times for students, I ask all students to schedule office
hours with me online. Please go to https://palmo.as.me to book an appointment. You and I will
both receive confirmation emails once you have scheduled an appointment. You can also
reschedule and cancel appointments online (up to a few hours before your appointment). If all
available appointments are full, please let me know and I will add some availability.
Accessibility of instructor
I prefer to answer as many questions as possible in person, either before or after class or during
office hours. This allows me to get to know students better through face-to-face conversations
and to provide better, timelier, and more in-depth answers to your questions. I receive a large
volume of email, so I can usually only provide very brief answers by email. If you need to send
an email, please use proper email etiquette with correct spelling and grammar. Treat an email
like an assignment – you will not be graded on it, but any correspondence you have with your
professors and TAs contributes toward their overall assessment of you as a student. The TA and
I will respond to your emails within 48 hours, excluding weekends. If you have not received a
response within that timeframe, please feel free to follow up again.
Late work policy
Late work will be accepted for a 10% penalty for every 24 hours past the due date. In other
words, 10% will be deducted from papers submitted between 1 minute late and 23 hours and
59 minutes late; 20% will be deducted from papers submitted between 24 hours and 48 hours
late, and so on. After each exam, no papers on previous topics will be accepted.
Exams
If you need to miss an exam due to a religious holiday or other documented event that cannot
be rescheduled, please let me and your TA know as soon as possible. A missed exam will be
result in a grade of zero. Make-up exams after the fact will be allowed only in cases of
documented emergencies and/or a note from Dean of Students.
Exam accommodations
If you are entitled to exam accommodations, it is your responsibility to make arrangements
with the Services for Students with Disabilities Office. According to their website: “All requests
for SSD test space for the Summer Sessions must be made 5 business days (1 week) prior to the
test date.”
                                                                                                   2


Attendance and missed course material
Your attendance in this course is expected. If you are unable to attend class, it is your
responsibility to approach other classmates to find out what you might have missed. The TA
and I not have the resources to go over material that was presented in class on an individual
basis. After class each day, I will provide a copy of the PowerPoint slides for the day on Canvas.
The slides are provided after class because I often edit the slides right until lecture starts, and
on occasion we do not make it through all of the material I had planned. I want to make sure
you have a copy of the exact slides I used during class.
Special needs
The University of Texas provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations for
students with disabilities. To determine whether you qualify, please contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (diversity.utexas.edu). If you are uncertain about your needs, please
don’t hesitate to speak with me anytime during the semester.
Academic integrity and misconduct
All work for this course must be your own. Academic dishonesty or misconduct of any sort will
not be tolerated. This includes a strict prohibition of using work you have written for other
classes for our class writing assignments. You will be held accountable for understanding and
accepting responsibility for the University of Texas’s policies on scholastic dishonesty as well as
the UT honor code which are outlined at the following web addresses:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/spot_honorcode.php
Grading
Final letter grades will be assigned using the scale below. Please note that out of fairness to all
students, I cannot round up grades upon request.
   A    94.0-100           B 84.0-86.9            C     74.0-76.9        D 64.0-66.9
   A-   90.0-93.9          B- 80.0-83.9           C-    70.0-73.9        D- 60.0-63.9
   B+   87.0-89.9          C+ 77.0-79.9           D+    67.0-69.9        F 0-59.9
                                                                                                    3


Course requirements
1. Six response papers (30%)
Six short reading response papers are due during the semester. You should submit two papers
on topics covered on the first exam, two papers on topics covered on the second exam, and
two papers on topics covered on the third exam. Otherwise, you may choose which topics you
would like to write about. Each paper should be approximately 400-600 words in length and
should respond to the prompts provided on the reading response paper assignment handout.
All reading response papers are due on Canvas one hour before class begins.
2. Three film response papers (15%)
Three documentary films are part of the curriculum for this course. For each film, you should
submit a film response essay. A prompt will be provided on Canvas for each film. Film response
papers will be graded according to the same criteria as reading response papers. Film response
papers are due on Canvas by 11:59pm on the day AFTER the scheduled film day.
3. Being Mortal book assignment (5%)
To prepare for our in-class book discussion, you will need to submit an assignment in response
to a prompt that will be provided. A prompt will be provided on Canvas. The book assignment is
due on Canvas one hour before class begins.
4. Exams (45%)
This course has three exams to assess your understanding of the course material. The exams
are not cumulative and there is no final exam. Each exam is worth 15% of your final grade.
5. Attendance & participation (5%)
Attendance and participation will be measured using SquareCap. Each class day will count as a
separate entry on Canvas. There will be no distinction between excused and unexcused
absences, but at the end of the semester the lowest single lowest attendance grade will be
dropped.
                                                                                               4


Course schedule
 Thursday, June 6   Introduction to the course
 Friday, June 7     1 – Social causes of health & longevity
 Monday, June 10    2 – Epidemiological transition theory
 Tuesday, June 11   3 – Social construction of health & illness
 Wednesday, June 12 4 – Medicalization
 Thursday, June 13  5 – The U.S. health disadvantage
 Friday, June 14    Film: Take Your Pills
 Monday, June 17    Exam 1
 Tuesday, June 18   6 – Gender & health
 Wednesday, June 19 7 – Race & health
 Thursday, June 20  Guest lecture: Obesity in America (Sam Twito)
 Friday, June 21    8 – Social relationship & health
 Monday, June 24    Guest lecture: Mama Sana (Taylor Huntley)
 Tuesday, June 25   9 – Childhood & adulthood health
 Wednesday, June 26 10 – Socioeconomic status, stress, and health
 Thursday, June 27  Film: Stress: Portrait of a Killer
 Friday, June 28    Exam 2
 Monday, July 1     11 – Mental health & illness
 Tuesday, July 2    12 – LGBTQ health
 Wednesday, July 3  13 – Immigration & health
 Thursday, July 4   No class
 Friday, July 5     Film: In Defense of Food
 Monday, July 8     14 – Models of health care coverage
 Tuesday, July 9    15 – Aging and wellbeing
 Wednesday, July 10 Book discussion: Being Mortal
 Thursday, July 11  Exam 3
                                                                  5
