                                   Multicultural Israel
                                              Spring 2019
                                    JS 365 * ANT 325L * MES 325
                                              Unique #s:
                                         39370*31700*40672
                                              RLM 5.116
                                        T-TH 12:30pm-2:00pm
                                  Dr. Amelia Rosenberg Weinreb
                                     Office hours by appointment
                                  amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu
                                         Phone: 512-232-2204
I. Course description
Israel has the highest proportion of migrants of any country in the world. The notion of
absorption—the social and economic integration of Jewish immigrants—has remained an
explicit ideal since the founding of the modern state of Israel in 1948. Yet, absorption is also an
ideological tool that often runs counter to the contemporary lived experience of citizenship,
participation, nation building, minority rights, and the conflicting interests of today’s
multicultural publics. Taking these tensions as a starting point, this course explores the complex
social fabric that comprises contemporary Israeli society, and that shapes Israeli identity,
practice and politics. We will focus on the lived experience of Israel’s increasingly diverse
population. This includes populations associated with the majority: veteran Ashkenazim and
Mizrahim; more recent Jewish immigrants from the former Soviet Union, Ethiopia, Latin
America and France; religious communities such Haredim and modern-Orthodox. It also
includes ethnic and religious minorities such as Arab-Israelis/Palestinians, Bedouins, Christians,
Muslims, Druze, and Black Hebrews, as well as laborers from all over the globe who migrate to
Israel and refugees from Sudan and Eritrea. How fluid are boundaries between these groups?
How different are their interests, tastes, desires and needs? How committed are various publics
to a coherent nation-building project and to contemporary Zionism? To explore the breadth of
multicultural Israel without sacrificing cultural specificity and theoretical depth, the course is
organized into three integrated units: a) historical background of Israel and its populations; b)
Israel’s citizen-state relationships, identity and belonging, and c) ethnographic case studies of
Israel-specific multicultural issues, and general contemporary multicultural theory.
Note: This course carries a Global Cultures flag: Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
                                                   1


II. Objectives
Upon completion of the course, students will have developed the analytic skills to:
a) Articulate central themes of multiculturalism specific to the Israeli social and historical
context, particularly in relation to the founding of the development of the modern state of
Israel
b) Place course themes of citizenship, participation, nation building, minority rights in the
framework of anthropological and multicultural theory
c) Converse, with historical and ethnographic sensitivity, about a variety of populations and
socio-cultural groups in Israel
d) Develop deeper familiarity with one such group living in Israel through extensive research
e) Write an annotated bibliography independently
III. Course Format
This course is designed to be a smaller-scale seminar for motivated students interested in
learning about contemporary Israel, but does not presume any prior knowledge about the
country or region. It is run as series of lively, fast-paced, interactive meetings in which students
are encouraged to articulate and synthesize ideas with clarity, accuracy and sensitivity, and
defend positions through evidence based on our common reading list. I will be asking for your
feedback regularly so there is an open flow of communication and room for improvement
during the semester. This is the rhythm of our weekly meetings:
Tuesdays-A small team of students, delegated in advance, will facilitate the discussion along
with the instructor, raising questions, stimulating debate, and integrating ideas from the
readings into the collective analysis of multicultural Israel. We have 10 student leadership days
designated for Fall 2017.
Thursdays-An instructor-led discussion provides further the context and background for the
readings, filling in gaps, and summarizing their key data, arguments and ideas in the reading.
IV. Course Requirements
a) Attendance and Participation (10%): Regular attendance is not only the key to your own
success as a student in this course, but also for the quality of the course as a dynamic whole.
Arriving late and leaving early disrupts class flow, so make every effort to arrive to class on time
with your materials prepared and phones and computers, etc. off. This is a low-tech, highly
interpersonal seminar.
b) Three, two-page typed reading responses (10%): These can be unfettered reflections,
reactions, critical commentaries, or overviews of the day’s assigned reading(s). These responses
are informal, but are required. They give students time to think through issues that interest
them without the pressure of a letter-grade evaluation, but will be marked with a √+, √, or √-
based on their quality. Important Note: You may choose what three readings you wish to
respond to over the course of the semester. However, to receive credit, reading response
papers must be via email the by 9pm before we we discuss your selected reading, and
cannot be made up at the end of the course. Please label each response by both title of
reading and number: response #1, response #2, response #3.
c) Annotated Bibliography Projects (30%): Each student will select an Israeli population or
sub-population that they would like to study in greater depth throughout the course, and
                                                     2


produce an annotated bibliography of the most relevant existing scholarly literature and
multimedia material on that population (rubric posted on Canvas).
d) 2 tests (25 % and 25%): Cover core concepts, vocabulary, history, ethnographic examples,
and theory in our texts. Each test will include a short-essay question that will encourage you to
develop an idea in writing.
The tests will include the following question format and point values. The second test covers
material from the pre-test, and includes maps.
15 multiple choice                 (2 points each=30 points)
15 fill-in-the-blank               (2 points each=30 points)
5 short answer questions           (4 points each=25 points)
1 short essay                      (1 essay       =15 points)
                                   _____________________
                                                    100 points
Note on question content: One week prior to each test, I have students post two questions they
would like to see appear on the test on Canvas, and often draw up to 80% of test content from
student suggestions! These suggested questions also prove useful for students to study and
prepare for tests. Both tests include 3 points worth of extra credit at the end that allow you to
showcase careful reading for details or special attentiveness to class discussion.
Summary of Course Requirements and Percentage of Final Grade at-a-glance:
a) Active, intellectually rigorous participation in seminar component: 10%
b) 2-page reading response papers (3 total, each one 3.3% of your grade): 10%
c) 2 in-class tests (25%, 25%): 50%
d) Annotated bibliography assignment: 30%
Extra Credit
Students may earn up to 3 points of extra credit per semester towards their final grade. Rolling
extra credit opportunities are announced during class, but not posted on Canvas.
V. Grading
Grades in this course will be based on the following scale:
A 94-100%         Excellent grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides
                  relevant details and examples; draws clear and interesting connections,
                  exceptionally original, coherent and well-organized; ideas clearly
                  written/stated, outstanding classroom participation
A- 90-93%         Very good grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly;
                  provides relevant details and examples; draws clear connections; ideas
                  clearly written/stated
B+ 85-89%         Good grasp of some elements above, others need work
B 83-84%          Satisfactory grasp of some elements above
B- 80-82%         Uneven, spotty grasp of the elements above
C+ 75-79 %        Limited grasp of the above
C 73-74%          Poor grasp of the above
C- 70-72%         Very poor grasp of the above
                                                   3


D 60-69%          Little evidence of grasp of material, having done readings, attended class,
                  or completed assignments
F   0-59%         No evidence of having done readings, attended class, or completed
                  assignments
Complete written assignments on time: I am committed to returning assignments to you
promptly so you can benefit from my feedback while material is fresh in your mind. I do not
grade papers or exams until I have the entire printed set in front of me. For these reasons, I do
not accept late assignments. Bring a hard copy at the beginning of class on the day it is due. If
you anticipate a problem, or have a history of deadline problems, meet with a consultant at the
learning or writing center to help you plan ahead:
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Grading policy: I am very happy to discuss how you may improve your work, and will read early
drafts, but I will not reconsider grades on papers or tests. I grade all the papers and tests in a
set at the same time to ensure that I am applying the same standards, and I make every effort
to be fair.
Plagiarism and copying: Although this course is designed for creative, individual work and
synthesis of ideas from various sources, any work submitted by a student in this course for
academic credit must be the student's own work. Should copying occur from another student,
both the student who copied work and the student who gave material to be copied will both
automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be
extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of plagiarizing:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/faculty/plagiarism/preventing.html
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Using office hours, getting help: I check email regularly, and will usually reply to emails within 24
hours for basic questions, and no longer than three days for more complicated ones. My door is
open from 11am-12pm on Thursdays. Ask for an appointment if you can’t come in during my
regular hours.
VI. University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community. In this course, that means we will all work to ensure that the discussion
space is shared relatively equally among the participants, and to maintain an atmosphere of
respect for each other’s perspectives and arguments, especially when there are strong
disagreements.
Students with disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
                                                  4


3986 (video phone). Please contact me as early in the semester as possible to let me know if
you need anything to participate fully.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, students are required to notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will certainly give you an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
VII. About the Readings
Through reading a common set of texts on the topic of multicultural Israel and taking
advantage of ethnographic and historical material and news media and film, we familiarize
ourselves with the breadth of Israel’s diverse population, and consider the national socio-
cultural landscape as a whole. We will also read a variety of multicultural theory that both lauds
multiculturalism as an ideal, and disparages it as divisive for a liberal democracy.
Note: A required course pack will be available for purchase. Details to follow
VII. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As
we go through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class. Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
Key dates at-a-glance:
Plan ahead!
 Tues. 3/12 Test 1
 Tues. 5/7      Test 2
 Thu. 5/9       Annotated bibliography due
   Date                Main Topics, text(s)              Readings to       Evaluation, work to do at home
                                                          complete
                                                         before class
                                                     UNIT 1
                           INTRODUCTION: SOCIAL AND HISTORICAL CONTEXT
                        What kinds of people live in Israel, and why do they live there?
            What historical context do we need to be literate about contemporary Israeli society?
            Why was the State of Israel founded and what implications does its foundation have?
 T 1/22    Introduction to this class and its structure;
           Israel history, culture and society pre-test
 Th 1/24 A brief overview of Israel’s populations        Rubin
           Rubin Chapter 4: Society                      pp. 121-150
 T 1/29    *Student-led                                  Rubin
           Rubin, Chapter 4, Society, cont’d             pp. 151-188
 Th 1/31 Mizrahim:                                       Zamkenai
           “The Politics of Defining Jews from           pp. 1-26
           Arab Countries”
                                                   5


T 2/5   *Student-led                               Lahav
        Feminism and Religion:                     pp. 50-70
        “The Women of the Wall: A Metaphor for
        National and Religious Identity”
Th 2/7 Refugees and Asylum Seekers:                Paz
        “Ordered disorder: African asylum seekers pp. 1-21
        in Israel and discursive challenges to an
        emerging refugee regime”
T 2/12 *Student-led                                Benezer
        Ethiopian Israelis                         pp. 157-173
        “Israeli “Mixed Families” with Members of
        Ethiopian Origin: Encounters in the Public
        Space”
Th 2/14 Create a population study guide
        In class exercise on group boundaries,
        boundary-crossing, and boundary-
        keeping
T 2/19  Meet in PCL 2.370 at 12:30pm                           Due: Typed, hard copy paragraph
        Library instruction day for annotated                  describing the population you are
        bibliographies                                         interested in for your annotated
                                                               bibliography, and why they are
                                                               significant
                                                               Due: Population study guide
Th 2/21 Historical Atlas of the Jewish People      Barnavi pp. Keep a running list of what you
                                                   1-40        consider the most important historical
                                                               details
T 2/26  *Student-led                               Barnavi pp.
        Historical Atlas of the Jewish People      40-80.
Th 2/28 Israel is Real                             Cohen
                                                   pp. 89-119
T 3/5   *Student-led                               Cohen
        Israel is Real                             pp. 120-157
Th 3/7  In-class review for test                               Post on discussion board by 9pm:
                                                               What would you like to see on test #1?
                                                               Submit 2 sample questions
T 3/12
                                                               Test #1
                                               6


                                                 UNIT 2
                   CITIZEN-STATE RELATIONSHIPS, IDENTITY, AND BELONGING:
             What does it mean to be an Israeli citizen, or excluded from Israeli citizenship?
        What is the relationship between citizenship, identity belonging and multiculturalism?
                How does do of citizen-state relationships shape the Arab-Israeli Conflict?
[Note: There is somewhat reduced reading load during this unit as students are completing annotated bibs]
Th 3/14 The Dynamics of Multiple Citizenship         Shafir and
                                                     Peled
                                                      pp. 1-34
T 3/19  Spring Break
Th 3/21 Spring Break
T 3/26   *Student-led                                Sagi and
        “Constitutional Incrementalism”              Nachtomy
        In Israel’s Multicultural Challenge          pp. 1-25
Th 3/28 The IDF                                      Israel’s
        “Service in the IDF and the Boundaries of    Multicultural
        Israel’s Jewish Collective                   Challenge
                                                     pp. 180-199
T 4/2   *Student-led                                 Jews in Israel
        Kibbutzim Transforming,                      pp. 151-173
        Updates on Kibbutz life
Th 4/4  Can Israel be both Jewish and                Gavison
        Democratic?                                  pp. 1-4
        Debates surrounding this question
T 4/9   Watch: City of Borders (documentary on a
        gay club in Jerusalem)
Th 4/11 Israel/Palestine (Dowty: 2008)               Dowty          Watch: documentary clips provided on
        The Jewish Story                             pp. ix-44      Canvas
        The Arab Story                               pp. 45-68
        The first pass at peace                      pp. 137-161
                                                 UNIT 3
                 MULTICULTURAL CASE STUDIES AND MULTICULTURUAL THEORY:
           What ethnographic examples help us understand Israel’s multicultural challenges?
                  How applicable are theories of multicultural to Israel’s national reality?
       What can multiculturalism tell us nation building in the case of Israel, and more generally?
T 4/16  The Jewish Holidays as Platform for          pp. 234-267
        Multicultural Discourse of Identity
                                              7


        We Pay our Taxes and Serve in the Army pp. 287-305
        (focus on the marginalization of the Israel
        Andalusian Orchestra)
Th 4/18 Multiculturalism in the news                          Bring in contemporary article featuring
                                                              Israeli identities
T 4/23 Multiculturalism in the media                          Bring in film clips/Youtube to share
Th 4/25 Multicultural theory, contemporary          Articles
        debates                                     posted on
                                                    Canvas
T 4/30 In-class annotation workshop                           Post on discussion board by 9pm:
                                                              What would you like to see on test #2?
                                                              Submit 2 sample questions
Th 5/2  Optional Class: open office hours in
        classroom for support for annotated bibs
        or test content
T 5/7                                                         Test #2
Th 5/9  *Party: Israeli holiday food and drink *              Annotated bibliographies due
         Course evaluation
                                             ***
                                              8
