TECHNICAL COMMUNICATIONS ARC 361T/381T                                                               SYLLABUS 1
Instructor:  Marla Smith marlasmith@utexas.edu
             Office Hours:      TU, TH GOL 2.206
TA:          Andrea Alvarez andreaalvarezbarrios@gmail.com
             Young‐Park F2012
Prerequisites:
             Undergraduate: Architecture 521E/G, 520E/G, or 520L/530T with a grade of at least C.
             Satisfactory completion of third-year portfolio review.
             Graduate: Graduate standing; Architecture 694, (or 393 and 394);
Description: In this class you will continue to integrate digital tools into your design process.
             We will use 2D, 3D and BIM software to develop and document various projects. We will
             concurrently review various standards for representation in both the classroom and office
             environments. Topics will include drawing set organization, office standards, estimating
             techniques, and data organization as they relate to both Building Information Modeling and
             Professional Practice.
             During the first half of the semester we will move through a series of technical and graphic
             representation exercises designed to develop your skills while reinforcing the organizing
             principles of digital drawing and model creation. We will explore the implementation of data
             driven design and Building Information Modeling.
             During the second half of the semester we will work on an assigned project. We will have group
             reviews covering specific drawings including: diagrams, plan, section, detail, schedules and
             perspective views. These pin-ups will focus on the ability of the drawings to illustrate, focus, and
             clarify your design intentions.
             You may use the program of your choice to represent your design. You must show proficiency in
             BIM through completion of the assignments. By the end of the semester you will be able to
             design, model, render and represent your project intent through efficient aesthetic and
             technical presentation. You will also show a clear understanding of drawing set organization,
             data organization, and data representation.
             I am looking for a critical attitude toward the design, the software and the presentation.
Hardware: You should have a computer in accordance with the School of Architecture Computer Initiative.
             Output: Computer Lab in Sutton.
             I will be giving short presentations on Tuesday and Thursday. I will give you a schedule of the
             topics and various handouts.
Software:    Before the first day of class you should download and install the lab versions of
             Autocad Architecture, Revit https://www.autodesk.com/education/home and
             Enscape3D https://enscape3d.com/educational-license/
             I recommend that you use the download now option instead of install now.
             Note: When accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are
             not required to purchase Creative Cloud services to sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to create a free
             Adobe ID. https://accounts.adobe.com/


TECHNICAL COMMUNICATIONS ARC 361T/381T                                                     SYLLABUS 2
Evaluation:
Attendance: Three unexcused absences will result in the lowering of your grade by one letter.
             Four unexcused absences will result in a grade no higher than a C and my recommendation
             that you drop the course. Five unexcused absences = F.
Progress:    Everyone is starting out at differing levels of proficiency therefore your grade will be based on
             relative progress.
Assignments: There will be a series of required assignments throughout the semester. You should complete
             assignments by the beginning of class on the due date.
Grades:
             X       Excused Incomplete - Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family
                     emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning
                     this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans' offices
                     and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before
                     the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling, according to the
                     School of Architecture policy.
             F       Fail - Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
                     acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when you have excessive unexcused
                     absences.
             C-, D   Poor - Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
                     presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required
                     competence and knowledge base.
             C+/C Average - Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not
                     pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
             B-/B/B+ Above Average - Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
                     completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort
                     to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential
                     for excellence.
             A/A-    Excellent - Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness,
                     visual language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
                     concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
                     complete on all levels.


TECHNICAL COMMUNICATIONS ARC 361T/381T                                                           SYLLABUS 3
Recommended resources:
            Architect’s Studio Handbook, Patterson
            Lynda.com/LinkedIn Learning (free tutorials for current UT Students)
            Video Tutorials included in assignments
            Autodesk Design Academy, https://academy.autodesk.com/software/revit
Accommodations:
            At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations
            should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with
            Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be provided,
            students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
            Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
            including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
            dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
            scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
            Feric Fevolution                             290 Mulberry, New York, ShOP Architects
