                           PSY 301: Introduction to Psychology
                                University of Texas at Austin
                                       Summer I 2019
Course overview
This course is designed to introduce you to the science of psychology. The goal is to
cover the main areas of psychology so that you can use psychology principles to
understand yourself and the people around you. Psychology will also strengthen your
awareness of how complex and intriguing human behavior can be. Whenever possible,
we will use in-class discussion, out-of-class assignments, demonstrations, and videos to
illustrate key concepts in this course.
Course Information
Dates: June 6 – July 12, 2019
Day and Time: MTWThF, 11:30 AM – 1:00 PM
Course location: WAG 214
Unique #83094
Instructor Information
Dr. Sarah Angulo
e-mail: sarah.angulo@utexas.edu
Office location: SEA 4.318
Office hours: Tuesday and Wednesday, 1:00 PM – 1:45 PM, and by appointment
Please send me an email if you plan to come to my office hours. I often have several
students coming to see me each day, and I like to make sure I’ve set enough time aside
for each student.
Course Reading
Required: Myers, David G. (2014). Exploring Psychology (9th edition). Worth Publishers:
New York.
You can rent or buy the text as a paperback or hardcover. Please do not purchase the
newer editions – they are expensive, and I supplement with newer content when
necessary. All exams are based on the 9th edition.
Course Website
http://canvas.utexas.edu
Course goals
After completing this course, you will:
• Understand basic statistical and methodological concepts, and be able to evaluate
    the appropriateness of research conclusions
• Be aware of the fundamental principles, theories, and research in psychology,
    especially in the areas of biological psychology, development, consciousness,


    learning, memory, cognition, motivation, health, personality, social relationships,
    disorders, and therapy
•   Apply psychology concepts to everyday life and your experience
Grading
Activity                                          Points              Percentage
Midterm examination                               140                  31.8%
Final examination                                 140                  31.8%
Application papers (10 x 14 points each)          140                  31.8%
Research participation                              20                  4.5%
_____________________________________________________________________
                                                  440                 100%
The points and percentages necessary for each letter grade are as follows:
  Letter grade   Points               Percentage
  A              394 and above        89.5% - 100%
  B              350 – 393            79.5% – 89.4%
  C              306 – 349            69.5% - 79.4%
  D              262 – 305            59.5% - 69.4%
  F              261 and below        59.5% and below
You are each responsible for the grade that you make in this class. I give you the grade
that you have earned. I do not bump grades up or change students’ grades under any
circumstances.
This class is a collaborative effort between you and me. I promise to do my part by
showing up each class day ready to lecture on the material and explain it in an
engaging way that you can understand. I need you to do your part by coming to class
willing to learn and prepared to discuss the material of the day.
I am hopeful that you will earn a high grade in this class, and enjoy yourself while
doing so.
Exams (280 points total)
Exams cover one section of the course at a time. There are two required exams in the
course. Exams are based on material from the book (35%) and the class notes (65%).
Exams contain 70 multiple choice questions (2 points each).
Make-up exams are administered only for documented illness, documented family
emergency, religious holiday, military service, or participation on a University athletic
team. If you know in advance that you’ll miss an exam, please provide me with
documentation as soon as possible so we can schedule an alternate time to take the
exam. In the event that an emergency or severe illness prevents you from taking an


exam, you need to follow these procedures: 1) notify me by email within 24 hours of the
missed exam; 2) provide me with documentation (e.g., note from physician) at the next
class period; and 3) schedule a make-up exam to be taken within three days of the
missed exam.
All students missing exams for other reasons will receive a 0.
Application papers (140 points)
On ten occasions across the semester, I will offer a brief activity for students to complete
during the week. Each of these activities involves practicing with current course
material and applying psychology to everyday life. These activities will tie into the
course material that we are studying at that time. Activities may include TED talks,
practice worksheets, critiques of well-known research, and brief reflection papers.
Students who complete the reflections receive full credit.
Application papers are due via Canvas on the dates listed in the syllabus. Details are
listed in the Assignments section of Canvas.
Research requirement (20 points)
In addition to coursework assigned by your professor, this class has a participatory
requirement discussed on this page—the PSY 301 Research Requirement.
Psychological data and theories depend upon the research methods used to obtain
them. Thus, exposure to research and research methods is an experience that is
invaluable to understanding psychology. At most universities, some exposure to
psychological research is generally required of students enrolled in introductory
psychology courses. At The University of Texas at Austin, the Department of
Psychology requires each student enrolled in PSY 301 to complete five research credit
hours to gain some familiarity with, and appreciation of, the aims, methods, problems,
and results of psychological research. The PSY 301 Research Requirement must be
fulfilled to receive a grade for the course.
There are two options for completing the PSY 301 Research Requirement:
    •   Writing a research paper
    •   Participation in research experiments
The research requirement options will be discussed during one of the first meetings of
the Psychology 301 class. If you feel you cannot complete the requirement in either of
the ways outlined here, you should meet your PSY 301 teaching assistant to discuss
possible alternatives.
Attendance and extra credit
You are expected to come to each class session.


At random times during each unit, I may give extra credit for attendance. Sometimes I
give one point of extra credit for class attendance for the day. Other times, students who
are present are given an extra-credit activity to complete. Students will not be told
beforehand when these extra credit days will be, so the best way to earn all your points
is to come to class very consistently.
Students who come to class regularly do better in the course. There are no excused
absences. You are adults and when you choose to miss class, you are responsible for the
materials that you miss. I do not post PowerPoint slides, so if you miss class, you’ll need
to request the notes from a classmate.
Material covered during lecture can be quite different from material covered in the
book, so you can see why regular attendance is required.
Classroom Discussions
Issues in psychology can be among the most relevant and personal in the academic
world. Your opinion is valuable and I want to hear from you. Listening to new
perspectives in a discussion will facilitate your own learning and that of others. The
following ground rules will aid us in having useful, respectful discussions about these
sensitive topics:
• Take responsibility for your own learning in this class. Come to class, pay attention,
     take notes, and do not distract others.
• Speak up if you have a question or do not understand.
• Respect others’ opinions, even if you do not agree.
• Feel free to disagree with any opinion that is expressed, but disagree respectfully
     and only after you fully understand the other point of view.
• Derogatory comments or personal attacks are not acceptable.
• Agree that we may disagree.
• Leave what others say in the classroom.
If, during this course, personal issues are raised that you would like to discuss with a
counselor, please ask me for a referral or contact the UT Counseling and Mental Health
Center at (512) 471 - 3515. I am willing to help you find the right resources for you and
your situation but I cannot become your counselor.
Faculty/Student Interaction:
According to the Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education,
interaction between faculty and students is very important. I encourage you to contact
me if you have any concerns, questions, or problems. I also invite you to attend my
office hours.
Writing Center


The University Writing Center (www.uwc.utexas.edu) offers free, individualized,
expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in
basis. Their services are not just for writing with "problems." Getting feedback from an
informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help
students develop strategies to improve their writing. The consultants are trained to help
you work on your writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your work.
Policy on academic integrity
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is highly
valued and seriously regarded at The University of Texas at Austin. More specifically,
you and other students are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard
of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. This is a very basic
expectation that is further reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum,
you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the
utmost honesty, which requires you to:
    • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
    • complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or
        obtain assistance in preparing them;
    • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of
        your academic discipline; and
    • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or
        another student.
Consequences of academic dishonesty, which can include a failing grade, suspension,
or expulsion from the university, can be found at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You should check your UT e-mail daily to stay current with university-
related communications, some of which may be time-critical.
Emailing the professor
I encourage my students to contact me via e-mail and come talk to me during office
hours. Faculty-student interaction is one of the most valuable parts of the
undergraduate experience.
When sending an email, please be courteous and reasonable. Consider each email you
send to a professor as a business letter. Some people are tempted to be more sarcastic or
informal through an email than in a face-to-face conversation. Please use a greeting,
proper spelling and grammar, and a salutation. Also, please allow for a reasonable time
to respond to the message. I will not respond to emails that ask for information that can
be found on the syllabus or information that has been covered extensively in lecture.


Documented Disability Statement
If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 TTY for users
who are deaf or hard of hearing). Present the letter to me at the beginning of the
semester so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business
days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will
need. For more information, visit http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/using-testing-
accommodations/
Religious Holidays
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of
the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Class Etiquette
Be respectful of your classmates and your professor.
    •  Laptop Computers – Take notes with a paper and pen. Laptops often create a
       distraction for the user and people seated nearby. Only students with
       accommodations from Services for Students with Disabilities may use a laptop
       computer in class. Scientific studies show that students process and remember
       course material better, and perform better on exams, when they take notes with a
       paper and pen. https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/a-learning-secret-
       don-t-take-notes-with-a-laptop/?redirect=1
    •  Privacy – Do not share personal information outside of class. Some of the
       issues we discuss in class are personal and sensitive. While I do not expect
       anyone to divulge personal information, people often do. I ask you to respect
       each other’s privacy. Nobody should feel threatened by sharing experiences
       which relate to the material.
    •  Phones, tablets, etc. – A low level of distraction is essential to our learning
       environment. Please turn off or silence electronic devices. The same rule applies
       to text messaging.


Course calendar, Part I
                                                    Paper due by 11:59
Month     Day(s)   Chapter Content                  PM
June         6             Course introduction
                           Thinking critically with
             7          1
                           psychological science
                           Thinking critically with
             10         1                           John Oliver segment
                           psychological science
                        2  The biology of behavior
             11         2  The biology of behavior
                           Developing through the   Nadine Burke Harris
           12, 13       4
                           lifespan                 TED talk (6/13)
             14         5  Gender and sexuality
                                                    Free choice - gender,
             17         5  Gender and sexuality
                                                    sexuality, and race
                        7  Learning
             18         7  Learning
                                                    Classical and operant
             19         7  Learning                 conditioning
                                                    worksheets
                        8  Memory
             20         8  Memory
                           Thinking, language, and
           21, 24       9
                           intelligence/wrap-up day
                           Midterm examination
             25
                           (Chapters 1 - 5, 7-9)


Course calendar, part II
 Month       Day(s)      Chapter    Content                             Paper due by 11:59 PM
                 26        10       Motivation and Emotion
                 27        10       Motivation and Emotion              Mindset reflection
                                    Stress, health, and human
                           11
                                    flourishing
                                    Stress, health, and human
                 28        11
                                    flourishing
                           12       Personality
                                                                        Gratitude letter
 July             1        12       Personality
                                                                        reflection
                           13       Social psychology
                                                                        Defense mechanism
                  2        13       Social psychology
                                                                        quiz
                  3        13       Social psychology                   Big Five Inventory
                           14       Psychological disorders
                                    Independence Day holiday - class
                  4
                                    does not meet
                  5        14       Psychological disorders
                                                                        Stanford Prison Study
                  8        14       Psychological disorders
                                                                        evaluation
                  9        14       Psychological disorders
                           15       Therapy
                                                                        Therapeutic Lifestyle
                 10        15       Therapy
                                                                        Change
                 11        15       Therapy, wrap-up day
                                    Final examination (Chapters 10 -
                 12
                                    14, 9:00 AM - 11:30 AM likely)
Please note that chapter 3, consciousness and the two-track mind, is not covered in
lecture but is your responsibility to learn on your own. The material will be on the
exam.
Chapter 6, sensation and perception, is not covered in lecture and is not on the exam.
The instructor reserves the right to make changes to the syllabus. Students will be
notified of all changes.


                                  The Research Requirement is Mandatory
You must complete five research credit hours. You have two options (only need to complete one):
1. Participate in five hours of experiment sessions:
     https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/psychology/undergraduate/Psychology-
     301/Research%20Experiments.php
2. Write a five-page research paper:
     https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/psychology/undergraduate/Psychology-301/Research%20Paper.php
What happens if I don’t complete the research requirement?
If you do not satisfy your research requirement properly, you will receive an X (incomplete) for your
grade. You will be given the following long semester to complete the requirement for your grade to be
released. Otherwise the X will convert to an F!
Start your requirement early on in the semester and get it done to avoid receiving an incomplete.
Important Information:
Check out the Important Dates for the research requirement
here: https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/psychology/undergraduate/Psychology-301/Important-Dates.php.
SONA
Log into SONA (https://utexas.sona-systems.com) to sign up for and track your experiment schedules and
credits. You will receive an email with your USER ID (your UT EID) and a random password at the
beginning of the semester.
You are limited to 1.5 credit hours for completing online (web) studies, the remaining hours must be
completed in person.
Please show up on time for the research studies. If you do not show up for experiments without first
notifying a researcher or the research coordinator, you will be assigned an unexcused no-show. If you
accumulate three unexcused no-shows, you will be asked to complete the research paper instead of
research studies to fulfill your research requirement.
If you are under the age of 18, your account is locked. You must first submit a parental permission
form to complete the Prescreen Survey. You must wait till your 18th birthday to complete studies on
SONA. If your birthday is towards the end of the semester, I recommend you complete the research paper
to satisfy your requirement. If you will not turn 18 this semester, you must complete the research paper.
Research Paper
If you are submitting a paper, do not wait last minute! Get your topic approved by your TA as soon as
possible.
Contact Info:
If you have any questions about SONA and the research requirement you can contact the Psychology
Research Coordinator @ psyresearch@austin.utexas.edu. If you have specific questions about your
research paper, contact your TA.
