Gotham and Modern Architecture                     1
Spring 2020
Gotham and Modern Architecture
INSTRUCTOR: Dr. Anthony Alofsin FAIA
TIME AND PLACE: Wednesday, 9:00am – 12:00, SUT 2.110
Course Unique Numbers: ARC 342R (00840) and ARC 388R (01105)
Prerequisites:
None. For undergraduate and graduate students interested in historical research in any field
throughout the university. This course is not intended to fulfill the University’s undergraduate
writing component. Maximum Class size: 15
Course Format:
Cities throughout history have been lenses for studying the history of architecture. This
research intensive seminar will look at the arrival and transformation of modern architecture in
New York City from 1900 to 1968. Its themes consider, among other topics, the intersection of
tradition versus modernity, Americanism versus Eurocentrism, and technology versus stylistic
image. Students will make frequent class presentations and pursue a major term-long research
project, the topic of which will be chosen in consultation with the instructor.
Educational Objectives;
By using the city as a lens cultural, social, and political forces become inseparable from the role
architecture plays in civic and domestic life. Pedagogical goals include creating transcultural
research methods and rigorous structuring of research agendas as well as the development of
critical thinking, articulation of ideas, and exposition of logical arguments.
Evaluation:
Grades will be based on class attendance, participation and quizzes; (thirty percent); assigned
projects (seventy-percent). Class participation is obligatory to receive an optimal grade. In the
case of group projects, students should discuss any particular concepts about credit for work with
the instructor during the semester. Pluses and minus will be used with letter grades as permitted
by University rules. Attendance is mandatory with no unexcused absences. If you must obtain
an excuse for absence, arrange this with your instructor in advance of class. Missing an
unexcused class may result in a half-letter deduction from your grade: missing two classes
will result in a full letter deduction.
Evaluation Criteria:
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is more complex than grading in other
academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be
evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of
issues: grasping the ideas and understanding of the project at hand, combined with an appropriate
process of inquiry; process: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas;
resolution: the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through representation.


Gotham and Modern Architecture                      2
A student in the School of Architecture must earn a grade of C or better in order for the course to
count toward the degree, and to progress to the next studio. A grade of C- will not satisfy degree
requirements or prerequisites for the design studios that follow.
Grade Descriptions:
A/A-                 Excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-             Above Average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C                  Average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-          Poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F                   Fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
this grade will be assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
X                 Excused Incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing
work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion
date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which you are
enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
Assignments and Papers:
All assignments must be submitted on or before due dates. Any late assignment will be reduced
one letter grade per day of delay. The only excuse for a late assignment is illness confirmed by
a physician's letter or dean’s letter. Instructions on the format of papers will be discussed in class
and included in the course assignments folder on Canvas. Any student taking the course
credit/no-credit will receive a failing grade if he or she does not complete the course
requirements by the assigned dates. Pay special attention to instructions on the medium for
submitting your work. If hard copy printouts are required, then a digital submission is not
acceptable; sometimes both may be required. Submit papers as double-spaced single sided text
with page numbers.
Lecture etiquette:


Gotham and Modern Architecture                             3
No food or eating in class. Classes start promptly at the designated; do not arrive late as often
important announcements occur at the beginning of class.
COMPUTER USEAGE IN CLASS:
Computers are a tremendous tool, but they can be distracting during lectures. Unless otherwise
indicated by the instructor, CELL PHONES AND SIMILAR DEVICES ARE NOT
ALLOWED DURING LECTURES. Texting, work on other courses, email, or anything else
except careful listening, participating, and note taking for this course is not a good use of your
time and suggests that you may not only be failing to take advantage of lectures, but you may
also be distracting other students. Please respect this course requirement.
Honor code and plagiarism:
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community. Academic dishonesty, which includes plagiarism, is a serious offense at the
University and subject to disciplinary action. For the University’s definitions and policies about
academic dishonesty, see the Registrar’s rules Sec. 11-802,
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi0910/app/gi09.appc03.html. If you have any questions
about citations or the appropriate use of materials, please contact your instructor.
PLAGIARISM: DO NOT COPY ANY MATERIAL WITHOUT CITING ITS SOURCE. This includes not
only print material but digital material including images and text from the internet. If you have questions about
citations ask your instructor, a reference librarian, or the University’s writing center. Your submissions may
be checked by university software to detect problematic use of uncited or incorrectly cited material.
Special Accommodations:
At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations should notify
the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities Office. To ensure
that the most appropriate accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471-
6259 or 471-4641 TTY
Religious holidays:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Emergency situation:
Please familiarize yourself with recommendations regarding emergency evacuation. For
questions contact the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767 and review material
on the Office’s website: UT Safety, or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/.
Texts
Books covering course content will be found in the Architecture and Planning Library, Battle
Hall. Articles, image libraries, and other materials will be available on the course site on Canvas.
Some monographs may be put on Reserve in Battle Hall as required.


Gotham and Modern Architecture                   4
Recommended for Purchase:
A. Alofsin, Wright and New York: The Making of America’s Architect (Yale, 2019)
BIBLIOGRAPHY:
*See links section on course Canvas site for file with full listings.
COURSE RESERVES:
*Monographs are located in Architecture and Planning Library, Battle Hall. See our Canvas site
and UTCAT for listings.
WEEKLY SCHEDULE OF LECTURES
Gotham and Modern Architecture                                            Spring 2020
INSTRUCTOR: Dr. Anthony Alofsin FAIA
OFFICE HOURS: Wednesday 1:00-2:00 and by appointment, tel. 471-7803 or Email:
alofsin@austin.utexas.edu.
WEEK 1
January 22. Introduction to course and Basic Research Methods.
Assignment 1 issued.
WEEK 2
January 29. Overview in two parts.
WEEK 3
February 1. Class presentations. Assignment 1 due in class and on Canvas.
Assignment 1 due in class: survey.
Assignment 2 issued: Bibliography I
WEEK 4
February 12 Advanced Research Methods I. Meet at Architecture and Planning Library, Battle
Hall.
WEEK 5
February 19. Advanced Research Methods II.
Assignment 2 due: Bibliography I. Class presentations.
Assignment 3 issued: Bibliography II
Reading: A. Alofsin, Wright and New York: The Making of America’s Architect (Yale, 2019)
WEEK 6
February 26. Case Studies: Technique
Assignment 3 due: Bibliography II. Class presentation.
Assignment 4 issued: Topic and Abstract


Gotham and Modern Architecture                   5
WEEK 7
March 4. Case study: Wright and New York
Assignment 4 issued due: Topic and Abstract
Assignment 5 issued: Outline
WEEK 8
March 11. Guest lecturer, TBA.
Assignment 5 due: Outline
WEEK 9
March 18. Spring break.
WEEK 10
March 25. Research Strategies and Topic Critiques.
Assignment 6 issued
WEEK 11
April 1. Tutorials.
Scheduled by appointment
WEEK 12 Presentation Preparation
April 8.
WEEK 13
April 15. Student Research presentations. Part 1
WEEK 14
April 22. Student Research presentations. Part 2
WEEK 15
April 29. Summary. LAST CLASS. Assignment 6 due. Submit final paper in hardcopy and
digital format on Canvas, 9:00am. No late papers accepted except for written medical excuse
WEEK 16
May 6. Studio review week. Feedback and critiques by appointment
