                 Introduction to Digital Humanities
                              INF 315E.01 - Spring 2020
Instructor​: Liz Fischer (she/her)               Unique numbers: ​27450, 31099
Email​: ​lfischer@utexas.edu                     Course numbers: ​INF 315E.01, AMS 315
Office hours: ​ M 1-2:30, W 3-4:30, and          Class Meetings: ​MWF 11-12 in​ ​FAC 7
by appointment
Office​: FAC 16
Textbook
   ● Humanities Data in R​ by Taylor Arnold and Lauren Tilton. Available for free
       through UT Libraries​.
About the Course
Focuses on the critical application of exploratory techniques in digital scholarship in the
humanities, including principles of exploratory data analysis and the R programming
language to perform both analysis and visualization. Practice in critiquing how text,
images, audio, and spatial data are analyzed and represented from a humanistic
perspective that considers intersectional power dynamics surrounding ability, class,
gender, and race in culture.
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and
discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.


Learning Objectives
    ● Interpretation​: Students will explain quantitative information presented in
        multiple forms (e.g., equations, graphs, diagrams, tables).
    ● Representation​: Students will convert quantitative information into multiple
        forms (e.g., equations, graphs, diagrams, tables).
    ● Calculation​: Students will demonstrate fluency in the mechanics and language
        or symbolism necessary to manipulate numerical or non-numerical information
        to solve a problem.
    ● Application & Analysis​: Students will make judgments and draw conclusions
        based on the quantitative and qualitative analysis of data (numerical or
        non-numerical).
    ● Assumptions & Limitations​: Students will identify assumptions underlying
        their methods of interpretation including data identification, data curation, data
        extraction, data analysis, data representation study and evaluate how their
        results and outcomes may be affected.
    ● Communication​: Students will express qualitative and quantitative evidence in
        support of an argument or in justifying their work, including formatting,
        presenting, and contextualizing the evidence used
Coursework & Grading
You will be graded on the following assignments this term:
    ●   Weekly assignments (30%)
    ●   In-class work & labs (5%)
    ●   Data Set Review (15%)
    ●   Midterm Exam (10%)
    ●   Final Project: Critical Data Analysis Research Paper (40%)
Assignment Descriptions
Weekly assignments
In the first half of the semester, the weekly assignments will be R programming
problem sets. In the second half of the semester, the weekly assignments will be Canvas
discussion posts discussing the readings for the week. You may always have a
one-class-period extension on weekly assignments ​if​ ​you come to my office hours to
discuss the assignment before the extended deadline.


Data Set Review
This assignment is meant to make data curation decisions more transparent. By writing
a review that focuses on how and why and for whom data sets are created for public
use, we start a conversation about how these data sets are built and how those decisions
shape the study of culture in the humanities and reflect assumptions and limitations in
human knowledge and experience.
Midterm
The midterm exam will assess learning of R programming skills and the critical
perspectives introduced through weekly assigned readings. The midterm will assess
understanding of the calculation, representation, and interpretation of data. Questions
will include scenarios to solve with R, and data visualizations or outputs to give written
interpretations of.
Final Project: Critical Data Analysis Research Paper
The Final Research Project will include a proposal, a working draft presentation, and a
final draft. The final research paper asks you to construct or find and analyze both
quantitatively and qualitatively your own data set from cultural heritage materials
found online. Methods of inquiry for this paper should be drawn from what we have
covered this semester. Analyzing data will include information about what kind of data
it is, why it's important to ask questions of it, and why you chose the methods of
analysis you chose. This paper will include an abstract, a literature review, a description
of methodology, and a discussion of what you observed and any hypotheses or
discoveries that may have arisen out of this analysis. This paper will be 8-10 pages.
Grades
Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness,
all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For
example, a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University
does not recognize the grade of A+.
•       A=94-100                  •      B-=80-83                 •      D+=67-69
•       A-=90-93                  •      C+=77-79                 •      D=64-66
•       B+=87-89                  •      C=74-76                  •      D-=60-63
•       B=84-86                   •      C-=70-73                 •      F=0-59


Class Policies
This class will always strive to be a safe space for learning and development; that is, a
space where we can develop and refine the knowledge and skills necessary for
culturally competent practice. Learning requires stretching beyond comfort zones,
and yet feeling safe is a prerequisite for a good learning environment. As we all bring
diverse experiences to our shared classroom, here are some general guidelines to
help create the environment we want.
Accessibility
Your success in this class is important to me​. If there are aspects of this course that
prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible.
Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and course requirements.
I am committed to making all course materials as accessible as possible​, and to
working with students if any of these materials are inaccessible. We will all need
some accommodations in this class, because we all learn differently. If you need
specific accommodations, let me know. Any conversations we have about
accommodations are confidential. ​I am happy to take extra steps to ensure
accessibility for all students​.
Attendance
I make no distinction between types of absences. If you need to miss a class, I do not
need to know the reason; there is no “excused” absence. You may miss up to 6 classes
without penalty (though keep in mind deadlines and the usual late work policy still
apply). Beyond that, each absence will result in a one-letter drop in the final course
grade.
Behavior
Be respectful of your colleagues. There is zero tolerance for slurs or derogatory
language. In general, don’t discriminate based on race, gender presentation, marital
status, religion, disability, age, or sexual orientation.
Everyone in our class has the right to be addressed in accordance with their personal
identity. The university provides me with a class roster containing each student’s


legal name and sex marker. ​I will gladly address you by the name and gender
pronoun with which you identify.​ Please let me know your preferred name and
pronouns early in the semester, so your peers and I can address you appropriately.
Email Policy
The most effective way to reach me outside of class is via email. You can use the
email address listed on the first page of this syllabus, or the message system in
Canvas. Email is an official form of communication at UT; see the departmental email
policy below for more information.
Email correspondence should be done with a professional tone. This means including
a meaningful subject line, a greeting, and a sign-off with your name. If your would
like a response, make sure it is clear what you need from me. I will do my best to
respond to you within 24 hours, but please note I do not respond to emails after 8pm
or on weekends. If you know you will need a fast response, please plan accordingly.
Learning Procedures
It is never okay to laugh at, belittle, or harass a colleague because of their opinion or
point of view. ​Always think about how your comments will support our learning
as a group​. But safe doesn’t mean operating in an environment where beliefs and
ideas go unchallenged. Challenging colleagues to explain their arguments in a
thoughtful manner is key to creating an engaging learning community.
     ● Make a commitment to understand unfamiliar positions from the context or
        point of view of your peers.
     ● Speak for yourself rather than for a group (use your “I” statements).
     ● Be present – really listening to your colleagues will dramatically improve your
        in-class experience and prevent most understandings.
     ● Take risks in speaking honestly; this will help the learning of the group.
Note on Language
I recognize that everyone will have different proficiencies in the English language,
and English may be a second, third, or even fourth language for some. This class is
designed to give you proficiency in a particular dialect and style of the English
language that is typical to academic and professional communication. The goals of
this class do not make your own language practices any less valuable and valid;


rather, they seek to empower you to succeed during your university and professional
careers. There are many resources on campus available to assist you in achieving the
goals of this class. If you are struggling with completing assignments in the dialect of
English we will be using, please let me know as soon as possible and I can connect
you to resources that may help.
Late Work
I will accept work up to one week after the assigned due date, with a 5% grade
deduction for each class-day it is late. After one week, no late work will be accepted
unless prior arrangements have been made.
Technology Policy
Computers will be essential for the work we do in this class. You are permitted to use
own computer during class when we are doing computer-based work. You are also
welcome to use the computers in our classroom if you cannot or prefer not to use
your own device. Learning the appropriate and respectful use of these technologies
in professional settings, such as a college classroom, is important. That being the case,
laptops are only to be used for class work, and cell phone use is not permitted
during class.​ Improper use of technology during class may result in being counted
absent for the day.
University Policies
Scholastic Honesty
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will
result in a major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies
to all drafts and assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the
Office of the Dean of Students and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain
circumstances, the Dean of Students will initiate proceedings to expel you from the
University.
So, take care to read and understand the Statement on Scholastic Responsibility,
which can be found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.


php​ If you have any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help
before handing in the assignment.
Students With Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or
1-866-329-3986 (video phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. More information is available on the Services for
Students with Disabilities website at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Email Accounts
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will
use this medium to communicate class information. You are therefore required to
obtain a UT email account and to check it daily. All students may claim an email
address at no cost by going to the IT Services website at
https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/.
Emergency Information
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University
of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
be found on the UT emergency page at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency


Other Important Emergency Information
You can find more information about planning for emergencies on the Emergency
Preparedness site at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. You
can learn more about the Behavior Concerns Advice Line on their site at
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php


Tentative Schedule
                                               Assignment   You should have
 Week   Day                Topic
                                                   Due         prepared...
       Jan 22      Course introduction
  1
       Jan 24   Digital Humanities history
                  Making meaning in the                       Readings on
       Jan 27                                  Discussion 1
                        humanities                               Canvas
                        Visit to PCL
  2    Jan 29
                 (meet in Learning Lab 3)
                   Introduction to R &                       Read ​Humanities
       Jan 31
                   Programming Basics                          Data​ Ch. 1
                                   Calculation
               Calculator, Objects, Numeric
        Feb 3                                    P-Set 0    Read Ch. 2.2 & 2.3
                          Vectors
  3
        Feb 5  Logical vectors & Subsetting                 Read Ch. 2.4 & 2.5
        Feb 7              Lab 1
       Feb 10 Character Vectors, Data Frames     P-Set 1     Read Ch. 2.6-2.7
  4    Feb 12 Matrices, I/O, Adv. Subsetting                Read Ch. 2.8 & 2.9
       Feb 14              Lab 2
                       Representation & Interpretation
       Feb 17       Tables, Histograms           P-Set 2     Read Ch 3.1-3.3
                Quantiles, Binning, Control
  5    Feb 19                                                Read Ch. 3.4-3.6
                           Flow
       Feb 21              Lab 3
              Combining Plots, Aggregation,
       Feb 24                                    P-Set 3     Read Ch. 3.7-3.9
                   Applying Functions
  6            Multivariate Analysis, Scatter
       Feb 26                                               Read Ch. 4.1 & 4.2
                           Plots


   Feb 28               Lab 4
   Mar 2      Text, Points, Line Plots         P-Set 4    Read Ch. 4.3-4.5
          Scatter Plot Matrix, Correlation
 7 Mar 4                                                 Read Ch. 4.6 & 4.7
                       Matrix
   Mar 6                Lab 5
   Mar 9               Review                  P-Set 5
   Mar 11             Midterm
 8
                                                            Readings on
   Mar 13      Project Development
                                                              Canvas
                        Spring Break -- No Class
                         Application & Analysis
              Proposal development
   Mar 23
            workshop; Finding datasets
                                                         Read Ch. 6 intro &
   Mar 25                                   Discussion 2   supplementary
 9                 Network Data
                                                              material
                                                         Read Ch. 10 intro &
   Mar 27                                                  supplementary
                Text Analysis Data
                                                              material
                                                         Read Ch. 9 intro &
   Mar 30            NLP Data               Discussion 3   supplementary
                                                              material
                                                         Read Ch. 7 intro &
10 Apr 1          Geospatial Data                          supplementary
                                                              material
                                                         Read Ch. 8 intro &
   Apr 3            Image Data                             supplementary
                                                              material
                      Assumptions & Limitations


               Scraping, curating & cleaning
       Apr 6
                             data
  11          OpenRefine Workshop at the
       Apr 8                                            Dataset Report
                             PCL
                                                                 Readings on
       Apr 10          Ethics in data
                                                                     Canvas
                                                Research
              Literature reviews: engaging in
       Apr 13                                   question
                   scholarly conversation
                                                  draft
  12
       Apr 15      No class-- conferences
                   Debates in the Digital                        Readings on
       Apr 17                                  Discussion 4
                        Humanities                                   Canvas
       Apr 20     Proposal presentations
                                                            Proposal
  13   Apr 22     Proposal presentations
       Apr 24         Writing abstracts
                  Giving & incorporating
       Apr 27
                          feedback
  14   Apr 29           Peer review             Abstract
                Class canceled-- instructor
       May 1
                          traveling
       May 4       No class-- conferences
                   Debates in the Digital                        Readings on
       May 6                                   Discussion 5
  15                    Humanities                                   Canvas
              Publishing & sustaining digital                    Readings on
       May 8
                        scholarship                                  Canvas
                                 Communication
Finals  TBD     Final project presentations    Final paper
