 ADV370/PR367 Integrated Communications Management Fall 2018 (HBpst 8_27_18)
 TH 3:30-6:30pm BMC 3.206
 Professor: Patricia Stout, Ph.D.                 Office: BMC 4.344
 Email: pstout@mail.utexas.edu                    Office Hours: T&W 1:30-2:30pm (& by appt.)
 TA: Jay Jisoo Kang                               Office: BMC 4th floor Cubicle TBA
 Email: jayjisukang@utexas.edu                    Office Hours: TBA
 COURSE DESCRIPTION
 The course PR 367/ADV 370J stresses the interrelationships between IBP activities and the competitive
 environment. The course focuses on strategic decision-making across a broad range of interrelated areas:
 crafting the most effective IBP mix; ethical concerns; utilizing research findings; establishing objectives;
 determining appropriations and budgets; developing creative strategy; utilizing personal selling; sales
 promotion; direct marketing; public relations; crisis management; branded events; social network
 communication; off- and on-line media; viral and guerrilla marketing; and, client/agency relations.
 Objectives
 This writing-intensive course has three main objectives:
     1. Help you develop the skills needed to make a wide range of interconnected advertising and public
         relations management decisions – decisions similar to what you will encounter in the “real
         world.”
     2. Familiarize you with “the case method” – a structured, field-tested approach to decision-making
         that is a practical and useful method for addressing a variety of communications management
         issues.
     3. Guide you in the further development of your professional presentation skills.
  To accomplish these objectives, this course requires you to:
     -   Assess problems and opportunities, isolate key facts, and rank-order salient management issues.
     -   Learn independently and from each other to make up for areas you haven’t yet studied.
     -   Think in a precise and structured manner and follow a structured decision-making process.
     -   Make decisions and create action plans appropriate to the situation under consideration.
     -   Efficiently and persuasively write up and present your analysis and sell your
         recommendations.
     -   Defend your position and analyses against comments and criticism from your colleagues.
 Prerequisites
You are expected to have successfully completed prerequisite courses and have a solid foundation in
marketing as well as the advertising and public relations functional areas. If necessary, quickly identify
background voids that exist and bring yourself up to date on any areas that may be new to you. Because
the course requires a common advertising and public relations foundation, students are responsible for
                                                      1


timely background leveling. Advertising and PR management teams form the basis for a significant
portion of the course. The ability to work effectively and efficiently in a group is essential to successfully
completing this course.
  Materials
  There is no required textbook for the course. We’ll be doing a LOT of reading. Assigned materials are
  mandatory unless specified otherwise. Be prepared for class discussion of all assigned materials.
  Readings an d additional materials will be uploaded on the class Canvas website
  http://courses.utexas.edu or assigned via Internet links. You are also expected to be proactive and
  find relevant articles on your own to share with the class. Some cases will be available as a Course
  Packet (available when and where as announced in class).
  While it is not required reading for the class, I highly recommend Jon Steel’s Perfect Pitch.
  It is an extremely useful book about making presentations and winning new business. It will be
  useful not only for the presentations in this class, but for presentations you make in other classes
  and as you move forward with your careers.
  Expectations
  Class time will be dedicated to discussion of readings and formal presentations of cases.
  Therefore, significant emphasis is placed on class participation (20% of your final grade),
  including questions, comments, and discussion among colleagues. Come prepared and ready to
  take an informed stand. A lively discussion among colleagues is the objective. Air your ideas.
  Rebut others. Ask questions. There are no dumb or wrong questions.
Come prepared and ready to take an informed stand. A lively discussion among colleagues is the
objective. Air your ideas. Rebut others. Ask questions. There are no dumb or wrong questions.
Throughout your academic career you’ve heard this phrase. But in ADV370/PR367, it is
imperative that you believe it. In this course – as in life –you’re likely to experience uncertainty,
have less information than you’d wish for to make your decision, and lack sufficient time to do what
you feel could be your best work. We learn from one another via asking questions and working
with others.
  ASSIGNMENTS
  In the first week we’ll discuss the case method and course structure and in preparation for our
  first case. The class meets one day per week for three hours. Within that time frame we will cover
  lecture, readings discussion, exercises, guest speakers, case discussion and case presentation. The
  size of the course enrollment will further determine the number of groups and group size as well
  as the weekly schedule for assigned discussion and/or presentation. More details will be available
  once the course roster is finalized.
                                                      2


 COURSE GRADING
Your final grade will be calculated as follows:
Course participation*                     =       15%
Individual case briefs (2)**              =       35%
Team case briefs (2)                      =       20%
Team case presentations (2)               =       20%
Management team peer evaluation (2)       =       10%
        Total                             =       100%
*Note that attendance and participation is captured within these grades.
**Note that this includes 5% for a practice case, in addition to 2 individual case briefs (15% each); you
have the option of rewriting one individual brief if you wish to amend your individual case points at end
of semester.
In general, team members receive the same grades for group exercises and projects. The individual
case papers will be opportunities to demonstrate your own skills and abilities. Late work will not be
accepted. Final course evaluations will use plus/minus grades.
     Course Participation: Your course participation (CP) in this course is worth 15% of your
     grade. For full points, you must be in regular attendance (both in class and online), punctual, and
     have a professional demeanor. The most important part of this grade is that you thoughtfully
     participate and engage consistently throughout the entire course. Participation includes active
     engagement in discussions, exercises, and other in-class activities, some of which will have specific
     grade point values. Missed assignments will also be factored into this grade. Being successful in
     this class requires that you demonstrate that you can work productively and respectfully with
     colleagues.
     Peer Evaluations: Your peers will evaluate your contribution to the team assignments. Their
     evaluations will be based on your demeanor, attendance, and participation in ALL group work,
     including exercises and discussions (both in class and online), production of the team case
     briefs, and the presentations. While the grades for your team case brief and presentations are
     the same for all team members, your peer evaluation grades may differ. If a group member
     underperforms during the class, his or her team members should use the peer evaluation to
     report this underperformance. 10% of your overall grade will come from the aggregated
     feedback your group members provide in your peer evaluation for each team case.
     Individual Case Briefs (ICB): The ICB is a written paper with its grade based on your
     format, statement of the problem, list of critical factors, definition of alternatives, a pro/con
     discussion, conclusion, additional comments, and references. Each individual case brief should
     be approximately 3 single-spaced pages in length (not including references), unless specified
     otherwise. Your ICBs must be produced individually, reflecting your independent ideas and
     thoughts and not after consulting members of your group or other classmates. Use 12-pt. Times
     New Roman font, 1-inch margins, and do not derive creative ways to waste space – this will
     decrease grades accordingly.
     Team Case Briefs and Presentations (TCB/TCP): This grade is a team grade, meaning that
     each team member receives the same grade for the case brief and presentation, as in the “real
                                                      3


      world.” The written team brief grade is based on the same standard for your individual case
      briefs (e.g., your format, statement of the problem, list of critical factors, definition of
      alternatives, a pro/con discussion, conclusion, additional comments, and references) and should
      be approximately 3 single-spaced pages in length.
      The presentation grade is based on your team’s overall professionalism, introduction,
      teamwork, delivery, visual aids, statement of the problem/critical factors, and definition of
      alternatives, pro/con discussion, conclusions, and additional comments. Presentations should
      be approximately 20 minutes in length. Failure to adhere to this timeframe will result in point
      deductions from the team’s presentation grade. Each team member should present
      approximately the same amount of time; it’s the responsibility of the group to figure out how
      to divide the presentation among its members effectively and equitably. Additional time will
      be allocated to Q&A from the audience.
Grade System
The following grade scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades. Note that a C or higher
is required to move forward to IC Campaigns. I do not round grades (e.g., a 92.49 is an A-).
                    A=      92.5 to 100
                    A- =    89.5 to 92.49
                    B+ =    86.5 to 89.49
                    B=      82.5 to 86.49
                    B- =    79.5 to 82.49
                    C+ =    76.5 to 79.49
                    C=      72.5 to 76.49
                    C- =    69.5 to 72.49
                    D+ =    66.5 to 69.49
                    D=      62.5 to 66.49
                    D- =    59.5 to 63.49
                    F=    59.49 or below
                                                     4


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from
attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may
not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment
from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. Please
notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
If you have a documented disability that requires academic accommodations, please contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or (512)-410-6644 (video phone) or contact:
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/ Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an
official accommodation letter from SSD.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially
the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting
this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty
damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more
information visit: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your
e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions at:
http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
                                                       5


individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
COUNSELING & MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support: Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p, SSB,
5th floor, 512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu OR CALL CMHC Crisis Line:
24/7, 512.471.2255, cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW (M-F 8-5pm,
CMA 4.134, 512-471-7642)
                                                       6


7