New Prototypes for
Urban Housing
ARC w694
Vertical Studio
University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
Summer 2019
Martin Haettasch - First Summer Session
Dean Almy - Second Summer Session


                                                                                    ARC w694
                                                                                    Vertical Studio
                                                                                    University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                    Summer 2019
                                                                                    Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                    Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                    office hours by appointment
Studio Description
This Vertical Studio will be taught over two summer sessions; the first one is
taught by Martin Haettasch, the second by Dean Almy. Both sessions are
conceived as a conceptual whole, building upon each other to enable students to
produce a substantial piece of design research on the issue of the contemporary
dwelling in the city across multiple scales. Each session (“Part 1 / Part 2”) may
temporarily isolate relevant issues into discrete assignments to serve as building
blocks towards a comprehensive project.
Course Objectives
The studio seeks to interrogate the status of the singular architectural “cell”
(the “dwelling”) as part of a larger urban system. Students will engage not
only with the architectural scale but equally gain an awareness of the reciprocal
relationship between the architectural and the urban scale. The belief that
“city” and “architecture” are not mutually exclusive realms of “planners” and
“architects” respectively, but part of a the same space-making endeavor will
guide our design decisions at all scales. Students will continue to hone their
skills in manipulating form, program, and the deployments of structural and
material systems and processes in ways that express a coherent set of values
and objectives achieved through architecture and its effects. At the same time,
students will be introduced to discursive trajectories in architecture and urbanism
that allow them to position their design work in relation to contemporary thinking
on the city. Students are expected to engage in an ongoing “feedback” loop
between ideas and their formal manifestation, and their critical evaluation within
the discourse of the discipline.
Course Work
Students will typically work individually over the course of the summer session.
Specific assignments may require work in groups of two students or more, and
will be introduced accordingly.
                                                                                                                                           2


                                                                                            ARC w694
                                                                                            Vertical Studio
                                                                                            University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                            Summer 2019
                                                                                            Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12             GOL 4.130
                                                                                            Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                            office hours by appointment
Studio Project - First Summer Session (Part 1)
Dwelling as Material Culture
‘It is not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social
existence that determines their consciousness.’
                                                                                (Karl Marx)
At the intersection between the material and the social and thus at the very core
of architecture lies the problem of the dwelling. How do we choose to live, how
do we negotiate our personal space with others, and how do our dwellings form
clusters, districts, and cities? The personal space of the dwelling is inherently
an urban problem. For generations architects have addressed the dwelling
question. In many cases the smallest unit of personal space was conceived as a
model for an overarching positioning of the relationship between the individual,
architecture, and the city. Whether postwar suburban houses or the minimal
dwellings of the European avant-garde of the 1920’s, the form of the dwelling
reflects individual and collective aspirations at the same time as it allows groups
and communities to distinguish themselves from each other and create distinct
identities. The space of the dwelling gives form to our attitudes towards others,
economic and ecological resources, and our position in the world. We are how
we live. The material manifestation of our built environment shapes us as much
as we shape it, and as architects we have a responsibility to creatively engage
this feedback loop between the material and the social.
Studio Project: City Segments
The question of housing in America’s growing urban centers has gravitated
towards extremes in recent years: On the one hand efforts at significant
densification have sparked the development of multi-story apartment blocks in
the professional, or debates about micro units in the academic world. On the
other hand the free standing single family house remains to date the unchallenged
ideal of most American families. But while multi story apartment blocks tends
to cater to young professionals and a transient population with a lesser need
for family-friendly spaces, rising property values make the free standing urban                                 1. Individual: Hans Hollein, Mobile Office
home an increasingly unattainable dream for many middle class families. (This                                   2. City: Levittown
lack of a middle ground of medium-density urban housing has been accurately                                     3. Atelier 5, Siedlung Halen
addressed within discourse as the “Missing Middle”) Between these (equally
unsatisfactory) extremes lies a vast range of possibilities for medium density
                                                                                                                                                     3


                                                                                     ARC w694
                                                                                     Vertical Studio
                                                                                     University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                     Summer 2019
                                                                                     Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                     Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                     office hours by appointment
housing types that - despite its rich history - has remained underexplored as a
response to the exacerbating housing crisis in American cities. There is an urgent
need to commit to a rigorous architectural experimentation and spatial innovation
with regards the segment of medium density housing defined by densities
around approx. 30-100 dwellings/hectare.
In Part 1 we will approach this research through both the study of precedents
from a variety of global contexts and the subsequent scaling up in design from
the scale of the unit to the scale of the city. How does the basic dwelling unit
organize the needs for individual and shared spaces? How can various activities
(live/work) be organized within a unit? How do units agglomerate, form clusters,
and neighborhoods?
The “final” project for the first summer session with be an ideal city of types.
Within a given organizational framework of (hypothetical) urban systems, students
will develop clusters of dwellings at different densities. The urban parameters in
Part 1 will be fixed, and the students’ projects are to be understood as much
as ideal types as they are expected to address issues of access, conditions of
front/back, lighting, gradients of public to private spaces, communal and private
exterior spaces, and parking.
Students will develop specific user profiles for their “city segments,” speculating
on changes affecting urban populations and the way they live. From traditional to
non-traditional family and group structures to live/work arrangements or emergent
ideas of co-living spaces: Our resulting “ideal city” will reflect one of the city’s
greatest assets in its pluralistic nature, allowing for the coexistence of forms of
dwelling and the ideas that shaped them.
Program
Students will begin to develop their program throughout the course of the
assignments. At the core is the question of the smallest unit of the urban dwelling
and the urbanistic consequences its agglomeration. “Program” therefore is not
understood as a given square footage dedicated to one exclusive use, but a
calibration of space, and the possibilities for its use. Students will approach this
subject by developing user group profiles that allow for spatial innovation both
                                                                                                         1. MVRDV, Patio Islands
within and between units. Densities (units per hectare or acre) will be used as
                                                                                                         2. OMA, Nexus World Housing
one of the control metrics to assess the impact of students’ explorations.
                                                                                                                                            4


                                                                                         ARC w694
                                                                                         Vertical Studio
                                                                                         University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                         Summer 2019
                                                                                         Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12              GOL 4.130
                                                                                         Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                         office hours by appointment
Site:
A “site” will be handed out at the beginning of assignment 3 of Phase 1. The site will
be literal in that is does not represent any existing site in the city, but rather acts as
a canvas for an ideal city. Students will be assigned “plots” of land on the site within
whose confines they will explore their designs a prototypes. The site will be marked by a
number of constraints with regards to access, front/back relationships, plot sizes and FAR
requirements. The site in Phase 1 will furthermore contain a number of characteristics
reflective of the “real” site given out in Phase 2 in the second summer session.
Studio Logistics
Studio Structure
The studio structure aims to support the development of one project at the end of the
second summer session. Assignments will temporarily isolate specific topics or areas of
inquiry pertaining to research, conceptual development, site, or technical development.
Assignment 1
Discursive Practice - Ideas <> Form (1 week)
In this assignment students will examine housing typologies relevant to the studio
program with regards to their specific operational and organizational strategies, formal
and structural logic, and the urban spaces they generate. Case studies will be scrutinized
across scales, ranging from the city to the detail. At the same time, the case studies
provide a vehicle to situate the problem within the evolution of the discipline. The goal
of this research is to generate a reference catalogue for the entire studio, which will
introduce possibilities and limits of particular strategies.
learning outcomes:            Critical Thinking, Graphic Skills, Model making
media:                        model, diagrams, drawings
readings:                     t.b.a.
Assignment 2: Unit (1.5 weeks)
Students will identify a set of problems relevant to the question of contemporary urban
housing. After establishing specific user groups and their needs (examples could include
co-living spaces, live-work types, or intergenerational living...), student will write their
                                                                                                             O.M. Ungers,
own program brief and develop a single living unit in response to their brief.
                                                                                                             IV. Ring Berlin-Lichterfelde,
                                                                                                             competition, 1974
          learning outcomes:             Critical Thinking, Graphic Skills, Space Making
          media:                         model, diagrams, drawings
          readings:                      t.b.a.                                                                                                   5


                                                                                    ARC w694
                                                                                    Vertical Studio
                                                                                    University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                    Summer 2019
                                                                                    Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12             GOL 4.130
                                                                                    Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                    office hours by appointment
Assignment 3: Agglomeration (“City Segments”) (2.5 weeks)
           learning outcomes:         Critical Thinking, Graphic Skills, Model
                                      making
           media:                     model, diagrams, drawings, perspectives
           readings:                  t.b.a.
Assignment 3 will transition from the scale of the single unit to the scale of
unit agglomeration and its resulting urban morphology. Where the previous
assignment focused on the domestic scale of the unit, its multiplication will
introduce additional parameters such as orientation, front/back relationships,
access, lighting, communal spaces, or variations in the unit itself. “Site” in this
assignment will be understood as the literal constraints of a given organizational
pattern (rows) in exchange with basic infrastructure (roads). Each student will be
responsible for developing one row within the site as a prototypical city segment
that will serve as a gateway to part 2 of the studio.
Studio Culture
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio
learning encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-
by-doing. The studio offers an environment where students can come together
to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and discussed
among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large. Studio
learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members, and
provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking
skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic
form of education, where project-based learning becomes the foundation for
developing an understanding of and commitment to the school’s core values —
broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism —
all in service of architecture’s fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the
built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture                                “second row” areas along high-density
                                                                                                        corridors:
Evaluation Criteria                                                                                     1. Burnet Rd. / Brentwood
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a                             2. Airport Blvd. / North Loop
significant portion of each grade is derived from broader and more subjective                           3. E. Cesar Chavez / Holly
criteria. Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over
the semester. Grades are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences,
and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor. Grading for an
                                                                                                                                            6


                                                                                           ARC w694
                                                                                           Vertical Studio
                                                                                           University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                           Summer 2019
                                                                                           Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                           Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                           office hours by appointment
assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
          Pursuit:
          the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
                   -         The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of inquiry
                   -         The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
                             models, etc.) in the development of the design
                   -         Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is
                             asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
          Grasp:
          the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in companion courses.
                   -         A strong and clearly stated design objective
                   -         Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements
                             and sectional development
                   -         Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through
                             creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and
                             environmental system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in
                             support of the design objective
                   -         Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and
                             assembly
          Resolution:
          of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final design presentation.
                   -         Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
                             displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
          Engagement:
          the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
Students work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions for
absences, late work, and late arrivals at the discretion of each instructor. A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order
for the course to count towards a degree in the School of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C-
will not satisfy degree requirements nor the prerequisites for the design studios that follow.
                                                                                                                                                  7


                                                                                         ARC w694
                                                                                         Vertical Studio
                                                                                         University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                         Summer 2019
                                                                                         Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                         Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                         office hours by appointment
Grade Descriptions
A/A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal
development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on
all levels.
B+/B/B- : above average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
excellence.
C+/C : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is
incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does
not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F : fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned
when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate
cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement
as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling,
according to School of Architecture policy.
Methodology
The primary subjects of the studio are the design potentials of techniques of building and siting. While students will be expected
to produce exquisitely crafted documents of their design proposals at the site, building, and detail scales, specific software
tools will not be dictated. General material and format considerations will be suggested by the instructor throughout the course,
however, investigation and experimentation is strongly encouraged at all stages of production and design. In addition to digital
production methods, portions of the studio process will include hand sketches and drawings as well as physical models; students
should equip their studio workspace appropriately.
                                                                                                                                                8


                                                                                          ARC w694
                                                                                          Vertical Studio
                                                                                          University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                          Summer 2019
                                                                                          Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                          Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                          office hours by appointment
Attendance
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final
grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused
absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical
issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating
communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students
should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly
regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
Religious Observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be
penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far
in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious
holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will
be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Code of Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Mental Health and Support Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts,
feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
•         In-house CARE counselor (see below)
•         For immediate support
          o         Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                    M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
          o         CMHC Crisis Line:
                    24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
                                                                                                                                                 9


                                                                                       ARC w694
                                                                                       Vertical Studio
                                                                                       University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                       Summer 2019
                                                                                       Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                       Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                       office hours by appointment
•         Free services at CMHC:
          o         Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
          o         Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
          o         MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
          o         Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Care Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools
they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or
academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the
CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the
Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Security, safety and the studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs
of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary
component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio
without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studiomates accountable for the security
of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce material consumption
at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a
give-and-take system for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available
throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to
the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be reported to the
                                                                                                                                              10


                                                                                        ARC w694
                                                                                        Vertical Studio
                                                                                        University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                        Summer 2019
                                                                                        Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                        Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                        office hours by appointment
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Emergency Evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:
•          Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm
           is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
•          Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy. Remember
           that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
•          Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the
           event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
•          Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University
           of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
           Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
           www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                                                                                                               11


                                                                                  ARC w694
                                                                                  Vertical Studio
                                                                                  University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                  Summer 2019
                                                                                  Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                  Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                  office hours by appointment
Resources
Ideas
-      Allen, Edward, The Architect’s Studio Companion: Rules of Thumb for
       Preliminary Design (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2007)
-      Allen, Stan, Points + Lines: Diagrams and Projects for the City (excerpts)
       (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999).
-      Banham, Reyner, The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment
       (excerpts) (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969).
-      Burns, Carol J., and Andrea Kahn, eds., Site Matters: Design Concepts,
       Histories, and Strategies (New York: Routledge, 2005).
-      Frampton, Kenneth, Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of
       Construction in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture, John
       Cava, ed. (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1995).
-      Kiel, Moe Integrated Design in Contemporary Architecture (New York:
       Princeton Architectural Press, 2008)
-      Thomas, Randall, ed., Environmental Design: An Introduction for
       Architects and Engineers (New York: E & FN Spon, 1996)
Systems
-      Allen, Edward,
       Fundamentals of Building Construction: Materials and Methods
       (New York: Wiley, 1999).
       The Architect’s Studio Companion: Rules of Thump for Preliminary
       Design (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2007)
-      Brookes, Alan, and Grech, Chris, Connections: Studies in Building
       Assembly (New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1994)
-      Brown, G.Z., Sun, Wind & Light: Architectural Design Strategies (New
       York: Wiley, 2001).
-      Ching, Frank, Cassandra Adams, Building Construction Illustrated (New
       York, Wiley,2001)
-      Finley, Dawn, and Mark Wamble, “Notes on System Form: The Rest of
       the World Exists,” in Perspecta, Vol. 34 (2003), pp. 110-117.
-      Ford, Edward, The Details of Modern Architecture, vols. 1 & 2
       (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990 & 1996)
-      Kieran, Stephen, and James Timberlake. Loblolly House: Elements of a
       New Architecture (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2008).
       ---. Refabricating Architecture: How Manufacturing Methodologies Are
                                                                                                                                         12


                                                                                   ARC w694
                                                                                   Vertical Studio
                                                                                   University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                   Summer 2019
                                                                                   Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                                   Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                   office hours by appointment
        Poised to Transform Building Construction (New York: McGraw-Hill
        Companies, Inc., 2004).
-       Kwok, Alison and Walter Grondzik, The Green Studio Handbook:
        Environmental Strategies for Schematic Design (New York: Architectural
        Press, 2006)
-       Oesterle-Liev-Lutz Huesler, Double Skin Facades, Intergrated Planning
        (London: Prestel, 2001)
Materials
-       Ball, Philip, Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21st Century
        (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).
-       Bielefeld, Bert, and Isabella Skiba, Technical Drawing (Basel: Birkhäuser,
        2007).
-       Brookes, Alan, and Grech, Chris, The Building Envelope
-       Brownell, Blaine, ed. Transmaterial: A Catalog of Materials that Redefine
        Our Physical Environment (New York: Princeton Architectural Press,
        2006).
-       Kolarevic, Branko, and Kevin R. Klinger, eds., Manufacturing Material
        Effects: Rethinking Design and Making in Architecture (New York:
        Routledge, 2008), pp. 25-46.
-       Schulitz, Helmut C., Steel Construction Manual (Basel & Boston:
        Birkhäuser, 2000).
-       Schittich, Christian, Glass Construction Manual (Basel, Birkhäuser, 2007)
-       Fuchs Matthias, Construction Materials Manual (Basel, Birkhäuser,
        2006)
Codes
-       Ching, Francis D.K., and Steven R. Winkel, Building Codes Illustrated:
        A Guide to Understanding the 2000 International Building Code
        (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2003).
-       International Building Code (Country Club Hills, IL: International Code
        Council).
Periodicals
-       Detail
-       El Croquis
-       The Plan
-       GA: Global Architect
                                                                                                                                          13


                                                                           ARC w694
                                                                           Vertical Studio
                                                                           University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                           Summer 2019
                                                                           Mon / Tue /Wed / Thurs / Fri 8-12            GOL 4.130
                                                                           Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                           office hours by appointment
Calendar
Week 01          Thurs    6/6     Studio Intro / Handout “Assignment 01”    PRE-CONDITIONS                     Axonometric drawing
                 Fri      6/7                                               Precedent Research                 Unit Model
                                                                                                               Diagrams
Week 02          Mon      6/10
                 Tue      6/11
                 Wed      6/12
                 Thurs    6/13    “Assignment 01” review
                 Fri      6/14    Handout “Assignment 2: Unit”              SCALE: UNIT                        Manifesto (Text)
                                                                            develop architectural              Diagrams
Week 03          Mon      6/17                                              ambition                           Plans / Sections
                 Tue      6/18                                                                                 Model
                 Wed      6/19
                 Thurs    6/20
                 Fri      6/21
Week 04          Mon      6/24    “Assignment 2: Unit” review
                 Tue      6/25    Handout “Assignment 3: Agglomeration”     SCALE: CITY                        Site Model
                 Wed      6/26                                              Unit Agglomeration                 Plans, Sections
                 Thurs    6/27                                                                                 Axonometric
                 Fri      6/28                                                                                 Perspectives
Week 05          Mon      7/1
                 Tue      7/2
                 Wed      7/3
                 Thurs    7/4
                 Fri      7/5
Week 06          Mon      7/8
                 Tue      7/9
                 Wed      7/10
                 Thurs    7/11    Final Review (all assignments)
note:
This schedule is subject to change, and adjustments may be made during the
semester. Please be available during class time throughout the semester.
Requirements for reviews and Pinups will be announced.
                                                                                                                                  14
