ADV 325 / Advertising Creativity
Spring 2019
Unique Num ber 06275
T/TH 8 – 9:30 am
CM A Auditorium
We get to make the future.
We like new. New means different, surprising, forward. We push to come up with new
inventions. New products. New ideas. New music. New art. New ways to solve
problems on a local and global scale.
When something has been done before we call it out. When something new misses
the mark, we call it out too.
So, while we strive for new, we should also strive for smart. How do we get to new and
smart? We get creative. And great communication is nothing if not creative.
Sure, we’ll address creative advertising in this class. But more importantly we’ll seek to
understand creativity in general: where it comes from, how we find it, and how to
champion it. This isn’t a read-and-regurgitate class. You’re going to be involved in an
ongoing conversation. You’re going to do as well as study. Want to know something?
Ask. Please. We’ll figure it out together. You’ll get a lot out of this class if you put
yourself into it.
For those of you thinking about becoming creative in the advertising and design world,
this is the big first step. For those of you who see yourselves on a different path,
creativity will always play a role in your journey. So this is the big first step, too.
Creativity is everywhere. It can come from anyone.
That means you.
Welcome to 325.


Fast Facts /
People you should know:
Instructor:
Sean Thompson, MA / seanthom@utexas.edu
Office: BMC 4.384
Hours: TBD
Teaching Assistants:
Adrianna San Roman / adrimsr@yahoo.com
Rocío Santiago Montes / rocio.santiago.montes@utexas.edu
Offices: ADV Bullpen, BMC 4th Floor
Hours: TBD
Texts + Supplies /
Required texts:
Hey Whipple, Squeeze This - by Luke Sullivan (5th edition, 2016)
*Additional readings will be posted to Canvas prior to discussion of the material.
Required supplies:
• Sketchbook that will serve as your idea journal.
         Nothing smaller than 5” x 8.5” and nothing larger than 9” x 12”. Pages should be unlined.
         We’ll talk further about this requirement in class when we introduce the assignment.
• Pens, pencils, paints, objects that will assist you in developing your journal. More to come.
• 11” x 17” paper for your mind maps.
Recom m ended texts & resources:
         Csikszentmihalyi – Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience
         Griffin & Morrison – The Creative Process Illustrated
         Tharp, Twyla – The Creative Habit
         Gladwell, Malcolm – The Tipping Point
Online resources to visit, read & follow:
         Advertising Age
         Communication Arts
         Lurzer’s Archive


       HOW
       creativity-online.com
       The One Show
       TheFWA.com
       AdsoftheWorld.com
       adland.tv
       heywhipple.com
Mission + Mandatories /
Your m ission:
Think smart. Think weird. Invent. Explore. Share. You’ll attend two lectures a week and submit
lab assignments (homework) online. Online videos and readings will be on Canvas. Expect to
be graded on thought-provoking and fun (no, really) individual and group projects, an idea
journal, and in-class exercises and exams. In addition, be prepared to live the creative life you’re
studying. Starting now.
So you have no desire to be an agency creative? No problem. All the theories and techniques
you will learn are applicable to anything and everything that you do.
Together we’ll:
       • Talk about theories of creativity
       • Learn about creative advertising pioneers and perspectives
       • Discuss general and advertising-specific ideation processes, tools, and outcomes
       • Analyze historical and contemporary examples of advertising creativity
       • Visit with great guest speakers
       • Collaborate with one another to develop strategic creative ideas and executions
Things to do:
       Do your best.
       Care and craft go a long way to making a good idea great. It’s easy to see when
       someone goes all-in on an assignment. And when someone doesn’t.
       Do identify your work.
       Put your name and EID on everything you hand in. Or points will be lost.
       Do join in the fun.
       Welcome! I prefer my classes to be facilitated conversations, not one-sided lectures. So
       please, participate in the discussion. Your voice is important. And the class will be better
       for it.


Things to don’t:
     Don’t cheat or plagiarize.
     End of story.
     Don’t skip class, show up late, or duck out early.
     You’ll miss good stuff. Important stuff. Assignment and exam stuff.
     Don’t turn work in late.
     Don’t turn in late assignments. NO EXCEPTIONS. Missing deadlines in the advertising
     industry means a lost, job, lost accounts, and all kinds of bad stuff. No really. Late = an
     automatic “0”. Make arrangements with your teaching assistant to turn in assignments
     EARLY if you know you won’t make it to class. Emergency issues should be handled
     through Student Emergency Services who will, in turn, contact me.
     Don’t ask for m akeup exam s or extra credit on an assignm ent.
     Unless you have accommodations from the university and have worked out said
     accommodations with me ahead of time, there is no extra credit work, makeup tests or
     other special considerations in general. If extra credit opportunities arise (no
     guarantees), they will be made available to the entire class.
     Don’t contest a grade unless you really m ean it.
     You have three actual days (72 hours) from the date a grade is announced/returned to
     contest it. No grade changes will be made at any point after this period. Not 3 business
     days. No time off for holidays. Keep in mind, that I reserve the right to adjust your grade
     EITHER WAY if you contest it. You’re asking me to take another look.
     Don’t ask for extra points at the end of the sem ester.
     Just don’t. There are none to be had, no exceptions. You have many opportunities
     throughout the semester to earn strong scores on your work. Being “so close” is just
     that. There. We said it. Good talk.
     Don’t get lost in the internet during class.
     Stay tuned in. Shop, text, or do homework for other classes later. Again, good talk.


Assignments + Grading /
Final course grade determ ination ADV 325
Homework Assignments (4 x 2.5)              10%
Mind Map                                    15%
Group Project 1                             15%
Group Project 2                             15%
Idea Journal                                15%
Exam 1                                      15%
Exam 2                                      15%
Statem ent on grading:
I may curve exams if the classwide results warrant. I round up final grades to the nearest tenth.
That’s all the help you get. There are no extra points given because you’re “SO CLOSE” to an A,
or to passing, etc. So, please don’t ask.
Final  letter grades are calculated as follows:
A       93.45 to 100       A-        89.45 to 93.44
B+      86.45 to 8944       B        83.45 to 86.44       B-     79.45 to 83.44
C+      76.45 to 79.44     C         73.45 to 76.44       C-     69.45 to 73.44
D+      66.45 to 69.44     D         63.45 to 66.44       D-     59.5 to 63.44
F       0 to 59.4
Projects and labs:
Project guideline sheets will be posted to Canvas prior to the discussion of each project. Labs
(homework) will also be posted per the syllabus and take the place of your section’s “lab”
meeting time.
UT policies for academ ic accom m odations:
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.


Schedule /
Course Schedule Spring 2019:
While I will make every effort to maintain this schedule, it is subject to change, depending on
class progress, and unforeseen opportunities that benefit our course of study.
Week          Day           Topic
1             T, 1/22       Hello!
              R, 1/24       Defining Creativity
2             T, 1/29       The Creative Process & Finding Ideas
              R, 1/31       The Creative Process & Finding Ideas
              F, 2/1        HOM EWORK ASSIGNM ENT appears on Canvas by noon
3             T, 2/5        The Creative Process & Finding Ideas
              R, 2/7        Guest Speaker
4             T, 2/12       The Agency Process
              R, 2/14       Creative Strategy & Problem Solving
                            M IND M APS DUE
5             T, 2/19       Creative Strategy & Problem Solving
              R, 2/21       Copywriting
6             T, 2/26       Art Direction & Branding
              R, 2/28       Art Direction & Branding
              F, 3/1        HOM EWORK ASSIGNM ENT appears on Canvas by noon
7             T, 3/5        Guest Speaker
              R, 3/7        Ingredients and Evaluation
                            GROUP PROJECT 1 DUE
8             T, 3/12       Exam Review
              R, 3/14       EXAM 1
9             3/19 & 3/21   SPRING BREAK
10            T, 3/26       Guest Speaker
              R, 3/28       Approaches and Opportunities
              F, 3/29       HOM EWORK ASSIGNM ENT appears on Canvas by noon
11            T, 4/2        Approaches and Opportunities
              R, 4/4        Approaches and Opportunities


12              T, 4/9        Being Original
                R, 4/11       Creative Presentations
13              T, 4/16       Guest Speaker
                R, 4/18       Doing the Right Thing
14              T, 4/23       GROUP PROJECT 2 DUE
                R, 4/25       Creative Careers
                F, 4/26       HOM EWORK ASSIGNM ENT appears on Canvas by noon
15              T, 4/30       Creative Panel Discussion
                R, 5/2        Exam Review & IDEA JOURNAL DUE
16              T, 5/7        EXAM 2
                R, 5/9        Creative Application Launch and Farewell
Important Information /
The University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Scholastic Dishonesty Statem ent:
The Department of Advertising has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the College of Communication.
By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities
described in that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its
assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
an/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.


Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin:
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and
support for your learning.
        The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
        Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
        Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
        Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
        Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
        Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
Em ergency evacuation recom m endations:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class:
        • Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Counseling and M ental Health Services:
For immediate support:
        • Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p, SSB, 5th floor,
          512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu
        • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7, 512.471.2255, cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
        • CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
          M-F 8-5p, CMA 4.134, 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
- Brief assessments and referral services
- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


Writing Flag:
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written
work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.
Use of E-M ail for Official Correspondence to Students:
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
email address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily—to
stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You
can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Cam pus Policy on Holy Days:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Texas Creative:
The Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations at The University of Texas at
Austin is home to a world-class program for aspiring copywriters and art directors. Texas
Creative graduates can be found working across the nation and around the globe. The
program is a competitive, rigorous, fun, challenging, portfolio-building sequence of classes
that will make you think in ways you might never have thought to produce smart, funny,
engaging, relevant, jaw-dropping advertising. Near the end of the semester, you’ll be given
information on how to apply. Please note that your idea journal entries are taken into
consideration as part of the application process.
