School of Architecture                                                         Spring 2019
                                                                               Handout #1
ARC 308
Architecture and Society
Instructor:                   Larry Speck
Time:                         TTh 9:30-11:00am
Place:                        HRH 2.104
Prerequisites
None. Required course for architecture majors. This course may be used to fulfill the visual and
performing arts component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following four
core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication
skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork and social responsibility. This course carries the Global
Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural
groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of non-U.S.
cultural groups, past and present.
Educational Objectives
        1. To establish a perspective of the role and influence of architecture in society
             and vis-a-vis other disciplines in the arts and science.
        2. To develop an understanding of how architecture is shaped by and reflects
             cultural values and social organization.
        3. To present a broad picture of issues and factors which influence architectural
             design.
        4. To understand how global cultures create environments that both reflect and
             shape their values.
Educational Approach
This is a reading/looking/listening/thinking course. It will follow a lecture format supplemented
by related outside reading and required participation in discussion sections that hone skills in
critical thinking, communication and teamwork. Students will also give oral presentations on
their research in discussion sections.
Evaluation
There will be three tests as well as a final exam in the course. Each test will count 15% of your
final grade. The final will also count 15%. Participation in class (in the form of question
responses due most class periods) and in discussion sections will count 20%. The remaining 20%
of your grade will be based on a series of short analytical exercises that you will do through the
semester. Tests will include multiple choice questions as well as short answer questions
analyzing buildings on campus or nearby to demonstrate understanding of material covered in
lectures and reading over a five- to seven-week period. The final exam will deal with
comprehensive material covered in the course. Analytical exercises will be dealt with primarily
in discussion sections. Students with disabilities may request accommodations. See
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ or call 512-471-6259.
Required Texts
Readings will be assigned from the following three texts:
         Rasmussen, Steen Eiler. Experiencing Architecture.
         Heschong, Lisa. Thermal Delight in Architecture.
         Moore, Charles, et al. The Place of Houses.
Website: www.larryspeck.com


ARC 308–Architecture and Society                                           Spring 2019
Instructor: Larry Speck                                                    Handout #2
                                          Course Outline
   I. Introduction
      Jan 22    - Course Description
      Jan 24    - Architecture and Society–Overview
      Jan 29    - Architectural Values/Philosophy/Principles/Prejudices/Theory
  II. Form in Architecture
      Jan 31    - Architecture as Sensual/Visual Experience
      Feb 5     - Architecture as an Intellectual/Artistic Experience
      Feb 7     - Class replaced by campus tours to be held Saturday February 9-10
      Feb 12    - Order and Systems in Architecture
      Feb 14    - Numbers/Mathematics/Geometry as Inspiration of Form
      Feb 19    - Nature/Biology/Organisms as Inspiration of Form
                   [Reading in Experiencing Architecture to be completed by Feb. 19]
      Feb 21    - Frank Gehry and Architectural Form
      Feb 26    - Synthesis – Form
      Feb 28    - Test #1
 III. Physical Considerations in Architecture
      Mar 5     -  Buildings and Land
      Mar 7     -  Geography/Topography/Ecology
      Mar 12    -  Structure and Materials
      Mar 14    -  Construction/Tectonics
      Mar 26    -  Architecture in Response to Climate
      Mar 28    -   Synthesis - Physical Considerations
                   [Readings in Thermal Delight in Architecture to be completed by Mar 28]
      April 2   - Citizen Architect
      April 4   - Test #2
 IV. Human Use in Architecture
      Apr 9     -  The Designation and Organization of Use
      Apr 11    -  Architectural Determinism
      Apr 16    -  Humanism at the Personal Scale
      Apr 18    -  Humanism at the Scale of Organizations/Communities/Bureaucracies
      Apr 23    -  Meaning in Public Buildings
      Apr 25    -  Synthesis - Human Use
                   [Readings in The Place of Houses (pp. 1-144, 277-297) to be complete by Apr 25]
      Apr 30    - Test #3
  V. Combinations and Synthesis
      May 2 - Technology as a Source of Beauty
      May 7     - Perfection and Compromise
      May 9     - A Few Good Buildings
      Final Exam to be scheduled by the University.




