RHE 309K
                                 Rhetoric of Conspiracy Theories
Instructor: Andrew Heermans
Unique number: 83395
Class Time and Place: MTWTHF 11:30 - 1:00, PAR 308
E-mail: andrewheermans@gmail.com
Course Website: Canvas - http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Office: FAC 16
Office hours: Tuesday: 1-2:30, Friday: 1:30-3:00, and by appointment
Course Description
What is a conspiracy theory, and why do people believe in them? It is easier to name an example of a
conspiracy theory, such as the “moon landing hoax” or the JFK assassination, than to define the
essential qualities that all conspiracy theories share. Studies suggest that nearly half the American
population believes in at least one conspiracy theory, yet the accusation of being a “conspiracy
theorist” can put one on the fringe of normalcy, and is often shorthand for a lack of credibility,
corrupted reasoning and/or paranoia. This course takes a closer look at a number of conspiracy
theories and “conspiratorial thinking” more broadly to develop a typology of conspiratorial rhetoric
that helps answer two primary questions: what makes conspiracy theories persuasive to those who
believe them, and how is giving the title of conspiracy theory or theorist itself a rhetorical act?
Approaching conspiracy theories from the standpoint of rhetorical theory can help students develop
the skills needed to write persuasively across intellectual boundaries and engage in ethical
argumentation at a historical moment when conspiratorial thinking has particularly high visibility and
rhetorical efficacy in broad political and cultural conversations in America, despite the often
insidious premises they can present. Further, understanding the basic rhetorical features of
conspiracy theories and considering the title itself will help students navigate the argumentative
landscapes they face in the “post-fact” world of “fake-news”.
Texts
“Everything’s An Argument” (Lunsford, 2016) (avaliable at the Co-Op new and used)
Little Longhorn Handbook, (2016, Norton)
Supplemental readings (provided either as handouts or as pdfs on Canvas)
Course Goals
     ● Understand the contemporary relevance and efficacy of classical rhetorical theory through a
         topical consideration that has resonance across disciplines and academic fields.


    ● Develop research methods that accommodate contemporary info-reality: developing
         technical proficiency in using the database resources UT students are given and developing
         skills in rhetorically critical analysis of sources generally.
    ● Identify and fairly summarize the main arguments of texts in a variety of genres and with
         varying levels of credibility and audience.
    ● Compose college-level papers that convey original arguments and analysis, and revise ideas
         and compositions in response to constructive feedback from the instructor and peers.
    ● Correctly document use of research materials using MLA citation.
    ● Present ideas effectively and convincingly in front of peers, consider the performative
         applications of rhetorical theory within, but (importantly) beyond its traditional disciplinary
         boundaries.
Description of Major Assignments & Unit Progression
 Unit 1: Indexing Conspiracy Theories
Content Description & Goals:
In the first unit (weeks 1-2) we will split our time between familiarizing ourselves with some basic
tenets of rhetorical theory (focusing specifically on the application of various concepts from classical
rhetorical theory within contemporary contexts), while indexing the historical trajectory of
rhetorically important conspiracy theories that (we will eventually argue) set the stage for conspiracy
theories becoming “mainstream”. In this unit, we will work in a network of foundational,
interrelated conspiracies related to NASA, in an effort to understand, among other rhetorical tools,
the theory of stasis. After familiarizing ourselves with the basics of research methods and tools, we
hope to develop a method of asking good and generative research questions through stasis theory. The
unit will culminate in the first major assignment, a rhetorical analysis.
Assignments:
    1. Two Research Summaries: of a given conspiracy theory and a relevant supplementary source
         (from the assigned readings) (10% each)
    2. Rhetorical Analysis of theory+supplementary source (10%)
Unit 2: Two-Way Rhetoric, Epistemology, and Argumentation


Content Description & Goals
In the second unit of the course, (weeks 3-4) we will continue our survey of rhetorical theory while
transitioning to the contemporary moment, and attempt to trace the rhetorical lineage of your
chosen conspiracy from Unit 1 into the current moment. In order to trace the rhetorical movement
of a conspiracy theory’s formal structure from one topic and historical moment to another, we will
focus on rhetoric’s ethics and strategies of argumentation, and consider the ethical and logical
features of contemporary instances of conspiratorial thought. In this unit, you will participate in
peer-review and revise your rhetorical analysis. This unit builds on the first, and you will begin to
draft an argument which offers a rhetorical interpretation of your chosen theory, focusing on why
those who believe it in find it persuasive, and what the implications of such belief may be for a
certain audience, be it those who believe or those who are the subject of such belief.
Assignments:
    1. Peer Review of Rhetorical Analysis (10%)
    2. Rhetorical analysis Revision (15%)
    3. Research Summary of relevant source/theory from Unit 2 reading/research (10%)
Unit 3:
Content Description & Goals
In the final Unit, you will build on the research and theory you’ve learned to attempt an informed
contribution to ongoing debates over your chosen conspiracy's rhetorical features, influences, and
broader social and historical significance: its cultural impact and the narratives it has spawned or
inaugurated. You are not here to primarily prove or debunk a conspiracy theory, though that may be,
depending on your choice in theory and the nature of your argument, a necessity or prerequisite. In
this unit, you will present evidence, information, and an original argument, using print and/or
electronic media. You will need to have an identifiable audience that has an identifiable position on
the conspiracy theory in mind, and need to respond to opposing viewpoints using rhetorical
techniques of refutation, rebuttal, counter-argument and concession.
In this unit, we will also consider visual rhetoric, and study some “conspiracy theory visuals” to
connect the theoretical dimensions of visual rhetoric(s) topically, since visuals such as graphs,
flowcharts, and network diagrams are ubiquitous throughout conspiracy theories. This helps us
dwell on a final theoretical point, one which speaks to a moment where convoluted and illogical
visualizations are short-hand for conspiratorial thought.
Assignments:
             1. A final project, being a paper or multimodal project that makes an original argument,
                 appeals to an identifiable audience by employing strategic rhetorical devices, utilizes


                 research and evidence, and demonstrates the writer’s facility with composing in a
                 certain medium. This project can be a “traditional” paper (e.g. as if it were an essay in
                 a specific publication) or a multimodal project (e.g. an infographic, advertisement,
                 short film, podcast, or presentation). If one chooses the multimodal choice, they will
                 still need to submit a shorter version of their argument in essay form. (15%)
             2. Peer-review and revision of proposal project (10%)
Grading:
     1.  Unit 1 Total: (25%)
     2.  Unit 2 Total: (30%)
     3.  Unit 3 Total: (25%)
     4.  Weekly Reading Responses: (10%)
     5.  Participation (10%)
         Participation will be determined by:
             ● Daily In-class writing exercises
             ● Group work participation
             ● Speaking and in class and contributing to discussion
If you have or need special accommodations from the SSD, alternative forms of participation will be
available.
Grades:
Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness, all numbers
are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For example, a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
• A=94-100
• A-=90-93
• B+=87-89
• B=84-86
• B-=80-83
• C+=77-79
• C=74-76
• C-=70-73
• D+=67-69
• D=64-66
• D-=60-63
• F=0-59
Note on Attendance and Participation:


This is a fast-paced course schedule, which means we have to meet every day of the week (we will
discuss as a class the option of scheduling major assignment conference sessions in lieu of 1-2 class
meetings). Success in this course structure requires students treat it as it as a feature of their “daily
routine”. In other words, your enrollment indicates a commitment to the schedule, and I will not
excuse your absences contingent upon the status of it being summer, or the frequency of our
meetings. This is not arbitrary, and does not mean the course will consume every day of your week,
but attendance is important because the majority of the course is structured around the teaching
opportunities that arise in a group discussion-setting. Daily assignments will be primarily reading-
response activities done in-class, and weekly assignments will require you to conceptually (through
ideas, names, and/or events) synthesize two more of the week’s readings. I won’t waste your time
with the reading assignments, so i expect attentive and insightful replies.
The supplementary readings will be diverse, and generally no more challenging than a well-written,
in-depth piece from the New Yorker, etc.. However, some of it will be explicitly responding to a
non-popular, academic audience more familiar with the jargon it uses than you may be. Given the
topic of the course, it is important we approach things from a spectrum of perspectives. If a reading
is particularly challenging for you, you have two options:
         1.Contact me with whatever question you have about the content and/or its relation to the
         course topics (rhetorical theory / conspiracy theories).
                 If this does not solve the problem, you can:
         2. Try to do the reading, and document the quality and quantity of your confusion with it, in
         a minimum of 500 words. If this is submitted before the reading is due in-class, it will
         excuse/supplement your in-class work as it relates to that particular reading.
         ***Option #2 is limited to a single assigned reading per-meeting.***
CLASS POLICIES
Accessibility
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent
you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and course requirements.
I am committed to making all course materials as accessible as possible, and to working with
students if any of these materials are inaccessible. We will all need some accommodations in this
class, because we all learn differently. If you need specific accommodations, let me know. Any
conversations we have about accommodations are confidential. I am happy to take extra steps to
ensure accessibility for all students.


Behavior
Be respectful of your colleagues: no slurs or derogatory language directed at classmates. Be generous
and cautious when speaking on sensitive or controversial matters but do not be afraid to state your
own opinion: disagreement and dissent is not inherently problematic, it is a necessary prerequisite
for rhetorical action and a fact of life. However, we live in a very polarized and polarizing world
right now, and this class is not the place for soapboxes or to engage in political/ideological battles,
especially if they are unrelated to our class topic. Do not assume everyone shares the same opinion
as you, and be respectful to those who think differently, as one of the goals of this course is to
encourage ethical and democratic argumentation, and we will model this goal in our interactions
with one another, writing and arguing always towards something rather than against something,
always aiming for consensus and/or understanding.
Late Work
Ask for an extension ahead of time if you know or feel you’ll struggle to finish an assignment on
time. I stop accepting late work after two class meetings have passed, and after the first day will
subtract 10 points for each day late.
Attendance Policy
You are expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing,
and to participate in all in-class editing, revising, discussion, and conference sessions. Should you
miss six class sessions this semester, excused or not, you will fail the course.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, at least one week before the absence, so that alternative
arrangements can be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this
reason, provide your instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University
specifies very few other excused absences (e.g., jury duty).
SCHOLASTIC HONESTY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University.
So, take care to read and understand the Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found
online at http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php If
you have any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the
assignment.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES


Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More
information is available on the Services for Students with Disabilities website at
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will use this
medium to communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email
account and to check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to the
IT Services website at https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found on the
UT emergency page at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
Other important Emergency Information
You can find more information about planning for emergencies on the Emergency Preparedness site
at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. You can learn more
about the Behavior Concerns Advice Line on their site at
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
Questions about these policies should be addressed to:
                                   Department of Rhetoric & Writing
                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                          Parlin Hall, Room 3


                                        rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu
                                              (512) 471-6109
Semester Schedule:
Monday (6/10): Intro to rhetorical theory and criticism
Readings:
From Hope to Harambe, Nagle
From Spaceship Earth to Google Earth, Helmreich
Pictorially Enhanced Disbelief, Perlmutter & Dahman
Scientific Rhetoric, Burke
Week 1
Tuesday (6/11):
Apollo revisited, flat Earth(s), towards a definition of conspiracy theory
Readings:
The Conspiracy Meme
Wednesday (6/12):
Intro to rhetorical theory, source vs quality of information, NASA contd
Readings:
Selected Sections (handout/pdf), Rhetorical Analysis: A Brief Guide for Writers, Longaker, Walker
Thursday (6/13):
Intro to Master Tropes, Intro to Classical Genres of Rhetoric and logos/ethos/pathos.
Readings: Longaker & Walker contd
Four Master Tropes (first 10 pages), Burke
Friday (6/14):
Burke’s Master Tropes and modes of thought + Discussion of writing expectations and overview of
first assignment.
Homework: 1 page (single spaced) synthesis of two readings from first week (and a half)
Week 2
Monday (6/17):
Proofs and deployments of Logos/Ethos/Pathos, Intro to stasis theory
Tuesday (6/18):


Stasis theory continued, Research Summary review, + conspiracy theory research workshop
Research Summary #1 due by midnight
Wednesday (6/19):
Commonplaces and Topics in Rhetorical theory and conspiracy theory rhetoric, preview of
rhetorical analysis
Thursday (6/20):
Rhetorical analysis discussion & workshop (connecting kinds of proofs to topics)
Friday (6/21):
preview of American conspiracy theories + rhetorical analysis peer review session
Rhetorical Analysis draft due by class time
(you will need a draft to participate in the peer review process).
***Peer Review Feedback is due by midnight Sunday 6/23
Week 3
Monday (6/24):
Requiem for Burke + Typified American Conspiracies: Secret Societies, JFK, MK Ultra, 9/11 (Part
1)
***Weekly Reading Response Discussion Post due by class time
Tuesday (6/25):
logos (formal arguments, fallacies, good/sham enthymemes, ideology and inference)
ethos (psychology, identification, mediated identity presentation as rhetorical performance, deep
fakes)
pathos (audience as identity, polarization, emotional ethics and good-faith argumentation).
Rhetorical Analysis Due by Midnight
Wednesday (6/26):
Typified American Conspiracies: Secret Societies, Crisis Actors and False Flags (Part 2)
Thursday (6/27): A return to the question of motives (Burke) + theories of motives and
conspiracy theory
Friday (6/28): CONFERENCE DAY (rhetorical analysis final draft)
Week 4
Monday (7/1):


Intro to final unit + project, arrangement and the classical template + rhetoric of form and formal
rhetoric (part 1)
Rhetorical Analysis Revisions due by midnight
***Weekly Reading Discussion Post due by class time
Tuesday (7/2):
Arrangement & form (part 2) + psychology and social science’s treatment of conspiracy theories and
theorists + brainwashing trope in US culture (Selected readings from Scott Selisker’s Human
Programming)
Wednesday (7/3):
Towards a typology of contemporary conspiracy theories: 2016 and beyond: Wikilinks, Pizzagate +
NXIVM, collusion confusion
Thursday (7/4):
From fake news to lizard people: theories at the fringe of the fringe as rhetorically noteworthy
phenomena + interrogating contemporary treatment of belief in conspiracy theories as mental
illness.
Friday (7/5):
Final Project Peer Review Session
Final Project draft due by class time
***Peer Review feedback due by midnight Sunday (7/7)
Week 5
Monday (7/8):
Visual and multimodal rhetoric beyond the moon: affordances, uses, risks and misuses of non-
textual rhetoric (infographics, data viz, simulation)
Tuesday (7/9):
Real conspiracies vs conspiracy theories: How to ethically approach questions of categorization,
consideration and condemnation, using rhetorical theory and practice + the rhetorical consequences
of censorship
Final Project due by midnight
Wednesday (7/10): CONFERENCE DAY (final project)


Thursday (7/11):
Post-Mortem, Student presentations, surveys.
Final Project Revisions Due by midnight, Saturday, July 13th
