                                                                                         1
                         University of Texas at Austin, Spring 2018
                  ARH 322 (19995) | ANT 324L (31717) | LAS 327 (39752)
        Issues in Exhibitions and Collections of Visual Arts:
                  Textile Arts of the Indigenous Americas
                         Fall 2018 | ART 2.106| 12:00 – 3:00 pm | F
                                       Syllabus (v.01)
Instructor: Prof. Astrid Runggaldier              Office Phone: (512) 471-6292
Email: astrid@austin.utexas.edu                   Office hours: Wednesdays 1–3 pm or by
Office: ART 1.412D (Mesoamerica Center)           appointment with min. 48 hours request
Classroom: ART 2.106
Class times: F 12:00 – 3:00 pm
Online classroom: https://utexas.instructure.com
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course explores the textile holdings of the Art and Art History Collection at UT
Austin, examining 19th century hand-woven Navajo textiles from the US Southwest,
ethnographic collections of huipiles and other clothing from the Maya region, and Pre-
Columbian cloth from the Andean cultures of South America. Working with objects
from UT’s collections, students will learn about manufacture from weaving and dyeing
technologies, about social and ritual meaning from symbolism and iconography, and
about gender, power, and the economic value of hand-crafted cloth in ancient societies.
Course readings focus on archaeological, anthropological, and iconographic studies of
ancient textile traditions in the Americas and in comparative global perspective.
Upon successful completion of this course you will be able to:
   1. Appreciate complex aspects of exhibitions and collections in visual arts
         concerning the place of indigenous American textiles in our contemporary
         society and within the context of the societies that created them.
   2. Identify the culture, period, and style of Pre-Columbian, historical, and
         ethnographic textile arts covered in this course and part of the UT Art and Art
         History Collection (AAHC).
   3. Research topics in textile arts collections and exhibitions through literature
         review, discussion, writing, and oral presentations, critically evaluating
         scholarship on textile arts through arguments supported with relevant
         observations and facts.


                                                                                        2
    4. Explore digital humanities platforms to research the holdings of the AAHC, to
         create compelling visual displays, and to facilitate communicating information
         about the textile component of the collection.
    5. Broaden your perspective on world cultures and non-Western art through in-
         depth analysis of an important medium in the arts of the indigenous Americas.
REQUIRED COURSE MATERIALS
There is no required textbook; however, this course relies heavily on extensive reading.
Required readings will be supplied digitally weekly, and additional readings will be
provided by student research. Required weekly readings will provide historical
background, concepts, and vocabulary terms, and will serve as the basis for class
discussions and research in the collection.
You are expected to read the assigned pages before class meets, which will supplement
the material presented and discussed in class (see Graded Course Components for
expectations on your reading process).
1.     Required Online: CANVAS (https://utexas.instructure.com). Required
       readings will be available on our course website. The subject matter of these
       articles will be addressed in weekly short writing assignments, discussion
       questions, and discussion leadership, and will also serve as important starting
       points for researching additional scholarly literature.
2.     Required Online: Email (checked daily) You are required and expected to
       read your email concerning this course (linked to your email address on file with
       your UTEID).
3.     Recommended: Depending on the most relevant digital platform for your final
       project deliverables, you might consider purchasing subscription-level access to a
       software or web option (for example $35-$75 for Omeka Plus or Silver).
GRADED COURSE COMPONENTS: EXAMS AND PROJECTS
There are no exams in this course. Instead the bulk of your grade will come from a
research project you will begin in late September and work on until the final week of
the course. The quality of your work on the research project throughout the semester is
directly proportional to the grade you earn for this course.
Your grade will be based on oral and written assignments, both formal and informal,
including: weekly reading responses, participation in discussion (discussion questions
throughout the semester, and discussion leadership); the semester research project
presentations and final research materials; and regular individual work as well as
collaborative group-work.


                                                                                            3
Attendance and Participation: this course meets only once a week, and therefore
attendance is mandatory and informed participation expected. Each missed class will
lower your final grade by one letter-step (see below Grading Breakdown). Exceptions
are granted only for approved absences (see Policies section for definition of three
categories of approved absences). Attending class unprepared, lack of participation,
distracted behavior, and other disruptions to your active engagement with the course
and your peers will also negatively impact your final grade and the quality of your
work.
Readings Précis: for each weekly meeting (Fridays at noon) you will turn in a précis
(Friday at 9 am) for each of the readings identified as a “Précis Reading” on Canvas,
where you will have additional information on what constitutes a summary précis.
Writing a précis will require you to engage in active reading and note-taking, which you
will have available with you each week in class. Failure to turn in your précis by the
deadline will be assumed to mean that you did not complete the readings in time and
are unprepared for class.
Discussion Questions: for each weekly meeting (Fridays at noon) you will turn in to
discussion leaders and peers two discussion questions (by Thursday at midnight) and
will be prepared to discuss them in class and to respond to your peers’ questions on the
weekly topics.
Discussion Leadership: each of you will have an opportunity to lead discussion in one
of the weekly meetings either alone or paired with a peer, and will provide the class
with a discussion of the readings topics guided by the principles of Harkness
Discussions outlined on Canvas.
Semester Research Project: you will select a topic of research early in the semester from
a list of available options that include a variety of research outputs, and you will follow
class instruction for sequenced components, including 1) a class meeting to discuss
topics, 2) a topic abstract and annotated bibliography, 3) two one-on-one meetings and
class updates on your research progress, 4) a presentation with PPT and handout, and
4) the final project deliverables (written essay, virtual exhibit, website, database, etc.)
Extra Credit: there will be occasional opportunities to engage with topics relevant to our
course outside of class. Research lecture extra credits will require a write-up afterwards
and will bump up your final grade by 1 percentage point for each lecture extra credit
turned in on time. Field trip extra credits will bump up your final grade by 3 percentage
points and will not require a write-up but will expect a longer time commitment.
GRADING BREAKDOWN
Grade component                                    Due date                 % of Final grade
Attendance and Participation                       (weekly)                            15%
Readings Précis                                    (weekly)                            15%
Discussion Questions                               (weekly)                            5%
Discussion Leadership                              (once, dates vary)                  10%


                                                                                        4
Semester Research Project                                                           50%
       Topic selections                              (Due September 21)
       Topic abstract and bibliography               (Due October 5 – 5%)
       Project Check-in #1                           (Due October 19 – 5%)
       Project Check-in #2                           (Due November 2 – 10%)
       Project deliverables draft                    (Due November 16 – 5%)
       Presentation quality/delivery                 (Due Nov. 30 and Dec. 7 - 5%)
       Presentation PPT and Handout                  (Due Nov. 30 and Dec. 7 - 10%)
       Final project deliverables                    (Due Nov. 30 and Dec. 7 - 10%)
Your final grade will be based on the +/- system according to the following scale:
A (94 and above); A- (90-93); B+ (87-89); B (83-86); B- (80-82); C+ (77-80); C (73-76);
C- (70-72); D+ (67-69); D (60-66); F (59 and below)
COURSE SCHEDULE OF TOPICS
(Readings will be available on Canvas)
     Week 1: Syllabus and Introduction to the AAHC
                       Introductions
                       Syllabus and expectations details
     F August 31
                       Textile examples
                       The Art and Art History Collection
     Week 2: Research Tools and Using the Databases
                       Presentation by Becca Pad – Fine Arts Library
     F September 7     Using the AAHC inventory and DASe
                       Database treasure hunt
     Week 3: Prehistoric Evidence: How old Are Textiles?
                       Issues in exhibitions and collections
                       Major course issues in textile arts
     F September 14
                       Some key aspects on prehistoric data
                       Group discussion of readings
     Week 4: South America Part I
     Th Sept. 20       Extra Credit research lecture (details on Canvas)
                       Harkness Discussion of readings
                       Millennia of Pre-Columbian cultures and their textiles
     F September 21 Techniques and terms for manufacture and style
                       AAHC examples
                       Research Project topics selection (in class)


                                                                                   5
Week 5: South America Part II
T Sept. 24      Extra Credit write-up due (optional)
                Textiles economies: craft and value
F September 28 Harkness Discussion of readings
                Chimú and Inca textiles – readings and AAHC examples
Week 6: US Southwest Part I
                Harkness Discussion of readings
                Southwest style weaving
F October 5     AAHC Navajo/Diné examples
                Guest speaker – public history project
                Project abstract and annotated bibliography due
Week 7: US Southwest Part II
                The ethics of collecting and contemporary issues of appropriation
F October 12
                Harkness Discussion of readings
Week 8: Mesoamerica Part I
                Traditions of the Aztec and the Maya, pre-Hispanic to contemporary
F October 19    Harkness Discussion of readings
                Project Check-in #1
Week 9: Mesoamerica Part II
                Maya Traditions - Harkness Discussion of readings
F October 26    Maya ethnographic textiles
                Identity, Place, and Georeferencing – in class exercise
Week 10: Iconography, Symbolism: What do Textiles Mean?
                Harkness Discussion of readings
F November 2    Case studies: Mesoamerican and global examples
                Project Check-in #2
Week 11: Craft, Gender, Value: Who Made Textiles and How do We Know?
                Gender and Division of Labor - Harkness Discussion of readings
                Archaeological, ethnohistorical, and ethnographic evidence
F November 9
                Case studies: global perspectives and example from the Americas
                Connections to previous course examples
Week 12: Technologies of the New World: How Were Textiles Made?


                                                                                                 6
                         Colors, Dyes, Looms, and Hand-Tools – Plants, Wood, and Clay
                         Cochineal, Indigo, and other New World and subtropical dyes
     F November 16
                         Project Deliverables Draft due
                         Information on presentation formats
     Sa Nov. 17          Extra Credit field trip to natural dyeing workshop
                     F November 23 No Class – Happy Thanksgiving Break!
     Week 13: Presentations
                         Presentations due for Group 1
     F November 30
                         Project Deliverables Due for Group 2
     Week 14: Presentations and Final Overview
                         Presentations due for Group 2
                         Project Deliverables Due for Group 1
                         Final overview: issues in collecting and exhibiting textiles
                         Course evaluations
          CONGRATULATIONS! YOU ARE DONE – HAPPY WINTER BREAK!
IMPORTANT COURSE EXPECTATIONS AND POLICIES: PLEASE READ!
Note: if you email to ask for information already contained in these pages, do not expect a
reply.
CLASSROOM POLICY:
Please arrive on time, stay awake, be courteous to your instructor and your peers, and refrain
from being disruptive. Being disruptive includes arriving late and making people get up for
your seat; clanking desks and noisily putting away your things before the official end of class;
engaging in computer activities other than note-taking, which distract you and those seated
near you; taking out and looking at your phone.
Computers and tablets (not phones) are allowed in class for note-taking only and are
required for some course-related projects. Please refrain from engaging in other activities on
your computer while note-taking: do not check your email, shop online, play games, do
homework for other classes, update your social media profiles, etc. Multi-tasking is severely
overrated.
Please turn off the ringer and stow away all cell phones. Do not park them on the desk, and
do not surreptitiously check them in your lap. Simply refrain from using them for the time that
you are in class. If you absolutely have to use your phone, step out of the room.
Note: because of the requirements of the collection, absolutely no food or drink is allowed in
the classroom, except for water in a closed container. This means that you should plan to eat


                                                                                                        7
before and after class. There will be a 15-minute break in the middle of class – use this to eat
some food if you need to, but do not expect to store it in the classroom.
ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION POLICY:
Attendance in class is required and expected and ensures your greatest chance of success in this
course. Attendance also allows you to participate, and participation in a small, seminar-style,
research-based course is a fundamental component of your successful engagement with course
materials. If you do not attend, you cannot participate. If you attend but never contribute to
discussion, get distracted, sleep, or check your phone, you are not participating, which may
impact the quality of your graded work.
Missed classes will not negatively impact your attendance and participation grade only with
notification from the Dean of Students (see Student Emergency Services below and link to what
does and does not constitute emergency-linked absences).
If you are late to class or leave early, it is your responsibility to sign the attendance sheet. I will
not keep track of classes in which you were present but forgot to sign in, and later emailed me
about forgetting. Missed signatures count as absences. Repeated late arrivals, late returns from
break, and leaving early will be notes and could negatively affect your attendance and
participation grade.
As this is not an online class, information delivered in class is not necessarily going to be found
on Canvas. If you miss class and ask whether you “missed anything,” the answer is “yes.”
Please rely on your network of peers in class to exchange notes, fill in missing information and
announcements, and continue to stay up to date even if you miss a class for a legitimate reason.
You are still responsible for due dates and for the material covered during the classes you miss.
NOTE - Three exceptions to the attendance policy are outlined below:
1. Religious holidays: A student who misses class or other required activities for the
observance of a religious holy day will not be penalized under Sections 51.911 and 51.925 of the
Texas Education Code; however, the policy requires students to notify each of their instructors in
advance of the absence so that arrangements can be made. Please notify your instructor 14 days
in advance if you foresee that a religious holy day will affect your ability to attend a class.
2. If you have already turned in your official Department of Intercollegiate Athletics travel
schedule, travel days are approved but you need to notify me before the last date to drop, so
arrangements can be made in advance and we can discuss whether your athletics schedule
might impact your ability to succeed in this course. You are still responsible for any work
missed or any assignments due.
3. If you have an illness, injury, personal or family emergency, your absence will be excused
only with notification from the Student Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of
Students: familiarize yourself with their response to student needs and absences from class:
Student Emergency Services rules and contact information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/index.php
Class Absence Notification Request – read the link below carefully:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php
COMMUNICATION POLICY:
Please feel free to communicate in person during office hours. If you communicate via email,
please remember that you might be asked to come to office hours if the matter is too lengthy to
discuss in an email. When you send emails, please remember to communicate professionally


                                                                                                     8
and with courtesy. Identify your course (ARH322) in the subject line to avoid confusion with
other courses, and to avoid accidentally being filtered out to junk mail. Allow 48 hours to
receive a response. Learning how to communicate effectively is a skill that will serve you
throughout your adult life.
You are welcome to use Canvas to email, as messages are seamlessly integrated with my inbox.
However, you must either choose to push Canvas notifications to your email, or make sure to
check Canvas at least once daily. Check the email address you have provided to UT Austin as
your contact email. Not being aware of a message, messages bounced because of “user
unknown,” and a full inbox are not justifiable reason for being uninformed.
USE OF CLASS MATERIAL:
The materials used in this class, including but not limited to class slides and other images
images, readings, and homework assignments are copyright protected works. Only students
enrolled in a password-protected Canvas course are entitled to make use of the class materials
for the purposes of completing their own work. Any unauthorized copying and distributing of
the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being
taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific,
express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code
and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing
those materials with other current or future students. You may share notes with other students
currently enrolled in this class provided that you do not charge for the service.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
The University’s Honor Code states the following: “As a student of The University of Texas at
Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” A
high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University is expected
of all students. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other
scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
    • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
    • complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
         assistance in preparing them;
    • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
         academic discipline; and
    • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
         student.
For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to Chapter
11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities. Familiarize yourself with the Honor
Code here: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY:
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
dishonesty - basically, all conduct that violates this standard, including any act designed to give an
unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
    • Cheating
    • Plagiarism
    • Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
    • Falsifying Academic Records


                                                                                                  9
    •   Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
        extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
    •   Multiple submissions (e.g., submitting essentially the same written assignment for two
        courses without authorization to do so)
    •   Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
Please be aware that UT Austin policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
If you have questions, please visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php.
If you have concerns over what constitutes scholastic honesty in writing, please contact the
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:
Students with certified disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations in the
course. For information on the University of Texas at Austin policy on and support of students
with disabilities, please call (512) 471-6259 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that
I can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
RESOURCES AND STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES:
Assistance is available to you to help you succeed in your university career. Numerous free
an/or low cost support services include, but are not limited to, the following:
    • The Undergraduate Writing Center at http://uwc.utexas.edu/ helps students with
        every phase of writing assignments for their courses.
    • The Sanger Learning Center at http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/ provides study skills,
        time-management and note-taking courses.
    • Student Emergency Services at
        http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/index.php provides services that include
        student absence notifications in case of documented medical (mental of physical health)
        issues, crime victimization, or family-related critical incidents and emergencies.
    • University Health Services at http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/ provides medical and
        health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who
        are officially enrolled in certain University programs.
    • The Counseling and Mental Health Center at http://cmhc.utexas.edu/ helps students
        with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life
