1
                  Classics of Social and Political Thought
                             CTI 302 / GOV 314
                                   Fall 2020
                         Professor Maurizio Viroli
   “ALAMO DRAFT HOUSE RULES” ARE IN EFFECT IN THIS CLASS: NO
     TEXTING, NO CELL PHONES, NO COMPUTERS OR ELECTRONIC
   DEVICES ON DURING CLASS. FIRST OFFENSE (YELLOW CARD), YOU
  LOSE ALL ATTENDANCE CREDIT FOR TERM. SECOND OFFENCE (RED
      CARD) YOU LOSE TWENTY POINTS FROM THE FINAL GRADE.
Unique 29370 and 37936
TTh. 11-12:30
Office hours: W 9-12
Office: Mezes 3.150
Phone: 232-7256
Email: maurizio.viroli@austin.utexas.edu
TA: James O’ Connor
(Probable) Office Hours: Friday 11:00-2:00
Batts Hall 1.118
Email: james.oconnorta@gmail.com
Course Description
This is a course about human nature. We will be asking what human beings
are, what they care most about, what they most deeply need and are moved
by, and what the character is of their highest aspirations. We will consider
what the features are of human nature that make human life both so rich and
promising and so fraught with conflict. We will consider different accounts
of where we came from, and of the potential that political life does or does
not have to forge communities within which individuals can find happiness.


2
We will examine in depth ideas of moral and social emancipation as well as
reflections on the religious experience. Through all of this, we will consider
what the answers to those questions suggest about how we should live, both
individually and collectively.
The course will proceed by means of close readings of some of the most
thoughtful and influential reflections on these questions, from ancient times
to the present. By the end of the course, students should understand and be
able to assess some of the most compelling accounts of human nature that
have been proposed and should also have a deeper understanding of the
origin, appeal, and validity of many contemporary political and social
assumptions.
This course counts towards the Certificate Program in Core Texts and Ideas,
a 6-course sequence in the great books, ideas, and controversies that have
shaped the modern world. The program is open to students in all majors and
colleges. For more information, visit https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/coretexts.
This course may be used to fulfill the Social and Behavioral Sciences
component of the University Core Curriculum and addresses the following
four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, empirical and
quantitative skills, and social responsibility.
Prerequisites: none
                             REQUIRED TEXTS
Many of the selections from the texts below will be made available through
PDF, including Skinner, Machiavelli and Levi. HOWEVER, any texts from
a PDF file should be printed and brought to class with the assigned
selections. Furthermore, based on class reactions to readings, we will
emphasize different parts of the selections below: y'all will be advised of this
as it arises.
These books are all available at the University Co-op and are strongly
recommended in the following editions:
Aristotle, The Politics , Cambridge University Press (selection)
Cicero, On Duties, Cambridge University Press
Aquinas, On Princely Government, in Political Writings, Cambridge


3
University Press
Quentin Skinner, ‘Ambrogio Lorenzetti and the portrayal of good
government’, in Visions of Politics, vol. 2, Cambridge University Press
Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince Oxford, Oxford University Press
Niccolò Machiavelli, Discourses on Livy, Chicago University Press
(selection)
Niccolò Machiavelli, Mandragola, Waveland Press
Hobbes, Leviathan, Cambridge University Press
La Boétie Etienne, Discourse on voluntary servitude, Hackett Publishing,
2012
Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws, Cambridge University Press (selection)
Jean- Jacques Rousseau, “Discourse on Inequality” and “Discourse on
Political Economy” in Rousseau, Basic Political Writings, Hackett
Publishing
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Emile, Trans. Allan Bloom, Basic Books
Alexis De Tocqueville, Democracy in America, Harper & Row (selection)
Dostoevsky, Fëdor, The Legend of the Grand Inquisitor, Filiquarian
Publishing
Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism, Harcourt Brace (selection)
Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem, Penguin Classics
Primo Levi, Survival in Auschwitz, New York Simon &Schuster, 1996
Max Weber, Politics as a Vocation, in The Vocation Lectures, Hackett
Publishing
Walzer, Michael, Exodus and Revolution, New York, Basic Books, 1985
Martin Luther King, A Testament of Hope, Harper& Row (selection)
                           COURSE SCHEDULE
WEEK I
Introductory Lecture
Aristotle, The Politics, Book I
WEEK II
Aristotle, The Politics, Book III
Cicero, On Duties, Book I
WEEK III
Cicero, On Duties, Books II-III
Thomas Aquinas, On Princely Government


4
WEEK IV
Ambrogio Lorenzetti, ‘Of Good and Bad Government’ (fresco; to be
uploaded on Canvas)
Quentin Skinner, ‘Ambrogio Lorenzetti and the portrayal of good
government’, in Visions of Politics
WEEK V
Readings: Machiavelli, Discourses on Livy Bk. I, chs. 1-6; 10; 16 -18, 58,
and Bk. II, ch.2 and 4; Bk. III ch.1
Machiavelli, Discourses on Livy, Bk. I chs. 10, 11, 12; BK II, ch. 2; Bk. III,
ch. 1
WEEK VI
Machiavelli, The Prince, VIII, XV, XVI, XVII and XVIII
Machiavelli, Mandragola
WEEK VII
Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan
Chapters: 11, 13, 17, 21, Review and Conclusion
WEEK VIII
La Boétie Etienne, Discourse on Voluntary Servitude
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Second Discourse
WEEK IX
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Discourse on Political Economy
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, skim Emile Book I; read closely, Profession of
Faith of the Savoyard Vicar (in Book IV)
WEEK X
Alexis De Tocqueville, Democracy in America,
Democracy in America (VOL. I: Author’s Introduction, Part I: 1 Physical
Configuration of North America; 2. Concerning their point of departure and
its importance for the future of the Anglo-Americans; ch. 9: Religion
Considered as a Political Institution; Indirect Influence of Religious beliefs
upon Political Society in the United States; The main causes That Make
Religion Powerful in America). Vol. II: Part I, ch. 2: Concerning the
Principal Source of beliefs Among Democratic Peoples; ch. 5: How Religion
in the United States Makes Use of Democratic Instincts


5
WEEK XI
Dostoevsky, Fëdor, The Legend of the Grand Inquisitor
Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism, 341-388
WEEK XII
Hannah Arent, Eichmann in Jerusalem, pp. 3-35, and pp. 253-279
Primo Levi, Survival in Auschwitz
WEEK XIII
Max Weber, Politics as Vocation
Walzer, Michael, Exodus and Revolution
WEEK XIV
Martin Luther King, A Testament of Hope
Review and conclusion
Assignments and Grading
Class participation 20%
Midterm 30%
Final 50%
The class participation grades will be based on the quality of the comments
you make and the questions you raise in discussion board posts, in class, and
in office hours. Class participation grades will be raised by 5% for perfect
attendance and will fall by 10% (one letter grade) for every unexcused
absence after the second. There is no penalty for the first two absences,
absences due to documented illness or family emergency, or absences due to
religious holidays for which you have notified me in advance.
Papers will be graded for the quality of the writing as well as for their
substantive content. For advice on writing political philosophy essays, see
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/government/_files/lpangleweb/AdviceOnPaper
Writing.pdf. For individual help with paper writing, come to office hours
any time or visit the Undergraduate Writing Center, info at
http://uwc.utexas.edu. Late papers will be subject to a penalty of 3% + 2%
for each calendar day they are late, unless you have a medical excuse or
family emergency. The midterm may be re-written within two weeks of
being returned for a revised grade, which will then be averaged with the
original grade. Unfortunately, we cannot apply this policy to the final, for


6
the reason that time is likely to run short.
Students who violate university rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the university.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability.
