                                     ANS 361N/ANT 322E:
                         SELF AND CULTURE IN NORTH KOREA
                                     Uniques #31700/31070
                                            Fall 2019
Meets:           TuTh 3:30-5:00, GAR 0.128
Instructor:      Robert Oppenheim
Office:          WCH 5.134
Tel.:            471-7279
Email:           rmo@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours:    Tu 12:30-2, Th 2-3:30 or by appointment
Course Description:
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (commonly called North Korea) is often
described as closed or unknowable, and simultaneously characterized in much U.S.
public discussion as alternatively threatening, crazy/irrational, or simply pathetic. It is
very rare to hear something about North Korea other than nuclear weapons, famine, or
human rights/refugees; it is sometimes hard to imagine that there is an actual society
there.
Yet in recent years, there has emerged a growing scholarly literature precisely concerned
with understanding North Korea’s historical development and its current workings as a
social, cultural, and political/ideological system. Self and Culture in North Korea is
focused on the questions this literature raises. Throughout the course, we examine such
issues as:
     • What is the history of North Korea’s formation, and of its engagement with the
         outside world?
     • How and why did the crisis of the 1990s happen, and how is it variously
         understood?
     • What has “crossing the line” from and to North Korea entailed for different
         people at different times?
     • What forms does North Korean everyday life take? What does it mean to be
         North Korean?
     • What is the public culture of North Korea? What role does art (especially film,
         but also literature, theater, public performance, architecture, etc.) play in public
         life?
Readings from various sources will be supplemented with documentary and (North
Korean) feature films. This is a discussion-based course.
Flag Information:
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should


therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
(Obvious, no?)
Assignments and Grading:
I will make use of plus/minus grading in this course.
A) A and B class presentations (5% each, 10% for both): Each student will be required to
give one A presentation and one B presentation over the course of the term. A
presentations should be in the 5-10 minute range (NOT more than that). Please offer an
overview of the main points and arguments of the reading or readings for that day’s class;
please do NOT attempt a full summary. B presentations should be 5 minutes, tops.
Please present three questions arising from the readings for that day’s class as a basis for
beginning class discussion. Open-ended, comparative, or conceptual questions tend to be
better than closed-ended, factual questions.
        We will sign up for presentations in the first few classes. Note that not every
class meeting will have presentation slots. Some classes will have more than one.
B) Short assignments (5 x 5%=25% total): There are five short assignments, indicated on
the syllabus, which ask you to prepare 1-2 paragraphs on a designated topic for a specific
class in order to foster class discussion. You should post your assignments to Canvas
before class, but you should also have them accessible and ready to discuss in some
fashion.
C) Papers (10% + 15%=25%): There are two papers assigned for this course, of
approximately 4-5 and 6-7 pages in expected length, respectively. Assignment release
and due dates are given below.
D) Take-home, open-book midterm exam (15%): This will be assigned around the
midpoint of the course and will be due a week later (on Canvas). It will likely feature a
mix of paragraph-long short answer and perhaps short essay questions, likely with some
degree of choice.
E) Take-home, open-book final exam (15%): The final exam will have a similar format to
the midterm, although it will likely be somewhat longer. It will be available on the last
day of class and will be due approximately a week later (on Canvas).
F) General class participation and discussion (10%): Within reason, quality counts more
than quantity. Don’t just talk, engage. Of course, if you are absent, you can’t really
participate either (a second way attendance factors into the final grade).
Academic dishonesty, cheating or plagiarism, will not be tolerated and will result in
penalties ranging from loss of credit for an assignment to university disciplinary
action.


Readings and Films:
I have ordered the following books for this course, which should be available at the Coop
and via various other retailers, and also will be on reserve at PCL:
Suzy Kim, Everyday Life in the North Korean Revolution
Barbara Demick, Nothing to Envy
Sonia Ryang, Reading North Korea
Jane Portal, Art Under Control in North Korea
Andrei Lankov, The Real North Korea
Other readings are or will be posted to Canvas (Files>Course Documents) or can be
accessed online via a link in the syllabus.
We see several films in this course, both documentaries and North Korean feature films.
Should you miss an in-class showing, most are available at the Fine Arts Library, via
Youtube, or both. I will try to help with links.
University Boilerplate:
University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to
keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly
and frequently to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical.
You can find UT Austin?s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter
that documents your disability from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the
beginning of the semester so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business
days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more
information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),


the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire
alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate,
inform me in writing during the first week of class.
      In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or
the Fire Prevention Services office.
Schedule:
8/29 Course Introduction
9/3 Colonial Origins A/B:
           Suzy Kim, Everyday Life in the North Korean Revolution, Introduction and chs.
           1-2
9/5 Sentimental Memory, the State, and the Colonial Past No pres
           Film: The Flower-Selling Girl (dir Choi Ik Kyu, 1972)
           (YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ey2fvPtBsiA)
9/10 A/B (watch end of film in advance):
           The Flower-Selling Girl (continued)
9/12 The North Korean Revolution A/B:
           Kim, Everyday Life, chs. 3-5
9/17 A/B:
           Kim, Everyday Life, chs. 6-7 and Conclusion
           Paper #1 assigned (4-5 pp. double-space)
9/19 The Turn to Juche A/B (Lankov):                                               A/B(Kim):
           Andrei Lankov, The Real North Korea, Introduction and ch. 1


        Kim Il Sung, “On Eliminating Dogmatism and Formalism and Establishing Juche
        in Ideological Work” (December 28, 1955). Available online here:
        https://www.marxists.org/archive/kim-il-sung/1955/12/28.htm
        Short assignment (due on Canvas by class this day, a paragraph or two in
        length): Through what sorts of examples did Kim develop the idea of Juche
        in his 1955 speech? How would you explain what Juche means or does?
        Have your assignment with you or accessible and be ready to discuss in class.
9/24 Industrialism and its Culture A/B (on reading):
        Cheehyung Harrison Kim, “North Korea’s Vinalon City: Industrialism as
        Socialist Everyday Life,” positions: asia critique 22(4): 809-836 (2014).
        Cheehyung Kim, “The Production of Everyday Life in Postwar North Korea.”
        Talk at Harvard Korea Institute on Vimeo: http://vimeo.com/76542561 (watch
        before class).
9/26 Mid-Century Internationalism No pres
        Film (excerpts, in class): The Game of their Lives (dir. Daniel Gordon, 2002)
10/1 Internationalism and Symbolic Performance A/B (Medlicott):
        Carol Medlicott, “Symbol and Sovereignty in North Korea,” SAIS Review 25(2):
        69-79 (2005).
        Short assignment: Find and have ready an article reflecting DPRK
        internationalism (or its self-imagination) from the KCNA aggregator
        website: https://kcnawatch.org/. Analyze what you think this article shows
        about how the DPRK interacts with the world, or how it portrays/imagines
        itself as interacting with the world. (Submit 1-2 paragraphs on Canvas
        before class meets.)
10/3 The Theater State: Art, Film, and Public Culture A/B:
        Jane Portal, Art Under Control in North Korea (London: Reaktion Books, 2005),
        Chs. 1-3
        Paper #1 due
10/8
        Portal, Art Under Control, Chs. 4-6 A/B:


       Short assignment (due on Canvas before class, 1-2 paragraphs in length):
       Analyze a work of North Korean art, either from Portal’s book or elsewhere,
       in political and artistic terms. Be prepared to discuss it in class and, if you
       choose a work from outside Portal’s book, have an image or link ready.
10/10 A/B (Chung):
       Film (in class): Pulgasari (dir. Sin Sang-ok, 1985)
       Steven Chung, “The Split Screen: Sin Sang-ok in North Korea, ” in Sonia Ryang
       ed. North Korea: Toward a Better Understanding. (Lexington Press, 2009).
10/15 A/B (Kim):
       Pulgasari (continued)
       Kim Jong Il, The Cinema and Directing (Pyongyang: Foreign Languages
       Publishing House, 1987) – skim
10/17 A/B
       Suk-Young Kim, Illusive Utopia (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, 2010), chs.
       5-6 (Canvas)
       Take-home midterm assigned
10/22 Into the 1990s: The Crisis Years A/B
       Lankov, The Real North Korea, chs. 2-3
10/24 North Korea’s Great Famine A/B (part 1)                        A/B (part 2)
       Andrew S. Natsios, The Great North Korean Famine (Washington: U.S. Institute
       of Peace Press, 2001), Foreword, Introduction, Chs. 1, 5, 9, 11.
       Cwiertka, Katarzyna J., Cuisine, Colonialism and Cold War: Food in Twentieth-
       Century Korea, ch. 6.
       Take-home midterm due
10/29 Famine and the Politics of Human Rights A/B (UNHRC report)
       A/B(Smith):
       UNHRC, Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the
       Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, A/HRC/25/63, 7 February 2014. {36
       pp.} {Highly optional: the full report, A/HRC/25/CRP/1, is also on reserve.}


       Hazel Smith, “Crimes Against Humanity?: Unpacking the North Korean Human
       Rights Debate,” Critical Asian Studies 46(1): 127-143 (2014).
       UNICEF, The State of the World’s Children, 2017 report statistical tables (skim
       for where the DPRK stands).
       Short assignment (due on Canvas before class, 1-2 paragraphs in length): Via
       the UNICEF statistical tables, compare North Korea’s standing with respect
       to other nations, or whichever seem most pertinent, with respect to measures
       of health and well-being. Do you find anything particularly telling about the
       comparison?
10/31 Refugees, Defectors, Exiles, and Everyday Life in North Korea A/B:
       Barbara Demick, Nothing to Envy, first half (chapters TBA)
11/5 A/B:
       Demick, Nothing to Envy, remainder of book.
11/7 No pres
       Film (in class): Crossing the Line (dir. Daniel Gordon, 2006)
       Paper #2 assigned (6-7 pp.)
11/12 No pres
       Crossing the Line (continued)
       Jim Frederick, “In From the Cold,” Time December 13, 2004, pp. 38-42.
       http://ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/login?url=http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?dir
       ect=true&db=a9h&AN=15267743&site=ehost-live
11/14 Mass, Self, and Leader A/B (part 1):                     A/B (part 2):
       Sonia Ryang, Reading North Korea: An Ethnological Inquiry (Cambridge:
       Harvard Asia Center, 2012), Introduction and Sections 1-2 (note: long
       assignment)
11/19 A/B:
       Ryang, Reading North Korea, Section 3 and conclusion


11/21 No pres
       Film: State of Mind (dir. Daniel Gordon, 2004)
11/26 No pres
       State of Mind (continued)
11/28 Thanksgiving
12/3 Whither NK? A/B (Lankov):                            A/B(Greenhill):
       Lankov, The Real North Korea, chs. 4-5.
       Greenhill, Kelly M., “North Korean Migrants, Nongovernmental Organizations,
       and Nuclear Weapons,” ch. 5 in Greenhill, Weapons of Mass Migration.
12/5 A/B:
       Lankov, The Real North Korea, Interlude, chs. 6-7, and Conclusion
       Short assignment (due on Canvas before class, 1-2 paragraphs in length):
       Maybe you agree with Lankov, maybe not. What do you think is most likely
       to happen with North Korea over the next decade, and what should “we”
       (always a dangerous word…oh, I don’t know, let’s say “we” in the United
       States and/or South Korea) be doing to prepare for it?
       Paper #2 due
       Take-home final assigned
Approximately 12/13 (Friday): Take-home final due on Canvas
