                                                                                                                 Page 1
  Fall 2018                                                                                 DR. CARY CORDOVA
  AMS 310/HIS 315G                                                                           Associate Professor
  Unique #: 31090/38975
                                      AMS 310 / HIS 315G
                                       INTRODUCTION TO
                                      AMERICAN STUDIES
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This class introduces students to the field of American Studies. The guiding objective of the class is to use
interdisciplinary lenses – such as music, dance, material culture, and technology – to develop a more complex
understanding of American culture. The course outline follows a semi-linear pattern in history, but it is hardly
comprehensive. We will look broadly at the tensions between individual identity formation and the many social
constructions that operate in American culture. The class is loosely tied around the interrelationship of individuals
with mass culture (music, in particular, but also fashion, television, government, and corporate cultures).
This class is organized into three sections, starting with the dynamics of swing culture in the 1930s and ‘40s,
shifting to the complexities of popular music and civil rights from the 1950s to the 1970s, and finally, looking at
the politics of class, capital, and citizenship in our everyday lives. We will use these three modules to think
critically about the relationship between the past and present, to examine the relationship between individual
identity formation and the larger cultural zeitgeist, and to develop an understanding of how social inequalities,
particularly guised through race, class, gender, sexuality, and geography, infiltrate all areas of American life.
While mass culture often provides a context for making sense of the world, it also simplifies and negates a variety
of more complex issues. At a time when people are bombarded with advertisements, information, and
propaganda, this course encourages students to develop research skills, raise questions, and thoughtfully evaluate
sources. If there is an overriding theme to the class, it is the concept of visibility versus invisibility. Who
becomes the representative American? What is un-American? Who feels displaced, or invisible? How do
ideologies of race, class, gender, and sexuality penetrate popular culture? And how have individuals responded?
The goals of the course are to develop a more nuanced understanding of American culture and American Studies,
to build critical thinking skills, and to generate new paradigms for looking at the world.
REQUIRED TEXTS:
COURSE READER: This class requires a course reader, which will be available for purchase at Jenn’s Copy
and Binding (512-482-0779). Jenn’s is located at 2518 Guadalupe (where Guadalupe intersects with Dean
Keeton). Please note: The first few articles will be posted on Canvas to ensure everyone has access to the
initial readings: https://utexas.instructure.com/
If you have trouble accessing the Canvas system, please contact the UT helpdesk (512-475-9400). In addition,
one copy of the course reader will be placed on reserve at PCL to ensure everyone’s access.
As you will see, this course intentionally brings together a diverse group of readings from a wide array of authors.
Part of your objective in this class is to make connections between the readings and to detect parallels,


                                                                                                                 Page 2
intersections, and dissension. In fact, becoming a critical reader of texts is an instrumental part of participating in
American Studies, since this is a field that encourages you to question your sources and to poke and prod at
silences and assumptions.
SUPPLEMENTAL INSTRUCTION:
                 ◼ Section 1:_Monday, 10:00-11:00 a.m., JES A218A
                 ◼ Section 2: Wednesday, 6:30-7:30 p.m., RLM 5.112
This course offers an optional Supplemental Instruction (SI) discussion sections in conjunction with the Sanger
Learning and Career Center. Teaching Assistant Christine Castro will hold this discussion section twice a week
for one hour (Note: the same material will be covered in both sections). The section will cover course material
as well as other skills that are vital for college success such as how to organize information, test prep and test
taking skills, and critical thinking and writing skills. There is a consistent and strong correlation between grades
and SI attendance in this and/or other classes and you are highly encouraged to take advantage of this opportunity.
Please note: Students who are unable to attend these sessions due to scheduling conflicts are more than welcome
to make use of TA and professor office hours to discuss class materials.
CULTURAL DIVERSITY IN THE UNITED STATES FLAG:
“The Cultural Diversity requirement increases your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American
cultural experience. Courses carrying this flag ask you to explore the beliefs, practices, and histories of at least
one cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization. Many of these courses also encourage you to
reflect on your own cultural experiences.” https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/cultural-diversity
GRADING:
     ◼ Midterm Exam (25%): A combination of keywords and short essays.
     ◼ Final Exam (25%): Similar to the midterm, focused mostly on material covered after the midterm.
     ◼ Reading Analysis papers (15%)
         o You must submit two short, but thoughtful papers (3 pages) in relation to a day’s reading assignment.
             One paper is due prior to the midterm, while the second is due in the latter half of the class (see
             schedule for due dates).
     ◼ Discography (20%)
         o For this assignment, you will turn in a music playlist and accompanying cultural analysis that
             examines how this selection of songs is personally AND culturally significant. Given that we will be
             spending a significant amount of time discussing the complexities of popular music in this class, this
             assignment requires you to think critically about the music that has informed your life. While it may
             be easy to identify songs you love, this assignment asks you to identify the larger cultural context of
             the songs you choose. Rarely is there a single answer to this process, but you will need to build your
             argument on RESEARCH.
     ◼ Attendance and Participation (15%)
         o Students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate as best they can in such a sizable
             class. Just showing up to class is important, but it is not the only factor in determining a student’s
             performance. Various aspects of the student’s overall performance will be taken into account,


                                                                                                         Page 3
     including regular attendance, pop questions, pop quizzes, submission of all assignments, overall
     performance of assignments, extra credit, participation in class, and/or efforts to communicate with
     the professor and teaching assistants outside of class.
  o  Sign-in Sheet: A sign-in sheet will be passed out at each class.
  o  It is the student’s responsibility to sign in each day. A pop question or quiz also may be used as a
     substitute for the sign-in sheet.
  o  You may miss up to 3 classes without penalty. Missing more than 3 classes is likely to
     negatively impact your grade. Students who experience conflicts as a result of a medical or family
     emergency, social trauma or disaster, or official documented university business, are encouraged to
     discuss accommodations with the professor and / or teaching assistants.
  o  Missing more than 3 weeks of class (7 absences) is a guaranteed zero for attendance and
     participation and may result in failing the class.
  o  Pop Questions: These short questions may draw on the reading or on lecture. Whether or not the
     student knows the answer, students should turn in a paper with their name, since I may use pop
     questions to calculate roll for that day.
  o  Quizzes: I do pop reading quizzes. Quizzes reward students that stay on top of the reading. This is
     your opportunity to show your hard work. But be warned: I especially like to give quizzes when I
     sense students are unprepared for lecture. My quizzes are not hard if you have done the reading.
     Come to class prepared. I do not give make-up quizzes. For quizzes, I grade as follows: +
     (excellent); ✓+ (good); ✓ (acceptable); ✓- (poor); — (failed). These grades are taken into
     consideration at the end of the semester as part of the student’s overall participation grade.
  o  Office hours: Your professor and your teaching assistants are happy to help you steer your way
     through this class. You are encouraged to visit with us during our office hours, or by appointment.
     Please take a few minutes to introduce yourself and express any questions you might have, or just say
     “hi.”
◼ Extra Credit:
  o  As the semester rolls along, there may be a few opportunities for extra credit. Extra credit
     opportunities often entail attending an event or talk related to our class and submitting a short paper
     (1-2 pages) on how the content of the event relates to the content of our class. If you have an idea for
     an extra credit assignment, you are welcome to discuss it with the professor.
  o  So what is extra credit worth? Extra credit is given weight in the assessment of your participation
     grade. It is meant to help students that would like a little more recognition in this aspect of the
     grading process. It is in no way required, but it can help push students up a couple of points in their
     overall participation grade.
  o  Extra Credit Exam Questions: Before the midterm and before the final, you will have the option of
     composing at least one short essay question that you would like to see on the upcoming exam. This is
     an exercise to make you think about how you can connect the materials and develop your critical
     thinking skills about what you are learning.


                                                                                                             Page 4
GRADING SCALE:
        100-93 = A                   92-90 = A-                   87-89 = B+                  84-86 = B
        80-83 = B-                   77-79 = C+                    74-76 = C                 70-73 = C-
        67-69 = D+                    64-66 = D                   60-63 = D-                   0-59 = F
POLICIES:
  ◼ CLASSROOM CONDUCT:
     o    In order to build the best possible learning environment, please be respectful of the professor, the
          teaching assistants, and other students. Reading on your phone, texting, falling asleep, talking to
          friends, and various other examples of disregarding the learning environment, are not
          acceptable conduct. Should you feel compelled to engage in these activities, you may be asked to
          leave the classroom.
     o    Please turn off and put away all the electronics – cell phones, tablets, and laptops.
          LAPTOP POLICY: WHY LAPTOPS ARE DISCOURAGED
          1. Students perform better without them! Studies show that the act of physically writing notes
               helps students better retain information. While laptop writers can type more quickly, they risk
               becoming “transcription zombies,” while those who put pen to paper must actively edit and
               physically document information in a way that enhances memory. See here:
               http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/the-case-for-banning-laptops-in-the-classroom
          2. While perhaps convenient for one student, laptops often serve as objects of distraction for
               every other nearby student.
          3. Because we are all human and easily distracted by email, social media, and homework for other
               classes. If you must use a laptop to take notes, you must abide the following: You must sit in the
               first three/four rows of class. If you appear to be doing anything other than taking notes, you will
               lose the privilege of using your laptop for the rest of the semester. The loss of electronic
               privileges is FINAL.
ASSIGNMENTS / LATE POLICIES:
  ◼ Students are expected to do the required readings for each class in advance of attending class. Students
     also are encouraged to bring the course reader with them to class, in order to refer to the material when
     needed (or perhaps prepare for a pop quiz!).
  ◼ Extensions on graded assignments will be granted only in the case of a medical or family emergency,
     social trauma or disaster, or if you have official documented university business off campus. In most
     cases, you must notify me before the due date. Failure to do so will result in the automatic subtraction of
     a letter grade. Assignments turned in late without an allowable excuse will lose one letter grade for
     each day past the due date.
  ◼ You are responsible for the material missed in any class. I cannot respond to email requests to summarize
     material, but I can respond to such requests during office hours or by appointment. Alternatively, consult


                                                                                                           Page 5
    with the teaching assistants, or a fellow student.
  ◼ EXAMS: Exams will be administered during the scheduled class time or final time. If you miss class,
    you will not receive credit for the exam. Only in cases of serious emergency or conflict, will I consider
    allowing a student to take the exam at a time other than on the schedule.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY:
  ◼ Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated and ALL incidents of dishonesty will be reported to the Office
    of the Dean of Students and Student Judicial Services. Academic dishonesty includes, but is not limited
    to, cheating, plagiarism (the unauthorized appropriation of another’s work – including from Websites – in
    one’s own written work offered for credit) and collusion (the unauthorized collaboration with another
    person in preparing college work offered for credit). These acts will be subject to serious academic
    penalty.
  ◼ PLAGIARISM: STUDENTS WHO COMMIT PLAGIARISM ARE SUBJECT TO IMMEDIATE
    FAILURE OF THE CLASS, IN ADDITION TO FACING THE POLICIES OF THE
    UNIVERSITY. Students should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted to a
    plagiarism-detection tool such as Turnitin.com as part of a larger effort to address plagiarism and
    improper citation. If you are unclear about what plagiarism is, I would encourage you to visit the
    following website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
ACCOMMODATION:
  ◼ Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
    accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at ssd@austin.utexas.edu, or 512-
    471-6259 (voice), or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone), as soon as possible to request an official letter
    outlining authorized accommodations. The professor and student will use this letter as a guide for
    implementing any accommodations. Students who need assistance, but do not yet have an official letter
    of support, are welcome to bring any of their concerns to the attention of the professor. Immediate
    concerns will be handled on a case by case basis, and official documentation will be required to ensure
    proper accommodations are made. See here for more info: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/using-
    accommodations/
  ◼ Religious observances: Texas Education Code 51.911 states that a student shall be excused from
    attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
    holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
    may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
    assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University
    policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so
    that arrangements can be made.
CAMPUS CARRY:
  ◼ According to Texas SB11, persons with a current legally valid Concealed Carry License may carry a legal
    handgun on public college campuses, as long as it remains concealed and on their person (private colleges
    can opt out of SB11). If anyone, including the professor, sees a handgun, however briefly, leave the
    vicinity and call 911 immediately.


                                                                                                               Page 6
    ◼ According to SB11, faculty members cannot ban the concealed carry of handguns in their classrooms, no
       matter how unsafe they or students may feel discussing complex issues with firearms present.
    ◼ Some exceptions to campus carry exist: For instance, faculty and staff can ban guns from their sole-
       occupant offices, but only if they give oral notice of this policy. Thus, in order to comply with this new
       policy, I will read the following aloud on the first day of class: “I prohibit the concealed carry of
       handguns in my office.”
STRATEGIES TO DO WELL IN THIS CLASS:
    ◼ FOCUSED READING:
       o This class asks students to read several essays of varying levels of difficulty. You are encouraged to
           read these texts thoughtfully and strategically. Rather than feeling you must remember every detail,
           consider these questions as guides to reading these texts more efficiently:
           ▪ What is the author’s central argument?
           ▪ What are the major themes and concerns shaping this argument?
           ▪ What evidence does the author use? What facts prove most or least convincing? Develop specific
                examples.
           ▪ What questions does the text raise for you?
    ◼ EFFECTIVE NOTE TAKING:
       o Students who opt for lecture to wash over them without taking notes forget lots! Studies show
           that we tend to forget about 40% of new information within the first 24 hours and about 60% after 48
           hours (famously known as the “Forgetting Curve”), unless we take steps to document and review
           the information.
       o BE SELECTIVE: You do not need verbatim transcripts of class discussions. Students benefit more
           from shorter, more targeted notes.
       o KEYWORDS are used to help students focus on particular narratives and events. Remember that the
           act of writing will help you recall and retain information. Reviewing notes, especially within the first
           few days, significantly enhances recollection. Note taking is also a valuable professional skill. The
           following article offers good tips on note taking: https://theconversation.com/whats-the-best-most-
           effective-way-to-take-notes-41961
    ◼ TREAT IN-CLASS AUDIO-VISUAL MATERIALS AS TEXTS:
       o American Studies is interdisciplinary and includes studying visual culture, sound, and music as texts.
           Treat in-class documentaries, films, images, and music as part of the curriculum and deserving of
           analysis, critique, and note taking.
    ◼ BE CURIOUS:
       o American Studies encourages asking questions, making connections across diverse materials, and
           looking at complexities and contradictions. Be open to analyzing mixed messages in our study of
           history and culture. Develop study groups, share ideas, and cultivate conversations that enhance your
           understanding of the materials, but also remember to be original and use your voice.
Course Schedule:
Please Note:
    1.     This schedule is subject to change as needed.


                                                                                                        Page 7
   2.      Students should complete the readings for the day they are listed,
           so they are prepared for that day’s lecture.
WEEK 1
Thursday, August 30
   ◼ Introduction: What is American Studies?
WEEK 2
Tuesday, September 4
   ◼       LEARNING TO LISTEN
           o READ: THE SYLLABUS!
           o READ: Josh Kun, “Strangers Among Sounds,” Audiotopia: Music, Race, and America
               (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2005), 1-18.
Thursday, September 6
                                    PART I: SWINGING THE DREAM:
                               NATION AND SEGREGATION, 1930s-1950s
   ◼       THE RISE OF SWING: AMERICA DANCES TO THE DEPRESSION
           o READ: Lewis A. Erenberg, “Just One More Chance: The Fall of the Jazz Age and the Rise of
               Swing, 1929-1935,” Swingin’ the Dream: Big Band Jazz and the Rebirth of American Culture
               (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1998), 3-31.
WEEK 3
Tuesday, September 11
   ◼       BECOMING MODERN: LEARNING THE LINDY HOP
           o READ: Malcolm X and Alex Haley, excerpts, The Autobiography of Malcolm X (New York:
               Grove Press, 1965).
Thursday, September 13
   ◼       MALCOLM IN THE MIDDLE
           o READ: Malcolm X, “Selection from ‘The Ballot or the Bullet,’” in The American Intellectual
               Tradition, Volume II, 1865 to the Present, eds., David Hollinger and Charles Capper (Oxford:
               Oxford University Press, 1997), 368.
           o READ: Robin D. G. Kelley, “The Riddle of the Zoot: Malcolm Little and Black Cultural
               Politics during World War II,” Race Rebels: Culture, Politics, and the Black Working Class
               (New York: The Free Press, 1996), 161-181).
WEEK 4
Tuesday, September 18


                                                                                                             Page 8
   ◼       ANOTHER SIDE TO ‘ROSIE THE RIVETER’: ALL-GIRL BANDS OF THE 1940s
           o READ: Sherrie Tucker, “It Don’t Mean a Thing If It Ain’t in the History Books,” Swing
              Shift: All-Girl Bands of the 1940s (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000), 1-29.
           o DUE: Reading Analysis #1
Thursday, September 20
   ◼       ZOOT SUIT RIOTS
           o READ: Eduardo Obregón Pagán, “Dangerous Fashion,” Murder at the Sleepy Lagoon: Zoot
              Suits, Race, and Riot in Wartime L.A. (Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press,
              2003), 98-125.
WEEK 5
Tuesday, September 25
   ◼       WHY BRACEROS
           o GUEST LECTURE: Christine Castro
           o VIEW: Why Braceros? (1962) online at: https://www.c-span.org/video/?407381-1/why-braceros
           o CONSIDER: Who produced the film and what is their goal? Who is the audience?; And, what
              are some images that stand out for you?
           o EXTRA CREDIT DUE: propose at least one essay question for the mid-term. To receive credit,
              your question should be typed. Your objective is to help me build a thoughtful exam question,
              using the themes that you have seen developed in the class. Consider what you would like to
              respond to on the exam and attempt to generate a question that allows for rich analysis of this
              issue. Your question must reflect some thoughtfulness, showing an attempt to make connections
              across this half of the class. Your question should ask students to draw evidence from at least
              two, or more, of the readings. Please note: Questions that do not reflect this effort will not
              receive extra credit. Simplistic one line / shallow questions will not warrant extra credit.
              Questions that rely on only one reading will not warrant extra credit. Questions not submitted on
              time will not be accepted.
Thursday, September 27
   ◼       THE FORTUNE COOKIE CHRONICLES
           o READ: Jennifer 8 Lee, excerpts, The Fortune Cookie Chronicles: Adventures in the World of
              Chinese Food (New York: 12 Press, 2008).
WEEK 6
Tuesday, October 2
   ◼       THE LAVENDER SCARE
              READ: David K. Johnson, Excerpt, The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays
              and Lesbians in The Federal Government (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004).
Thursday, October 4
              ****MIDTERM****
WEEK 7


                                                                                                     Page 9
Tuesday, October 9
                               PART II: THE SOUND OF CIVIL RIGHTS?
                                       YOUTH, MUSIC, AND RACE
   ◼       THE RISE OF YOUTH CULTURE & THE SHIRELLES
          o READ: Susan Douglas, “Introduction,” and “Why the Shirelles Mattered,” Where the Girls
              Are: Growing Up Female with the Mass Media (New York: Three Rivers Press, 1995).
Thursday, October 11
   ◼      THE RISE OF YOUTH CULTURE CONTINUED
          o DISCOGRAPHY ASSIGNED
WEEK 8
Tuesday, October 16
   ◼      REVOLUTION IN THE AIR AND THE THIRD WORLD STRIKE
          o READ: Rickey Vincent, “Introduction: Revolution in the Air,” Party Music: The Inside Story
              of the Black Panthers’ Band and How Black Power Transformed Soul Music (Chicago, IL:
              Lawrence Hill Books, 2013), 1-18.
Thursday, October 18
   ◼      BROADCASTING RACE
          o READ: Maurice Berger, “Guess Who’s Coming To Dinner: Broadcasting Race,” For all the
              World To See: Visual Culture and the Struggle for Civil Rights (New Haven, CT: Yale University
              Press, 2010).
WEEK 9
Tuesday, October 23
   ◼      WHY DISCO MATTERS
          o READ: Richard Dyer, “In Defense of Disco,” in Out in Culture: Gay, Lesbian and Queer
              Essays on Popular Culture, eds., Corey K Creekmur and Alexander Doty (Durham, NC: Duke
              University Press, 1995), 407-415.
          o READ: Joshua Gamson, excerpt, The Fabulous Sylvester: The Legend, The Music, The
              Seventies in San Francisco (New York: Henry Holt and Company, 2005), 134-154.
Thursday, October 25
                    PART III: CLASS, CITIZENSHIP, AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES
   ◼      BORN IN THE USA: BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN AND THE WHITE WORKING CLASS
          o READ: Jefferson Cowie and Lauren Boehm, “Dead Man’s Town: ‘Born in the U.S.A.,’ Social
              History, and Working-Class Identity,” American Quarterly 58.2 (June 2007): 353-378.
WEEK 10
Tuesday, October 30


                                                                                                     Page 10
   ◼      BORN IN THE USA Continued
          o DUE: DISCOGRAPHY
Thursday, November 1
   ◼      THE NEW GILDED AGE
          o READ: Douglas S. Massey, “The Rise and Fall of Egalitarian Capitalism,” Categorically
             Unequal: The American Stratification System (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2007).
          o IN-CLASS FILM: Inequality for All
WEEK 11
Tuesday, November 6
   ◼      HOW WHITENESS WORKS
          o READ: George Lipsitz, “How Whiteness Works: Inheritance, Wealth, and Health,” The
             Possessive Investment in Whiteness: How White People Profit from Identity Politics
             (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2006).
Thursday, November 8
   ◼      THE NEW JIM CROW
          o READ: Michelle Alexander, “The New Jim Crow,” The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in
             the Age of Colorblindness (NY: New Press, 2010), 178-220.
WEEK 12
Tuesday, November 13
   ◼      READING THE LANDSCAPE: IN THE SHADOW OF ROBERT E. LEE
          o READ: Mitch Landrieu, excerpts, In the Shadow of Statues: A White Southerner Confronts
             History (New York: Viking, 2018).
Thursday, November 15
   ◼      CENTRAL AMERICAN-AMERICAN VISIBILITIES / INVISIBILITIES
          o Cary Cordova, “Marking Space: Interpreting Central American-American Spaces in the
             U.S. Landscape,” Journal of Commonwealth and Postcolonial Studies (Spring 2017), Vol. 5,
             No. 1.
WEEK 13
Tuesday, November 20
   ◼      DOCUMENTED / UNDOCUMENTED
          o Manuel Ramirez, “Still DREAMing,” Presente!: Latin@ Immigrant Voices in the Struggle for
             Racial Justice, eds. Cristina Tzintzún, Carlos Pérez de Alejo, and Arnulfo Manríquez (Oakland,
             CA: AK Press, 2014), 137-146.
          o William Perez, “Introduction,” We ARE Americans: Undocumented Students Pursuing the
             American Dream (Sterling, VA: Stylus, 2009).
          o DUE: Reading Report #2


                                                                                                Page 11
Thursday, November 22
   ◼      Happy Thanksgiving Holiday!
WEEK 14
Tuesday, November 27
                                     New Technologies, New Worlds
   ◼      THE GOOGLIZATION OF EVERYTHING
          o READ: Siva Vaidhyanathan, “The Googlization of Us: Universal Surveillance and
              Infrastructural Imperialism,” The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should Worry)
              (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2011), 82-114.
          o EXTRA CREDIT DUE: Submit an essay question for the final exam. See instructions for
              proposing midterm essay questions earlier in this syllabus.
Thursday, November 29
   ◼      THE PROBLEM WITH FACEBOOK IS FACEBOOK
          o Siva Vaidhyanathan, “The Problem with Facebook is Facebook,” Antisocial Media: How
              Facebook Disconnects Us and Undermines Democracy (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
              2018).
WEEK 15
Tuesday, December 4
   ◼      THE POLITICS OF FACEBOOK
          o Siva Vaidhyanathan, “The Politics Machine,” Antisocial Media: How Facebook Disconnects Us
              and Undermines Democracy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).
Thursday, December 6
   ◼      Last Class / Review
Thursday, December 13
   ◼      FINAL EXAM per schedule from UT Registrar:
          Thursday, December 13, 9:00-12:00 noon
          Location TBA
