                                                BIO 370
                                   Evolution - Summer I 2019
                                     (Unique #’s 85105 & 85110)
                                   Course Overview and Syllabus
                          LECTURE: MTWTHF 10-11:30AM -                       ECJ 1.306
                 DISCUSSION (#85105) MW 11:30 AM - 1 PM                      GCD 2.210
                                (#85110) MW 1 – 2:30 PM                      GCD 2.410
INSTRUCTOR
         David R. Johnson, PhD (instructor): d_j182@txstate.edu, or message through Canvas
                 Office hours: by appointment, either before or after class, location TBD
TA
         Justin Chen: justinchen1211@utexas.edu – Office hours TBD
This course is an introduction to biological evolution, including the history of the field, the mechanisms
of evolution and the history of life on earth. The prerequisite is an understanding of basic genetic
concepts. You are required to have taken BIO 325 (Genetics) or an equivalent before taking BIO 370.
You should be familiar with the fundamentals of Mendelian and molecular genetics (e.g., gene
inheritance, DNA coding for amino acids in proteins, etc.) It may be worth reviewing basic genetics at
the beginning of the semester (e.g. by reading Ch 6 in Bergstrom & Dugatkin; Ch 5 in Herron &
Freeman, or CH 4 in Futuyma and Kirkpatrick). We will briefly review these in the first lecture.
COURSE FORMAT. This course consists of two types of instruction (1) lectures presenting the course
material, and (2) discussion sessions allowing you to refine your understanding of the material via
interaction with your fellow students and the TA. See DISCUSSION SESSIONS below for more
information.
TEXT. There is no assigned textbook for this course. However, it is STRONGLY recommended that you
acquire a copy of one of the following textbooks and read the chapters that parallel with the topics
covered in lectures. The following are recommended: Evolutionary Analysis (5th ed. 2014) by Herron &
Freeman, Evolution (4th ed. 2017) by Futuyma & Kirkpatrick, Evolution (2nd ed. 2016) by Bergstrom &
Dugatkin. An older version of these (e.g. Futuyma 3rd ed.) is acceptable, as long as it was published after
2010. See course schedule below for details regarding how chapters in each relate to lecture content.
COURSE WEBSITE. Canvas (canvas.utexas.edu) will be used to disseminate readings and course
information. Access requires you to login with your EID and password (i.e. you cannot login unless you
are registered for the course). Additionally, to assist with your learning, lecture slides and lecture notes
will be posted prior to specific lectures.
GRADING. Your grade will be assessed on three midterm examinations and discussion session
attendance/participation. Each exam is worth 27% of the course grade (81% overall). Discussion-
session scores will account for 19% of the course total (9% attendance, 10% participation). Here is the
breakdown:
                                                   Percentage
Three exams (27% each)                                 81%
Discussion (9% attendance 10% participation)           19%
Total                                                 100%


 At the end of the semester, course grades will be assigned based on standard scale (i.e. A > 89.5, B
>79.5, C > 69.5, D >59.5, F < 59.5). In a typical semester, approximately 25% of students receive A’s,
30% B’s, 35% C’s, and 10% D’s and F’s. Note: we will NOT be using a plus/minus grade system.
EXAM POLICY. Exams will be held on June 17, June 27 and July 11. Exams will be a combination of
multiple-choice, T/F, fill in the blank, and short answer/discussion. Exams are based on the material
covered in the lectures and the assigned readings for the discussion sessions. You will not be tested on
things not covered in the lectures or the discussions.
          It is your responsibility to arrive at the exams on time. Exams will be held in our regular
classroom during regular class time. Students who arrive late for an exam will not be given additional
time and anyone arrive after other students have finished and left the classroom will not be permitted
to take the exam. Failing to take a scheduled exam will result in a score of zero on that exam. Make-up
exams are given at the discretion of the Dean’s office and will only be given in cases where there is a
documented excuse beyond your reasonable control:
          - Illness; you must have a physician’s note indicating that you are not in a physical condition
                to take the exam at the scheduled time; a note from a family member is not sufficient.
          - Death or grave illness in your immediate family; documentation is needed here as well.
          - Significant scheduling conflicts; again, documentation needed.
All documentation must be submitted to the Dean’s office (not the instructor), and the nature of the
make-up exam will be decided by the instructor and may consist of a written and/or oral exam.
          When grading, we strive for fairness and consistency. If you feel a grading error was made on
an exam, you may submit a typed appeal along with your graded exam within one week (7 days) of
when the exam was returned to you. Any errors in adding scores will be corrected without question.
Appeals about the interpretation of essay-type answers will be carefully considered, but we will also re-
grade the other answers on the test. We will only regrade what was written on the exam... not what
you meant by what you wrote, or what was in your mind when you wrote it. We will correct mistakes
but be aware that as a result of regarding the appealed exam it is possible for your grade on the exam
to decrease.
DISCUSSION SESSIONS. Discussion session attendance is mandatory (9% of course grade). Each session
will have required weekly readings from the literature or other sources. These readings will be posted
by the Friday prior (for both M&W) to Canvas and discussion sections will meet Mondays and
Wednesdays to discuss the assigned readings and to answer questions you have about the lectures.
Discussion groups will begin on June 10th 2019.
          Discussions are an essential part of the course, as it is the place where you are asked to think
like a scientist and have the opportunity to critically evaluate ideas and the evidence supporting them.
Participation in the discussion sessions is required. Poor attendance or lack of participation will lower
your overall course grade. All the assigned readings should be read carefully before the discussion
section. You do not need to understand all aspects of each reading, however before each meeting, you
are required to write (i.e. typed) two questions about each reading and bring them to your section on a
printed sheet of paper with your name on it (5% of course grade). Questions will be chosen at random
to facilitate discussion, so you should put some thought into these in the event your question is chosen.
These typed questions will be handed in to the TA at the beginning of each discussion section.
Additionally, quizzes over the lecture material and/or reading will take place in the discussion sessions
(5% of course grade)
          Discussion readings will cover material not specifically discussed in lecture, and discussion
readings will be tested in the exams. Do not switch discussion sections without permission from your
TA, or you will not receive credit for the discussion section into which you switched.


LECTURE ATTENDANCE POLICY. Lecture attendance is not mandatory, and you will not receive points
for attending lecture, nor will you be penalized points for not attending. That said, attending lecture
will help you learn and comprehend the material.
OBSERVANCE OF RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS. Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and exam
schedules. Students that miss course work due to the observance of a religious holy day will be given
the opportunity to complete the work missed. The University policy requires that students notify the
course instructors at least 14 days prior to the class that will be missed.
INCOMPLETE POLICY. Any incomplete grade must be verified with a written agreement with the
student. The agreement will specify the work to be done and timetable for completion. IN accordance
with University policy, the grade of incomplete can only be awarded in cases of students whose
circumstances prevent them from finishing the required work for the course.
SPECIAL NEEDS AND ACCOMODATIONS. Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD;
ddce.utexas.edu/disability/) to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. We will
do everything in our power to accommodate students with special needs. The following is from the
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) homepage: “At SSD, we determine eligibility and help
implement reasonable accommodations for students with disabilities at the University of Texas at
Austin. More general resources for the UT community may be found on UT’s Disability Resource page.“
SSD is housed in the Office of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth floor of the Student Services
Building. Information on how to register, downloadable forms, including guidelines for documentation,
accommodation request letters, and releases of information are available online. Please do not hesitate
to contact us at (512) 471-6259, VP: 1-866-329-3986 or via e-mail if you have any questions. We look
forward to making your experience at the university more accessible!”
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS CODE ON ACADEMIC INTEGRITY. All of the work that you submit for this course,
on every assignment and examination, is to be entirely your own. Deviation from this rule constitutes
plagiarism (which is, “using the work of another person and presenting or implying that it is one’s
own”). Any form of academic dishonesty, whether it be cheating on a test or an examination (e.g. a cell
phone visiable [i.e. not put away]), plagiarism, improper collaboration on assignments, lack of proper
attribution, or the submission of the same essay to two instructors without the explicit consent of both,
will be reported to the Office of the Dean of Students. Under this Code, students are allowed to study
together and to discuss information and concepts pertaining to the class; however, this cooperation
cannot involve one student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by someone else, or
the communication, verbally or in writing, of an answer to an assignment. In such situations, both the
donor and the recipient of the information or materials will be penalized. Penalty for violation of this
Code can be extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action. Additional
information pertaining to what constitutes academic dishonesty and the disciplinary process is
available at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php.
CONFIDENTIALITY OF STUDENT RECORDS. We strive to maintain the anonymity of individual students
taking this course relative to grades given on assignments or exams, or final grades at the completion
of the course.
SAFETY AND SECURITY. We believe that the classroom should be a safe place to learn and discuss and
consider ideas critically. No one should ever feel threatened in class to express or explore an idea. If at
any time, you feel unsafe in our class, bring this to our attention and we will address the issue.


                                       BIO 370 Course Schedule*
                                                                Textbook Chapters **
                                                                                            Discussion Session
  Date                      Lecture topic                      H&F       B&D       F&K
                                                                                                  Papers
  6-Jun                Introduction to Course
  7-Jun            Case for Evolutionary Thinking                1
 10-Jun               History/Evidence of Evol                   2       1&2      1&2           Nesse 2010
 11-Jun         Genetics and the Origin of Variation             5      6 & 10       4
 12-Jun      Genetic variability, Pop Gen & Heritability       3&9       7&9      3&5        Barett et al. 2019
 13-Jun                   Natural Selection                    3&6          3        3
 14-Jun              Catch-up day/exam review
 17-Jun                         EXAM I                                                         Tishkoff 2015
 18-Jun                  Natural Selection II                  3&6          3        5
 19-Jun                Genetic Drift & Linkage                   7          8        7       Welch et al 1998
 20-Jun                Sex & Sexual Selection                 8 & 11       16       10
 21-Jun                 Migration/Gene Flow                      7          7        8
 24-Jun       Integration of Evolutionary Mechanisms             7          8        8      Prentice et al 2017
 25-Jun                      Phylogenies                         4       5&6        16
 26-Jun              Catch-up day/exam review                                                  Karmin 2015
 27-Jun                        EXAM II
 28-Jun                       Speciation                        16         14        9
  1-Jul               History of life on Earth I                17         11       17           Fox 2016
  2-Jul               History of life on Earth II               18         12        "
  3-Jul               No Lecture - Johnson Out                                                  Sallen 2015
  4-Jul             4th of July Holiday - No Class                                           no class - holiday
  5-Jul                        EvoDevo                          19         13       15
  8-Jul                 Evolution of Sociality                  12         17       12          Young 2005
  9-Jul                   Human Evolution                       20         19       21
 10-Jul              Catch-up day/exam review                                                 Gibbons 2010
 11-Jul                      Final Exam
* Course Schedule subject to change at the discression of the professor.... Updated 5/28/19
** textbook chapters:
H&F = Herron and Freeman 2014 Evolutionary Analysis 5th ed. Pearson
B&D = Bergstrom and Dugatkin 2016 Evolution 2nd ed. WW Norton and Co.
F&K = Futuyma and Kirkpatric 2017 Evolution 4th ed. Sinauer
