  GOV 365L, ANS 361: Ethnic Politics in Taiwan, China, and Asia
                                         University of Texas at Austin
                     Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays 9:00-10:30am – Parlin Hall 303
                                                  Spring 2020
                                    Unique #: 38115 (GOV), 32220 (ANS)
\ Contact Information \
   Professor Amy Liu
   Office Location: Batts Hall 3.128
   Email: amy.liu@austin.utexas.edu
   Office Hours: Mondays 2:30-4:00pm and Wednesdays 1:00-2:30pm
\ Course Description \
   This course is primarily about ethnic politics in Taiwan – an empirically interesting, normatively
   reassuring, but theoretically complicated case. We will begin with a study of different theories of ethnic
   politics. Then we will draw on these theories to get an understanding of how different governments have
   responded to their ethnic “Chinese” populations. But we will first begin in Southeast Asia where the
   notion of “Chinese” – e.g., historical origins and their political situation – are easier to grasp. Second,
   with an understanding of not just ethnic politics theoretically but also what it means to be empirically
   “Chinese”, we then turn to the Taiwan case. We will examine why the Taiwanese state transitioned from
   being an authoritarian regime – where an ethnic minority repressed the majority – to one that is
   democratic and accommodating of even the most marginalized minorities. The current state of ethnic
   accommodation is not only arguably the most liberal in Asia, but it rivals some of the most
   accommodating western democracies. Third, we then situate the Taiwanese experience by looking at that
   of China. We will conclude the course by discussing the challenges and benefits of ethnic diversity – and
   the implications not just for Asia but the United States as well.
\ Course Structure \
   The class is a lecture/seminar meeting three times a week. Reading assignments are important and should
   be done before each class. Attendance will not be taken in the course. You are, however, strongly
   encouraged to attend each class for several reasons. First, the readings and class lectures are not
   substitutes. In class, I will present additional materials that either challenge or build on the arguments
   made in the readings. Second, some of the readings are more difficult than others. When this is the case,
   I will devote significant class time going over the reading. And third, if you are absent on a quiz day (see
   below), you will receive a 0% on that specific quiz. I will not post lecture notes online. If you do miss
   class, I strongly encourage you to get notes from a classmate first before you come to my office hours.
   Prerequisites
                                                       1


Students wishing to enroll in this class must have taken a foundational course in government or Asian
studies. The course also assumes basic knowledge of world history. Students who find themselves lost
during lectures or class discussions should see me during office hours immediately.
Readings
There are two required books for the course:
     1.  Brown, Michael E. and Sumit Ganguly. 2003. Fighting Words: Language Policy and
         Ethnic Relations in Asia. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. ISBN-13: 978-0262025355
         (hereafter referred to as “Brown and Ganguly”).
     2.  Fell, Dafydd. 2012. Government and Politics in Taiwan. New York, NY: Routledge.
         ISBN-13: 978-0415575423 (hereafter referred to as “Fell”).
While the two books are required for the course, the purchase of either one is not. You can access the
first book, Fighting Words, electronically for free on Google Scholar (http://scholar.google.com) – with
some missing pages and sections – or through the library catalog system (https://search.lib.utexas.edu).
I have placed a copy of the second book, Government and Politics in Taiwan, on reserve at the Perry-
Castañeda Library (24-hour checkout period). The book is also available with some missing sections on
Google Scholar. And you may also come to my office hours to scan my copy. Of course, for those of you
who want to purchase a copy and can, Amazon is probably the easiest option.
All other readings will be on Canvas (https://canvas.utexas.edu) under the File tab (File\Readings).
Grading
The grading scale is as follows: A: >94%, A-: 90-93%, B+: 87-89%, B: 84-86%, B-: 80-83%, C+: 77-79%,
C: 74-76%; C-: 70-73%; D+: 67-69%; D: 64-66%; D-: 60-63%; F: <60%. I round using the conventional
rounding rules.
Your final grade is composed of the following five parts:
     1.  Quizzes: 25%
     2.  Newspaper Corpus: 25%
     3.  Big Data Analysis: 25%
     4.  Policy Proposal: 25%
The quizzes can be cumulative and cover both the lectures notes and assigned readings. Quiz dates will
usually be announced in the previous class. I do, however, reserve the right to administer pop quizzes.
These quizzes will test key information. On average, there will be one quiz per week. On each announced
quiz, there will be a bonus question (worth 3% of the quiz) about current affairs in Taiwan and Asia. I
strongly encourage you to read the following news sources on a regular basis:
        China Post: http://www.chinapost.com.tw
        Taipei Times: http://www.taipeitimes.com
        BBC: http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world/europe
        Washington Post: http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/europe
                                                   2


   One objective of this course is to expose you to how social science research is done. One field that is
   growing in popularity – not just in academia but also among job employers – is big data. Big data is the
   computational use of large datasets to identify trends and associations among some phenomenon of
   interest. Examples could include shopping tendencies, ride-share hailing behavior, and when – and in what
   context – certain words get used.
   In this class, you will gain basic familiarity with how big data works. You will scrape two different news
   sources on a topic of your choosing – subject to my approval. The topic must be related to either (1)
   ethnic politics – in any country; or (2) Taiwan, China, or Asia – on any subject. Suitable topics could
   include bilingual education in Texas, the 2020 presidential elections in Taiwan, or the Rohingyas in
   Myanmar. A project looking at the Australian bushfire, for example, would not be appropriate in this
   context. The newspaper articles you scrape will form your corpus.
   Once you have your corpus, you will learn different ways to analyze the data. We will focus on word
   frequencies (e.g., what are the most common roots); word types (e.g., are the words generally positive or
   negative in connotation); and if time permitting, word association (e.g., what pair of words appear most
   commonly together). After you have completed your analysis, you will write a summary report.
   I will provide more information later and throughout the course. I suspect this process will be the first
   time for most of you. If this is the case, do not worry! We will spend several class periods going over this.
   I will also be available in office hours to help guide you through this process.
   At the end of the semester, you will be given the specifics of a real-world, real-time challenge pertaining
   to an ethnic minority. You will be asked to draft a policy proposal – drawing on what you have learned
   in the course.
\ Course Policies \
   Missed Quizzes and Assignments
   I will only take the top ten quiz grades. As such, if you are absent for whatever reason on a day a quiz is
   given, you will receive a 0% for that specific quiz. There are no makeup quizzes. If you miss between
   40-50% of the total in-class quizzes given, your final quiz grade for the semester will be a 0%. If you miss
   50% or more of the in-class quizzes given, you will automatically fail the course.
   Make-up assignments will only be given in the case of sickness (requiring a doctor’s note), family
   emergency (requiring a Dean’s note), or religious observance (requiring prior approval from the
   instructor). There are no exceptions.
   Appeals
   If you believe a grade does not reflect your performance, you are welcomed to dispute the grade. I ask
   that all grade appeals be made in writing. In the memo, explain why you should receive a higher grade
   on that quiz or assignment. This should be done within a week after the grade is announced and submitted
   after class or in office hours. You will get a response in writing addressing your concerns.
                                                        3


Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities: 512.471.6259 or
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Religious Observances
By university policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss an assignment in order to observe a religious holy
day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Academic Dishonesty
“Scholastic dishonesty… includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic
records, and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited
to, submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without prior permission of the
instructor, providing false or misleading information in an effort to receive a postponement or an extension
on a test, quiz, or other assignment), or the attempt to commit such an act” (Section 11-802 (b),
Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities).
If you have any questions about what constitutes scholastic dishonesty, you should consult with me and
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html. Any student that violates this policy will
fail this course and have the details of the violation reported to Student Judicial Services.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
In the event of a fire or other emergency, it may be necessary to evacuate a building rapidly. Upon the
activation of a fire alarm or the announcement of an emergency in a university building, all occupants of
the building are required to evacuate and assemble outside. Once evacuated, no one may re-enter the
building without instruction to do so from the Austin Fire Department, University of Texas at Austin
Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Students should familiarize themselves with all the exit doors of each room and building they occupy at
the university. Students should also remember that the nearest exit routes may not be the same as the
way they typically enter buildings.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructors in writing during the first week
of class. Faculty members must then provide this information to the Fire Prevention Services office by
fax (512.232.2759), with “Attn. Mr. Roosevelt Easley” written in the subject line.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Additional Policies
Since studies have shown people are more likely to multi-task (i.e., be distracted and be distracting) when
they are sitting behind a computer, I do not allow laptop computers or tablets in the classroom. In the
same spirit, please do not check your email, browse the internet, or send messages on your phone in the
                                                     4


middle of class. I reserve the right to confiscate your phone for the class period and/or penalize the entire
class for violations of this policy.
Also, when emailing me, address me with either “Prof” or “Dr”. Do not use messaging or Twitter language.
I reserve the right to not respond to emails in the twelve hours before an assignment due.
                                                     5


\ Course Schedule \
             01/22 (Wednesday) — Introduction
          Primordialism versus Politics
 Week 1
             01/24 (Friday) — Ethnicity versus Nations: What is Chinese?
                  Canvas \ Taylor, Jay. The Generalissimo: Chiang Kai-Shek and the Struggle for Modern
                     China (excerpts from Chapters 1 and 3).
             01/27 (Monday) — Origin and Construction of Ethnicity
                  Canvas \ Chandra, Kanchan. “Cumulative Findings in the Study of Ethnic Politics.”
             01/29 (Wednesday) — Ethnicity and Institutions
                  Canvas \ Reilly, Benjamin. “Electoral System for Divided Societies.”
 Week 2
          Comparative Ethnic Politics: Southeast Asia
             01/31 (Friday) — The Chinese in Southeast Asia ***
                  Canvas \ Skinner, G. William. “Report on the Chinese in Southeast Asia”
             02/03 (Monday) — Political Institutions in Indonesia
                  Canvas \ Dayley, Robert and Clark D. Neher. “Chapter 4. Indonesia.”
 Week 3
             02/05 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics in Indonesia
                  Brown and Ganguly: Chapter 9.
             02/07 (Friday) — Politics towards the Chinese in Indonesia: Proquest
             02/10 (Monday) — Political Institutions in Thailand
                  Canvas \ Dayley, Robert and Clark D. Neher. “Chapter 2. Thailand.”
             02/12 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics in Thailand
 Week 4
                  Brown and Ganguly: 177-196.
             02/14 (Friday) —Politics towards the Chinese in Thailand: Proquest
                     Due: Big Data Topic (submit on Canvas by 5pm)
                                                      6


            02/17 (Monday) — Political Institutions in Malaysia
                 Canvas \ Dayley, Robert and Clark D. Neher. “Chapter 5. Malaysia.”
Week 5
            02/19 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics in Malaysia
                 Brown and Ganguly: 239-254.
            02/21 (Friday) — Politics Towards the Chinese in Malaysia: Proquest
         Taiwan under the Japanese
            02/24 (Monday) — Political Institutions under the Japanese
                 Fell: 11-12.
Week 6
            02/26 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics under the Japanese
                 Brown and Ganguly: 392-394.
            02/28 (Friday) — Public Attitudes toward the Japanese today
                 Canvas \ Liu, Amy H. and Hu Yue. “Effects of Foreign Language Proficiency on
                    Public Attitudes.”
         Taiwan under Hard Authoritarianism (1945-1969)
            03/02 (Monday) — Political Institutions under Hard Authoritarianism
                 Fell: 12-16 and 43-45.
Week 7
                    Due: Big Data Corpus (submit on Canvas by 9am)
            03/04 (Wednesday) — Political Institutions under Hard Authoritarianism
                 Fell: 17-24.
            03/06 (Friday) — Ethnic Politics under Hard Authoritarianism
                 Brown and Ganguly: 395-397.
            03/09 (Monday) — Linguistic Inquiry of Word Count (LIWC)
                 Canvas \ Zimmer, Ben. “Book Review – The Power of Pronouns”
Week 8
                    Guest Speaker: Anastasiya Byelousova, (Plan II))
            03/11 (Wednesday) — Word Associations
            03/13 (Friday) — Word Associations
                                                    7


             03/16 (Monday) — No Class (Spring Break)
Week 9
             03/18 (Wednesday) — No Class (Spring Break)
             03/20 (Friday) — No Class (Spring Break)
          Taiwan under Soft Authoritarianism (1969-1986)
             03/23 (Monday) — Political Institutions under Soft Authoritarianism
                  Fell: 24-27, 45-46, and 134-137.
Week 10
             03/25 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics under Soft Authoritarianism
                  Brown and Ganguly: 397-399.
          Taiwan and Democratization (1986-1996)
             03/27 (Friday) — Political Institutions with Democratization
                  Fell: Chapter 3.
             03/30 (Monday) — Political Institutions with Democratization
                  Fell: 46-47 and 57-65.
             04/01 (Wednesday) — Political Institutions with Democratization
Week 11
                  Fell: 137-139.
             04/03 (Friday) — Ethnic Politics with Democratization
                  Brown and Ganguly: 399-404.
                     Due: Big Data Analysis (submit on Canvas by 5pm)
          Taiwan in the Democratic Era
             04/06 (Monday) — Political Institutions in the Democratic Era
                  Fell: Chapter 6.
Week 12              Guest Speaker: Keith Chew, PhD Student (GOV)
             04/08 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics in the Democratic Era
                  Canvas \ Shih, Cheng-Feng. “Language and Ethnic Politics in Taiwan.”
                     Guest Speaker: Chun-Ying Wu, PhD Candidate (GOV)
                                                      8


             04/10 (Friday) — Ethnic Politics in the Democratic Era
                  Canvas \ TBD
             04/13 (Monday) — Ethnic Politics in the Democratic Era: Aboriginal Politics
                  Canvas \ Ku, Kun-hui. “Minority, Indigenous Politics in the Emerging Taiwanese
                    Nationalism.”
Week 13
             04/15 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics in the Democratic Era: New Resident Politics
                  Canvas \ Tsai, Ming-Chang. “‘Foreign Brides’ Meet Ethnic Politics in Taiwan.”
             04/17 (Friday) — Public Attitudes and National Identity: Chinese versus Taiwanese
                  Fell: 139-149.
                  Canvas \ The Monkey Cage. “The Taiwanese see themselves as Taiwanese.”
          Comparative Ethnic Politics: China
             04/20 (Monday) — Political Institutions in China
                  Canvas \ Starr, John Bryan. “Chapter 3: The Party State.”
Week 14      04/22 (Wednesday) — Ethnic Politics in China: Historical
                  Brown and Ganguly: Chapter 12
             04/24 (Friday) — Ethnic Politics in China Today: Xinjiang
                  Canvas \ Liu, Amy H. and Kevin Peters. “The Hanification of Xinjiang.”
             04/27 (Monday) — (Ethnic) Politics in China Today: Taiwan
                  Canvas \ Kao, Jay Chieh. “How does the Pro-Beijing Media Influence Voter
                    Behavior and Opinion?”
                     Guest Speaker: Jay Kao, PhD Candidate (GOV)
Week 16
             04/29 (Wednesday) — (Ethnic) Politics in China Today: Hong Kong
                  Canvas \ TBD
          Ethnic Diversity
             05/01 (Friday) — Measuring Ethnicity
                  Canvas \ “Ethnologue: Introduction to the Printed Volume.”
                                                     9


          05/04 (Monday) — Detriments of Diversity
               Canvas \ Anderson, Christopher J. and Aida Paskeviciute. “How Ethnic and
                 Linguistic Heterogeneity Influence the Prospects for Civil Society.”
Week 16
          05/06 (Wednesday) — Benefits of Diversity
               Canvas \ Oliver, J. Eric and Janelle Wong. “Intergroup Prejudice in Multiethnic
                 Settings.”
          05/08 (Friday) — In-Class Policy Proposal
                                                 10
