                 Introduction to Physical Anthropology
                               ANTHROPOLOGY 301
                                        SPRING 2020
PROFESSOR:         Becca Lewis
                   Department of Anthropology
                   Office: WCP 5.152
                   Phone: 232-5386
                   e-mail: rjlewis@austin.utexas.edu
                   Office hours: Wednesdays 10-noon
TEACHING ASSISTANTS:
Emily Dawson              Email: eldawson@utexas.edu
                          Office hours: Fridays 12:30-2:30 WCP 5.114
                          Labs: F 10-noon, F 3-5
Blair Heidkamp            Email: blair.heidkamp@gmail.com
                          Office hours: Thursdays 9-11, location TBD
                          Labs: Tu 3-5, Tu 5-7
Allison McNamara          Email: allison.mcnamara@utexas.edu
                          Office hours: Wednesdays noon-2 WCP 5.130
                          Labs: M 10-noon, W 10-noon
Ben Rodwell               Email: ben.rodwell@utexas.edu
                          Office hours: Tuesdays 11-1 WCP 5.130
                          Labs: W 3-5, W 5-7
Dom Romanello             Email: romanello@utexas.edu
                          Office hours: Thursdays 1-3 WCP 4.116
                          Labs: Th 3-5, Th 5-7
Camille Weinberg          Email: cdsweinberg@utexas.edu
                          Office hours: Mondays 1-3 RLP 4.418
                          Labs: M 3-5, M 5-7
LECTURES:          Monday and Wednesday, 9:00 AM - 10:00 PM ART 1.102
LABS:              WCP 5.172 (check course schedule for meeting time)
                   NOTE: Labs begin the second week of class (Jan 27 - 31).
REQUIRED TEXTBOOK:
                   How Humans Evolved by Boyd and Silk
                   W.W. Norton & Co., 2015
                   8th Edition.
                   *Additional readings will be available on Canvas. *
                                                                            1


COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVE:
Physical anthropology (also called biological or evolutionary anthropology) is the study of the
behavior, ecology, and evolution of primates, including humans. As a scientific discipline,
research in physical anthropology is (1) empirical and (2) grounded in the scientific method.
ANT 301 is intended to provide an introduction to the field of physical anthropology and an
overview of its sub-disciplines. ANT 301 is also designed to provide the necessary foundational
knowledge needed for all upper division courses in physical anthropology. The first 2 weeks of
class focus on living primate diversity. The remaining lectures focus on three main subjects: 1)
primate behavior and ecology, 2) micro- and macroevolution, and 3) primate and human
evolution. Labs focus on the collection and analysis of quantitative data, and provide an
opportunity to explore key concepts, osteological material, and fossil material discussed in
lectures. During lab exercises, students will engage in a variety of quantitative methods for data
collection and analysis, including (but not limited to) (1) osteological morphometrics for
biomechanical analysis of skeletal material and (2) the comparative method as a tool for making
quantitative inferences about the fossil record. Please be advised that you will be required to take
measurements directly from human skeletal material for some labs. Lab exercises will also
include a combination of individual work and collaborative work in pairs or groups.
This course may be used to fulfill the natural science and technology (Part II) component of the
university core curriculum. Courses meeting this requirement are designed to give students an
appreciation of the current state of knowledge in two or more areas of natural science and
technology, and to help students understand the methods, approaches, and theories that scientists
use to answer questions about the natural world. To meet these core objectives, students taking
ANT 301 are expected to gain a detailed understanding of biological evolution and adaptation
(considered foundational knowledge in all life sciences). Students are also introduced to a range
of scientific concepts and methods that are central to physical anthropology and related scientific
disciplines (e.g., biology, geology, and paleontology).
ONLINE MATERIALS:
All lab documents will be made available online through Canvas at: http://canvas.utexas.edu
You are required to download and print out your lab documents and bring them to class.
NOTE: Students arriving without appropriate materials will not receive credit for lab.
Power Point files used in class lectures will NOT be made available online.
LABS:
You may go to any TA’s office hours to ask questions, but you must attend the lab section
for which you are enrolled. If you have an excused absence from lab due to sickness or other
legitimate reasons, you must provide your TA with appropriate documentation (e.g., doctor’s
note) and make arrangements to attend another lab section that week. To schedule an alternate
time, you must contact both your TA and the instructor of the lab section that you wish to attend
in advance. Students abusing this privilege will have the option revoked and will receive a score
of zero for any missed lab.
                                                                                                   2


Please note that documentation of an excused lab absence will NOT be accepted if provided
more than 7 days after the missed lab.
GRADING:
There will be three general exams covering all lectures and reading assignments. All general
exam questions will be objective format (e.g., multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and
short answer). All exams will be non-cumulative. THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM.
There will also be two lab practical exams in which you will be required to identify or describe
objects (bones, fossils, stone tools, etc.). Any students arriving after a lab exam has begun will
be penalized one letter grade (e.g., 10 points off the exam). Any student arriving 10 minutes or
more after a lab exam has begun will receive a grade of zero for the exam.
DO NOT MISS AN EXAM. Make-up exams will be given ONLY when medical or family
emergencies can be documented. If you miss an exam due to an emergency, you must contact
your professor ASAP and provide documentation within 5 days of the exam. FYI: If you are sick
on an exam day, don’t ask the Student Health employee who schedules your appointment for a
note – get one from the physician, PA, or nurse practitioner who sees you.
Your grade for the semester will be based on the following four components:
                        Exam 1 ------------------------- 25%
                        Exam 2 ------------------------- 25%
                        Exam 3 ------------------------- 25%
                        Cumulative Lab Score -------     25%
Your cumulative lab score will be calculated based on the formula:
                        Lab Midterm ------------------- 25%
                        Lab Final (non-cumulative)-- 25%
                        Lab Exercises ------------------ 50%
RE-GRADING POLICY:
Grade disputes must be turned in to Prof. Lewis in writing within 1 week of when the exam is
returned. If you have any questions about your grade on any exam, Prof. Lewis will be happy to
recheck your whole exam if it was completed in indelible ink. Simple errors in addition can be
corrected with a short written statement explaining your specific concerns. For disputes about
grading beyond simple calculation errors, the student must include a 1-page single-spaced 12 pt.
font explanation per question of why (s)he thinks that his/her answer is correct. These explanations
should cite the textbook and/or primary literature (peer-reviewed journal articles) to support the
argument and include a bibliography. Then give your (1) written explanation and request for a re-
grade and (2) your original exam to Prof. Lewis. You have 1 week after the exams have been
returned to you to notify Prof. Lewis of any errors or disagreements. After that, grades are final.
                                                                                                   3


        The following guidelines are used to assign final grades:
        A       90-100
        B       80-89
        C       70-79
        D       60-69
        F       59 or less
        Plus and minus will be assigned, for example:
        B+      86.5-89.4
        B       83.5-86.4
        B-      79.5-83.4
PLEASE NOTE THAT THE FOLLOWING GRADING POLICIES WILL BE ENFORCED:
All grades for the semester are final and non-negotiable. No individual grades will be curved.
The only way to change a test grade is via the official regrading policy (see above). Students
will not be provided with any opportunities for bonus work to increase their
final grade.
Documentation of excused absences from an exam will not be considered more than 1 week after
the date of the exam.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
If you are caught plagiarizing, I will be following the university guidelines for disciplinary actions:
(deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html), see also (www.academicintegrity.org/).
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University Code of Academic Integrity (see
attached). Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student’s
own work. You are encouraged to study together and discuss information and concepts covered
in lecture. You can give “consulting” help to or receive “consulting” help from such students.
However, this permissible cooperation should never involve one student having possession of a
copy of all or part of work done by someone else, in the form of email, email attachment file, disk,
or hard copy. Should copying occur, both the student who copied from another student and the
student who gave material to be copied will both be automatically receive a zero for the
assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course
and University disciplinary action.
During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during
the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any
collaborative behavior during the exams will result in failure of the exam, and may result in failure
of the course and University disciplinary action.
CHEATING POLICY:
During exams, students will not be permitted to wear/use hates or electronic devices of any kind.
***This includes smart watches, ear buds, and headphones.*** Students are not permitted
to wear any electronic devices that connect to the internet or to communicate with someone
                                                                                                     4


else (unless approved by the professor due to SDD policies). Please silence cell phones before an
exam begins. If your cell phone rings during an exam, do not remove it from your pocket,
backpack, or purse. All exams must be completed using a pen with indelible ink, or you will
forfeit the opportunity to request a re-grade of your exam.
BE ADVISED that on exam days, students will only be allowed to take a pen to their seat. All
backpacks, book bags, purses, drinks, food, jackets, etc. must be left on the dais at the front of
the auditorium. If you're worried that someone might take your bag by mistake, don't bring it to
class.
Without exception, any student found cheating on an exam or lab assignment will receive a grade
of zero for the exam or lab assignment and will be referred to the Office of Student Judicial
Services for disciplinary action. Note that any attempt to alter a graded, returned exam in order to
improve the score will be considered cheating and will result in a grade of zero for the exam.
Please note that sharing information about an exam with a student who has not yet taken the
exam will be considered cheating, regardless of the means by which the information is shared
(e.g., verbally, on a web page, via email, via text message, via an App, etc.). For example, a
student with a Monday lab who shares information about a lab exam with students in a Thursday
lab by posting lab questions on GroupMe is cheating – both the student sharing the information
and student(s) using the information will receive 0% credit for the exam. Students who observe
cheating via electronic media or other means are encouraged to inform the professor or their TA.
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:
In compliance with the UT Austin policy and equal access laws, Prof. Lewis is available to
discuss appropriate academic accommodations that may be required for students with
disabilities. Requests for academic accommodations are to be made during the 1st 3 weeks of the
semester, except for unusual circumstances, so arrangements can be made. Proof of qualification
for accommodations from the UT Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) office must be
provided. Students are encouraged to register with Student Disability Services to verify their
eligibility for appropriate accommodations.
Each time a student wishes to use an approved accommodation for an exam, it is the student’s
responsibility to notify and make arrangements with their TA. If you require special
accommodations for exams (e.g., a reduced-distraction environment or extra time), you must
contact Prof. Lewis and your teaching assistant at least 7 days IN ADVANCE of the exam again
in order to discuss the necessary arrangements. There will be no exceptions to this rule.
A student is free not to use an approved accommodation. However, if a student opts out of an
accommodation for one exam and then decides to use it for another exam, it is the responsibility
of the student to make advance arrangements with his/her TA.
ELECTRONIC DEVICES POLICY:
                                                                                                   5


Cell Phones – The “Alamo Drafthouse Policy”: Please keep your cell phones dark, silent, and
out of sight for the entire class period. Research conducted here at UT shows that having a
visible cell phone is a major distractor in class, even if it is face down or turned off. As a result,
in addition to not having your cell phone sitting in your lap or on your tabletop, you are
encouraged to not even have it in your pocket and to instead have it off and placed in your
backpack or purse. No cell phone use during class will be tolerated – this includes texting –
unless cell phone use is part of an in-class assignment – which it will not be! If a student’s cell
phone is visible, they will be asked to put it away, so please do not disrupt class by having one
out. After one warning, the student will be asked to leave the auditorium. This permitted use will
only occur with an explicit statement by the instructor. Students engaging in disruptive behavior
of any kind will be asked to leave the classroom.
Computers: Feel free to take notes on a computer. However, no one is permitted to make audio
or video recordings of lectures under any circumstances. This includes taking photographs of the
lecture slides. Please inform your professor or TA if you see anyone making audio or video
recordings of the lecture or taking photos of the slides so that we may eject them from the lecture
hall. Please note also that students who text or use their computers for anything other than taking
notes may be asked to turn off their computer and/or to leave the classroom.
OTHER POLICIES:
Please be respectful of the instructor and your fellow students. Do not talk, text, or sleep in class.
Students engaging in disruptive behavior of any kind will be asked to leave the auditorium.
Be sure to regularly check Canvas for class materials and information. Class handouts will be
available on Canvas. If class is missed with an excused absence, it is up to the student to secure
the notes from other students.
No extra credit assignments will be given, so please be sure to pay close attention to dates of exams
and assignments.
If a student chooses to create and administer a web page for this course via social media (e.g.,
Facebook), Prof. Lewis and all of the teaching assistants must be granted access to the page.
                  While Prof. Lewis cannot legally ban concealed guns from the
        classroom, she can exercise her first amendment right to let you know that
        she would strongly prefer that you NOT bring them into her classroom
        or the lab. She CAN legally ban concealed guns from her faculty office.
        Thus, this (and her reading of this statement aloud in class) is her
        official notification that you may not bring any concealed guns into her
        faculty office.
                               STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSIBILITIES
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
                                                                                                       6


• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
your learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
others.
• Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring
to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone
is excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                      PERSONAL PRONOUN USE (SHE / HE / THEY / ZE / ETC)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official
roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any
changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
                             UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes students of all
backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let
me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can
only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this
semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking
some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit
from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
                                                                                                    7


available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know
experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we
strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center: All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal: BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns
have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the
power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to
build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. The
following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
                                                                                                    8


    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
        have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu . For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                                       UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at
the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                                                                    9


TENTATIVE SCHEDULE                                Readings                   Lab Schedule
                                                  to be completed prior to
                                                  lecture (BS=textbook;
                                                  ARTICLE on Canvas)
Week 1  Jan 22  Introduction                                               No labs this week
Week 2  Jan 27  Diversity: What Is a Primate?     BS: xx-xxiii,             Lab 1: Scientific
                                                  ARTICLE: Kirk 2013          Method and
            29  Diversity: Meet the Primates      BS: Ch. 5                Skeletal Anatomy
Week 3  Feb 3   Diversity: Meet the Primates      BS: Ch. 5                Lab 2: Taxonomy
            5   Evolution: History and Theory     BS: Ch. 1                   & Cladistics
Week 4  Feb 10  Evolution: History and Theory     BS: Ch. 2                 Lab 3: Genetics
            12  Evolution: Microevolution         BS: Ch. 3
Week 5  Feb 17  Evolution: Macroevolution         BS: Ch. 4                 Lab 4: Behavior
            19  Evolution: Macroevolution
Week 6  Feb 24  Evolution: Behavior               ARTICLE: Lewis              Lab 5: Diet
                                                  2017a; Sinha & Rizvi
                                                  2017; Rodriguez 2015
            26  Exam I
Week 7  Mar 2   Primate Ecology                   BS: Ch. 5                  Lab practical
            4   Behavior: Group-living            BS: Ch. 6                     exam 1
Week 8  Mar 9   Behavior: Sexual Selection        Lewis 2017b,c               Lab 6: Sex
            11  Behavior: Cooperation             BS: Ch. 7
        Mar 16-      No Class – Spring Break                               No labs this week
            18
Week 9  Mar 23  Behavior: Intelligence, Language, BS: Ch. 8                Lab 7: Functional
                Culture                                                       Morphology
            24  Behavior: Intelligence, Language, BS: Ch. 16
                Culture
Week 10 Mar 30  Fossil Record: Primate Evolution  BS: Ch. 9                  Lab 8: Fossil
        Apr 1   Fossil Record: Primate Evolution  BS: Ch. 9                    Primates
Week 11 Apr 6   Exam II                                                          Lab 9:
            8   Fossil Record: Australopithecines BS: Ch. 10-11            Australopithecines
Week 12 Apr 13  Fossil Record: Australopithecines BS: Ch. 10-11                 No labs
            15  Fossil Record: Australopithecines BS: Ch. 10-11
                                                                                             10


Week 13 Apr 20 Fossil Record: Homo        BS: Ch. 12-13   Lab 10: Genus
            22 Fossil Record: Homo        BS: Ch. 12-13       Homo
Week 14 Apr 27 Fossil Record: Homo        BS: Ch. 12-13   Lab practical
            29 Anatomically Modern Humans ARTICLE: Hammer    exam 2
                                          2016
                                          BS: Ch. 14
Week 15 May 4  Modern Human Variation     BS: Ch. 15
        May 6  Exam III
                                                                        11
