Benedikt, Theory III (386M/327R)
SPACE, OBJECT, RELATION
Spring 2019, Tuesday mornings 8.30am to 11.30am, GOL 101
Description:
This seminar is divided into three segments. Each segment will consist of four sessions: three lecture and discussion, and one
"show and tell" by students. During the latter sessions, students are asked to offer a ten-to-fifteen-minute presentation or
demonstration of original thought and/or research coming out of the previous three weeks of lectures and discussions. While
students are encouraged to present all three times, they are required to present at least twice. Some written or recorded digital
record of these presentations will constitute the output upon whose substance and quality the student grades will be based,
along with an assessment of class participation.
The first segment, SPACE, will follow the thinking of the famous ecological perception psychologist James J. Gibson. We will
read excerpts of his Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems, with supplementary material by the instructor. We will also study
Isovist Theory, becoming familiar with the application ISOVIST 2.0.
The second segment, OBJECT, will revolve around reading contemporary philosopher Graham Harman (principally, Object-
Oriented Ontology: A New Theory of Everything, 2018) and several of the essays in CENTER 21: The Secret Life of Buildings
(2018).
The third segment, RELATION, will revolve around philosopher Martin Buber's I and Thou as well as neuroscientist Michael
Graziano's Consciousness and the Social Brain, with reference to the instructor's new book, Architecture Beyond Experience.
Architectural examples will be presented and discussed throughout.
The intention of 'Space, Object, Relation' is to deepen student's thinking about architecture in relation to human beings as
designer/architects as well as appreciator/user/critics. Reciprocally, the seminar will think about life, as a human being, in the
light of what architecture might teach us.
'Space, Object, Relation' is a graduate seminar with some upper-division undergraduate participation. Students taking it need to
be committed reading all the readings, and to full attendance and participation in class (exceptions for emergencies). The tone
will be buoyant and serious at once.
Schedule:
January 22: Intro
January 29: Space 1
February 5, Space 2:
February 12: Space 3
February 19: Show & Tell 1
February 26: Object 1
March 5: Object 2
March 12: Object 3
  Spring break
March 26: Show & Tell 2
April 2: Relation 1
April 9: Relation 2
April 16: Relation 3
April 23: Show & Tell 3
April 30: Extra show & tells, summary discussion, CIS
May 7: No class (one on one 'exit' interviews, as requested)


                                                             THE FINE PRINT
            EVALUATION CRITERIA
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester on three criteria: quality of the products (P);
extent of the effort (E), and depth of grasp (G) of the material. A separate judgment will be made about the level of participation in
class (L). All will contribute to the grades meaning this:
A/A-                 Excellent
                     P, E, G, and L together surpass expectations
B+/B/B-              Above Average
                     three out of four of P, E, G, and L surpass expectations, with expected achievement in one.
C+/C                 Average
                     Strengths and weakness in P, E, G, and L "balance out." Overall performance acceptable.
C-/D+/D/D-           Poor
                     Lack or weakness in two or more of P, E, G and L. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and
                     knowledge base.
F                    Fail. Greater lack or weakness than in the above, or more than four unexcused absences.
X                    Excused Incomplete
                     Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not
                     an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans'
                     offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the second week of
                     the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
            ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is required. With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be
lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from
religious observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student
is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due
dates.
If a student is late (45 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students
should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding
lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
            RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a
reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the
absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
            ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for
official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.                         http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-
university/#universitycodeofconduct
            CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools they
serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. BTL
114B | (512) 471-3115 https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
            STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard
of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
needed should be discussed at that time.


http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/