                                                E F344L    l   Hollywood Babylon
          Instructor: Bennett, C.                                         Areas:
          Unique #: 80624                                                 Flags: Wr
          Semester: Summer 2018                                           Restrictions:
          Cross-lists: n/a                                                Computer Instruction: no
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English or rhetoric and writing.
Description: Dream factory or nightmare? Promised land or wasteland? In this course we will examine Hollywood’s symbolic role
in American culture, considering the many complex and often contradictory ways the film capital has been constructed and
understood. What can these competing representations of Hollywood tell us about twentieth-century America and its ideals,
practices, and concerns? What do we find if we approach Hollywood as a vibrant cultural site to which America has repeatedly
turned to work out its most conflicted ideas about art and commerce, class, gender and sexuality, race and ethnicity, ethics, politics,
style? Posing these questions of numerous representations of Hollywood—primarily in films and novels, but also in stories, essays,
poems, paintings, photographs, songs, and fan magazines—we will trace America’s fraught relationship to Hollywood as it develops
over the twentieth century, and explore the formal genre of the Hollywood story.
Texts: In addition to Kenneth Anger’s gossipy Hollywood counter-history, Hollywood Babylon, texts may include novels by F. Scott
Fitzgerald (The Love of the Last Tycoon), Nathanael West (The Day of the Locust),and Gore Vidal (Myra Breckinridge);the films A Star
is Born (dir. George Cukor), Barton Fink (by Joel and Ethan Coen), L.A. Confidential (dir. Curtis Hanson), Sunset Blvd.(dir. Billy Wilder),
and Mulholland Dr.(dir. David Lynch); and artwork by Joseph Cornell, Andy Warhol, Ed Ruscha, and Cindy Sherman (The Complete
Untitled Film Stills).The course packet will include several additional readings, including critical and theoretical essays.
Requirements & Grading: Grades will be based on class participation (15%), weekly discussion board posts (15%), quizzes (5%), the
final exam (30%), and a six-page essay and optional revision (35%). Excessive absences, tardiness, and/or missed deadlines will
negatively affect your final grade.
Schedule:
6.6 Fade In: “Hollywood”
6.7 F. Scott Fitzgerald, The Love of the Last Tycoon
6.10 The Love of the Last Tycoon
6.11 The Love of the Last Tycoon
6.12 Kenneth Anger, Hollywood Babylon; The Hays Code
6.13 Hollywood Babylon and The Hays Code
6.14 A Star Is Born (dir. George Cukor);
6.17 A Star Is Born
6.18 A Star Is Born
6.19 Laura Mulvey, “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema”; Cindy Sherman, Untitled Film Stills.
6.20 Sherman, “The Making of Untitled” and Untitled Film Stills
6.21 Nathanael West, The Day of the Locust
6.24 The Day of the Locust
6.25 Barton Fink (by Joel and Ethan Coen)
6.26 Barton Fink
6.27 Langston Hughes, “Movies” and “Is Hollywood Fair to Negroes?” ; Public Enemy, “Burn Hollywood Burn”; Dylan Marron, Every
Single Word; Indecline, Hollywood Walk of Fame; Illusions (dir. Julie Dash)
6.28 Mary Desjardins, “Systematizing Scandal: Confidential Magazine, Stardom, and the State of California”; Confidential magazine
articles; Anger, Hollywood Babylon
7.1 L.A. Confidential (dir. Curtis Hanson)
7.2 L.A. Confidential
7.3 Sunset Blvd. Due: Essay 1
7.4 No class
7.5 Workshop
7.8 Sunset Blvd.
7.9 Mulholland Dr. (dir. David Lynch)
7.10 Mulholland Dr.


7.11 Fade Out: questions, conclusions
7.13 Final Exam
Policies:
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone), or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work. For
additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Web Site: Canvas
