GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                                SYLLABUS
                                  GEO 660A & B – FIELD GEOLOGY
                                             SUMMER 2019
DESCRIPTION:          The capstone six-week summer field course for undergraduate geoscience majors in
                       several Jackson School degree options. Taught annually outdoors at sites in west
                       Texas, New Mexico, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Idaho and Utah by up to ten
                       faculty/research scientists. The course consists of ~ 15 single or multi-day projects
                       that focus on aspect of field description and interpretation. Products generated
                       include measured sections, reports, photopan interpretations, cross sections, maps
                       and stereonets. Geo660A and Geo660B are two separate three week courses;
                       students may enroll for one or both.
INSTRUCTORS:          Field Camp Director: Dr. Mark Helper, JGB 4.112
                                             helper@mail.utexas.edu
                                             Phone: Office - 471-1009
                                             Cell – 512-924-2526
                      Other Instructors & Assistant Instructors: See attached.
TEACHING ASSISTANTS: See attached.
GRADING:              Field Projects, Field Tests, Presentations………………………. 100%
                      Project scores are weighted by the number of days in the field. The number of
                      projects varies by instructor, locality, weather and year. Single day individual exercises
                      (field tests) are weighted double. See the attached course schedule and calendar for
                      details.
                      This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
                      designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester,
                      providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question,
                      problem, or project. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade
                      to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your work.
PREREQUISITES:        A grade of C or better in Geo. 420K and Geo. 428, or permission of field camp
                      director.
OTHER ITEMS:          Announcements and course information will be posted on the 660 website at
                      http://www.geo.utexas.edu/courses/660/default.htm. Check it often prior to
                      departure for updated information about the travel schedule, lodging addresses, a
                      calendar of projects, sign-up details, etc.
                      Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated. Anyone in violation of University policy
                      (see Student Handbook) will receive a failing grade and is subject to additional
                      punitive measures, which may include expulsion from the University. Expectations
                      during group work will be clearly stated by all instructors prior to commencement of
                      projects. If you are unclear about what constitutes dishonesty or unsanctioned
                      collaboration, ASK. Do not assume that one instructor’s rule apply to all projects.
REQUIRED ITEMS:       See attached list.
                                                      1


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                                Course Objectives
Why a class in geological field methods? Geology is first and foremost a field science. Field geology and
field geologists provide literally the ground truth for geologic concepts and theories of how the earth works.
The degree to which we, as geologists, are successful observers and interpreters of rocks in the field depends
in large measure on what we are prepared to see and record. The old adage “I wouldn’t have believed it if I
hadn’t seen it” is, in the case of field geology, more truthfully “I wouldn’t have seen it if I hadn’t believed it”.
We explore. We discover. Unfortunately, without sufficient experience and preparation we can’t attach
meaning to (and thus frequently ignore) what we don’t recognized or understand. Discovery is, in part,
“…seeing what everybody has seen, and thinking what nobody has thought." (A. Szent-Györgyi). From our
vantage point, this requires a perspective acquired largely from field experiences.
Paradoxically, we must also learn what to ignore; “Wisdom is learning what to overlook...” (W. James).
There is rarely, if ever, sufficient time for exhaustive field data collecting. As time permits, we thus typically
focus on a relatively few key aspects at a field site, paying less or no attention to the rest. Anthropologists
term this ability to recognize and sort the significant from the insignificant “professional vision”. It is a
crucial field skill that comes mostly from practical experience. You will begin to develop your professional
vision in this class.
Field proficiency has long been a distinguishing characteristic of our science. As a geoscientist, you are
expected to be a proficient scientific observer and recorder. Your unique skills and training in this area
separate you from lawyers, engineers, chemists and other professionals with whom you might one day
work. Without proper preparation, including a strong grounding in field methods, we would be little better
than rock hounds out for a day of casual collecting. Field geology is not merely collecting data and samples;
it is about making sense of the geology around you, about making geologic interpretations. Landscapes are
histories, with time marked by boundaries in the rocks, soil and sediment. A geologic map or a measured
section is the articulation of that history, with each line marking a before and after, a hiatus that might last a
second or a billion years. Through our maps and graphical logs, we represent time as space. The ability to
create, read and interpret such product is best developed from training and practice in a field setting. It all
begins by making and recording observations. An accurate record in the form of a map, measured section,
photograph, sketch, a carefully documented sample, field notes, etc. provides a permanent, solid basis upon
which to develop testable ideas and interpretations – the plot of the story. Without such evidence,
interpretations are fanciful fables; there is no scientific basis to objectively evaluate them.
Successful field work depends greatly on how well we can formulate and test ideas while in the field.
Geology is rooted in the scientific method. The process of formulating and testing multiple working
hypotheses during field work is a distinctive, unique, vital aspect of our profession, one that can only be
taught and practiced while in the field.
Like all sciences, geology has its own vocabulary. There is no better way to learn a language than to be
immersed in it. This course can provide that immersion.
It is often said “The best geologist is the one who has seen the most rocks” and there is much truth to it. Six
weeks of field work at some of THE classic geologic localities in the western US provides a strong
introduction, the beginnings of a mental catalog of rocks and field relationships that can provide a
framework to build upon in future classes, later field work and a future career in the geosciences.
                                                           2


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                          660 STAFF, 2019
Faculty                               Expertise/Interests
1 Dr. David Mohrig                Sedimentology, depositional systems
1 Dr. Charles Kerans              Carbonate depositional systems
1 Dr. Claudia Faccenna            Tectonics, Geodynamics
1 Dr. Nikola Tissato              Geophysics
1 Dr. James Gardner               Volcanology
1,2 Dr. Peter Hennings            Structural geology, tectonics
1, 2 Dr. Mark Helper              Cordilleran geology, geology of crystalline rocks
1, 2 Dr. Brian Horton             Basin analysis, tectonics
2 Dr. Danny Stockli               Structural geology, petrology, geochronology
Assistant Instructor (Faculty Advisor)
1 Ben Smith, Ph.D. Candidate           Carbonate Depositional Systems (Kerans; 2 years 660 experience)
Teaching Assistants (Faculty Advisor)
1 Kristina Butler, Ph.D. Candidate     Basin analysis, tectonics (Horton)
1 Cody Draper, M.S. Candidate          Carbonate Depositional Systems (Kerans; 1 year 660 experience)
2 Jake Makis, M.S. Candidate           Ore deposits (Cloos; 2 years 660 experience)
2 Megan Flansburg, Ph.D. Candidate Tectonics, basin analysis (Stockli)
2 Rachel Ruthven, Ph.D. Aspirant       Petrology (Ketcham)
_______________________________________________________________________
1
  Teaches all or part of 660A
2
  Teaches all or part of 660B
                                                    3


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                      EQUIPMENT LIST - GEO 660
  Required Materials:
   Field notebook (e.g., engineer’s field book)
   Clipboard (8 1/2 x 11 size) with cover
   Geologic hammer
   Hand lens (10x)
   Small squirt bottle of dilute (approx. 10%) HCl
   Grain size card
   Six-inch ruler (best is the Post ruler with protractor on it)
   Protractor (bring spare rulers & protractors; many students lose several)
   Pencils and erasers (again, the number depends on how many you lose)
   2 or 3 drafting (mechanical) pencils (recommend Pentel or equivalent 0.5 mm or 0.3 mm lead,
      hardness F or 3H) and spare leads
   Colored pencil set that will keep a point (at least 10 colors); pencils with hard, water-fast lead are
      preferred
   Pencil sharpener or pointer, and/or sandpaper – for colored pencils
   Technical pens with fine-line points and black ink (Sizes 00, 0, 1, are desirable)
   Tablet of 8 1/2 x 11” tracing paper
   Tablet of 10 square to the inch of 8 1/2 x 11” graph paper
   Liquid paper (optional)
   The textbooks and lab manual from GEO 420K and GEO 428
   Calculator
   Watch
   Carrying bag (shoulder bag or daypack)
   Proper field clothes, long pants, long-sleeve shirts, jacket (see note on gear)
   Sun screen/block lotion
   Hat, wide brim
   Hiking boots, broken in (avoid non-lace boots; see note on gear)
   Rainwear (it will rain; see note on gear)
   Canteen (2 or 3, one-quart/liter water bottles, a Camel-Back or some other water storage container)
   Warm sleeping bag and pad** (see note on gear)
   Tent (can be shared; see notes on gear)
   Towels, washcloth
   Flashlight and/or headlamp
   Plate, cup, silverware
  Desirable Materials:                                          Prohibited Items:
   Digital Camera                                              Firearms
   Masking tape                                                Consumption of alcohol in UT vehicles
   Scotch tape                                                 Illegal drugs
   Tweezers (important for run-ins with cactus)
   Insect repellent
   Minor first aid kit for bug bites, thorns, blisters (moleskin), etc.
   Small pair of binoculars
   Whistle (if you are prone to getting lost and have a weak voice)
   Safety goggles or other eye protection (see field course policy handout regarding this and hard hats)
   Sharpie markers to label rocks
                                                      4


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                               Gear for Geo. 660
The equipment list for Geo. 660 contains items that many of you may not own that can be relatively
expensive. Below are some ideas on adequate equipment at reasonable prices. A little searching on the
web can yield tremendous dividends.
Boots
Footwear is the single most important item for a field course. Good boots provide traction, protection and
support for your feet. Tennis or basketball shoes are not adequate for the latter two reasons, nor are
cowboy boots for the former. A wide variety of boot styles are available, from those with low-or high-top
nylon/leather uppers, to all-leather boots. Leather boots provide maximum protection, support and, with
the proper soles, excellent traction. Most today are designed with backpacking in mind, which requires
relatively rigid uppers and maximum padding to provide comfort and support for carrying heavy loads. Once
broken-in, a well-made boot of this type is unsurpassed for field use. They are the best at keeping feet dry,
provide an important measure of protection from cactus and other thorny plants, and will usually (but not
always) outlast a softer boot.
  The major disadvantage of leather boots is price; a decent pair now costs over $150, with many in the
$180-$250 range. Do you need leather boots at this price for 6 weeks of fieldwork? No. A well-made,
cheaper pair of “soft” boots can be adequate if: 1) you’re relatively agile and light on your feet; 2) your field
pack doesn’t weigh more than about 30 lbs.; 3) you’re not prone to kicking cactus. I worked in soft boots
for many years and, although they lasted little more than one season, I’ve was very happy with the lowest-
priced models of Merrill, Vasque and Asolo boots, which can often be found on sale (or on the web) for less
than $100/pair. Well-made pairs by major manufacturers sell at list prices of $70 - $200. Less well made
varieties tend to lack side support (foot tends to roll sideways when walking across slopes) and can quickly
come apart (soles detach, front rand comes off) after limited use. High-top boots provide ankle support and
will keep scree and dirt out when moving down-slope on unstable ground. Trail running shoes are for trails
and do not work well for the off-trail traversing you will be doing.
  Regardless of the boots you select, you will be much more comfortable if you use well-padded socks with a
clean pair of thin sock liners. Sock liners wick moisture from your feet and are easy to wash/rinse at the end
of a day.
Rain gear
A good, well-fitting, waterproof coat is a necessity, not a luxury. We have never experienced a summer
where it didn’t rain. Three summers were exceedingly wet, raining nearly every day and for several days on
end. We camp and cook outdoors and are in the field every day, rain or shine. Strong winds and colder
temperatures often accompany rain in the mountains.
 Adequate rain gear need not cost 100’s of dollars, but a $5 plastic poncho, which is only marginally better
than a plastic trash bag, won’t work in such conditions, nor will a thin nylon shell sprayed with Scotchguard.
Lower-priced ($20-50) raincoats and rain pants, which are usually made of plastic- or coated nylon, are
adequate and widely available in a variety of styles. The best of the least expensive brands is probably Frogg
Toggs. Medium-priced coats (typically $50-100) can be somewhat lighter-weight, usually better ventilated,
may have an attached hood and are thus more comfortable to work in. They are, however, no more water
repellent than lower-priced varieties, sometimes less so. High-priced rainwear is general constructed of one
or more “miracle” fabrics; lightweight materials that are touted to “breathe” while also being waterproof.
In my opinion (based on several coats, boots, mittens, and a few other items) these fabrics are vastly
overrated for the price. Nonetheless, such coats are generally ruggedly constructed, fit well, and typically
have many desirable features (multiple pockets, armpit zippers, internal drawstrings, ancillary ventilation,
etc.). Again, they are no more waterproof than much lower priced models. Ponchos and umbrellas don’t
work well in windy weather.
                                                         5


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
Regardless of what you type of coat you choose be sure it’s large enough to allow for insulating layers
underneath. Have a pair of rain pants.
Sleeping Bags and Pads
This summer, you will spend 33 nights sleeping on the ground in a tent. Nighttime temperatures can be as
low as 30o in June and are commonly 40o-50o. Blankets are only marginally adequate in such conditions; a
sleeping bag provides better heat retention and insulation. The enormous price range for sleeping bags
reflects differences in insulating materials, weight and construction. At the high end are extremely light,
down-filled bags made of waterproof, breathable fabrics that have a comfort range that extends to -30o F.
These bags are uncomfortably warm for all but the coldest conditions. At the low end are cotton bags with
natural or synthetic fiber insulation, some of questionable construction, which may or may not keep you
warm at temperatures below 50o. In between is a very large spectrum of nylon shell, down- or synthetic
fiber-filled bags that are more than adequate for summer camping in the US Rockies. Fiber-filled bags are
light, dry quickly, are easy to clean, are nearly as warm as down, and pack to a small volume. Like wool, they
provide warmth even when wet. Down bags are typically more expensive, slow to dry and nonfunctional
when wet. If you are concerned about your sleeping bag keeping you warm, bring a pair of long underwear
to sleep in and make sure you have a good sleeping pad. I also use a sleeping bag liner to extend the
temperature range of my bag.
  A sleeping pad or foam mattress provides insulation from cold ground and a measure of comfort. A
closed-cell foam or inflatable pad provides the best insulation. A blanket beneath you sleeping bag is much
better than nothing.
Tents
The Department no longer supplies tents. Tent prices have come down in recent years and very well made,
1- to 3- person tents are available for $200 or less. In evaluating a tent for this summer, ask yourself the
following: Will the tent withstand windy (30-40 mph) conditions? If it has fiberglass poles and is tall enough
to stand up in then the answer is likely no. Is it waterproof (or can it be made waterproof) in a sustained,
heavy downpour? If the tent fly does not extend most of the way to the ground the answer is no. Do you
have all the parts? A waterproof ground cloth (a sheet of heavy mil plastic will do) keeps the floor of your
tent from absorbing water from wet ground and protects against punctures. When sticking out beyond the
tent fly, it collects water that runs under the tent, making it worse than no fly at all.
Clothing
You should have clothing that will allow you to live and work comfortably in both cold (40oF) and hot
(100o+F) weather. Cold is best handled by wearing layers that can be donned and shed as needed. For
maximum comfort your outermost layer should be windproof; rain coats/pants are adequate. Beneath this,
a layer that will trap air (sweater, sweat shirt, fleece jacket, down vest, etc.) comes next, underlain by one or
more thin layers (T-shirt, long sleeved shirt) that provide additional warmth and wick perspiration from your
skin. Synthetic fabrics (hiking pants, shorts, shirts) do not hold as much moisture (sweat, rain, snow) and dry
much quicker than cotton. They are also easier to wash without facilities. Exposed skin can burn more
easily at altitude –stay covered and use sun screen.
   A wide brim hat, bandanna, and sunblock are essential for working in the deserts of western US. A knit
cap is nice for sleeping on a cold night and good for cold rainy days under a hood. If you’re cold, try putting
a hat on. Finally, you will be traveling or working outdoors nearly every day of the 6 weeks. You will load
and unload your gear, along with ice chests, cook boxes, tarps, etc., many, many times along the way. It is
to your and everyone else’s benefit to travel light. Examine every piece of clothing you pack critically; do
you really need it? Keep in mind that there will be opportunities to do laundry at some places we visit and
we will not be anywhere that requires anything but field clothing. Believe it not, clothing can be worn more
than once before it’s too dirty, and rinsing or washing socks, underwear, shirts, etc. under a faucet or in a
stream can extend wearability almost indefinitely!
                                                           6


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
          Jackson School of Geosciences Department of Geological Sciences
                                        Field Trip and Field Course Policies
The Department of Geological Sciences conducts numerous field activities (field trips, field geology
courses, and field research). Because students are exposed to a variety of situations and experiences
that are different from those found in the classroom, special rules of conduct are necessary.
Traveling and field work involves hazards and risks, so each person must exercise care to avoid
personal injury to others. Examples of dangers specific to field work are the use of geologic picks,
poisonous snakes, tick bites, toxic plants, falling, and slippery rocks encountered when hiking on
steep slopes or crossing streams. Other dangers, as well as damage to property, may be created by
carelessness. The Department has access to certain private properties and use of private facilities
whose future availability will depend upon proper consideration for these resources by everyone.
Students who abuse University or personal property during a field trip, or who jeopardize the health
and safety of other people, will be required to leave the field trip immediately. These persons will be
subject to appropriate academic evaluation and possible disciplinary action by the Office of the Dean
of Students.
The Department has the following rules and recommendations which apply to field activities.
1. Liability and Waiver. The University requires all students to sign a liability release form (accompanying form). This
      form must be signed and returned before a student is allowed to participate in field activities.
2. Medical Care. A medical form must be filled out by all students. Any student who has medical problems (e.g.
      asthma, diabetes, metabolic disorders, allergies, trick knees) should inform the field trip leader or supervising
      professor. If you require special medications, it is your responsibility to insure that they are available when needed.
      Field activities are sometimes in very remote areas, and immediate medical assistance is not possible.
3. Health Insurance. Every student taking a field course must have medical insurance. Student health insurance is
      available at minimal cost through the Student Health Center (471-4955). Students taking field trips as part of
      normal classes who do not have health insurance will be provided with insurance for the field trips only.
4. Clothing and protective cover. Wear suitable clothes. We recommend wearing a hat, long pants, and good hiking
      boots in some areas. These help prevent sunstroke, insect bites, and bad encounters with cacti or thorny shrubs. You
      may want to bring insect repellent, and we also suggest the use of sunscreen. Consider significant possibilities of
      rain or cold weather.
5. General field hazards. Insects, poisonous snakes, and toxic plants may be found on any field trip or course. Wearing
      suitable clothing and boots helps reduce these hazards. Remember to check yourself for ticks which can transmit
      diseases such as Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Lyme disease, etc. Ticks should be removed immediately; be sure
      to remove the body with head intact. Do not use a match to kill the tick first. Watch for, don't play with, and avoid
      snakes. Five students on Department trips have been bitten by rattlers since World War II; try not to be the sixth. If
      you are allergic to such things as bee stings, you must bring appropriate medication. A few other common sense
      rules: stay out of the water if you can't swim; stay out of thunderstorms, particularly at high elevations, and out of
      flashflood-prone areas in any rain. Some field areas have steep cliffs that you are not required to and should not
      climb; use common sense and follow your instructor's advice in such areas.
6. Head and eye protection. We recommend eye protection when using, or around someone using, a geologic pick,
      hammer, or other tools. Hard hats should be used in mines, quarries, steep road cuts, or other areas where rock falls
      or blows to the head could occur; some sites may require these protective devices. Safety glasses and hard hats can
      be checked out from the Department storeroom.
7. Firearms. Possession of firearms or facsimiles at any time during any field course or field trip is forbidden.
8. Drugs and alcohol. Use or possession of illegal drugs at any time is forbidden. Alcoholic beverages may NOT be
      consumed at any time while traveling in a University vehicle.
9. Department equipment. Take care of Department property. Our equipment normally gets hard use and current
      budgets are tight, so treat it as you would your own.
10. Person Conduct: Belligerent, intimidating or harassing behavior will not be tolerated. Any behavior that can or
      could be construed as sexual harassment, even if unintentional or offered in jest, will not be tolerated – if in doubt,
      err on the side of caution. No means no, without exception or explanations. Offenses should be reported to
      instructors immediately and are grounds for dismissal.
You have previously read and agreed by signature to follow the Field Trip/Field Course Policies
for departmental field activities given above. Please keep them in mind this summer.
                                                               7


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                2019 Class Rosters (on 4/29/19)
                                                        660
 Last               First    email                      course(s)
 Arias              Joseph   josepharias4998@gmail.com  Both
 Baiocchi           Jason    jason.baiocchi@utexas.edu  B
 Benavidas          Juan     juanbenavid@utexas.edu     Both
 Bland              Carolyn  cdbland@utexas.edu         Both
 Bolduc             Chance   chancebolduc@gmail.com     A
 Denham             Andrew   atdenham@yahoo.com         B
 Ditges             Thomas   thomasditges@yahoo.com     Both
 Ferrari            Brianna  brianna.ferrari@utexas.edu B
 Foux               Caitlin  caitlinfoux@utexas.edu     Both
 Fredericks         Mason    masonfred1009@gmail.com    Both
 Garcia             Victor   victorgarcia5@utexas.edu   A
 Milliken           Matthew  mdmilliken@utexas.edu      Both
 Nguyen             Tyler    tylernguyen184@gmail.com   Both
 Quintero           Thomas   tquintero@utexas.edu       Both
 Ryan               Rebecca  rryan20@utexas.edu         Both
 Smith-Salgado      Clara    csmithsalgado@aol.com      B
 Soto-Kerans        Nicholas sotokerans@gmail.com       A
 Standring          Patricia patty.standring@utexas.edu A
 Villasenor         Gabriel  g_villasenor@utexas.edu    Both
 Wade               Matthew  matthewgeowade@gmail.com   Both
 Yang               Yukun    yangyukun1998@yahoo.com    Both
 Zamora             Marlowe  mz0898@hotmail.com         Both
 Zhao               Xiafei   feifeizhao98@gmail.com     Both
                                             8


   GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                      SCHEDULE FOR GEO 660A&B, SUMMER 2018
May 26          Travel to Carlsbad, NM; Drs. Kerans & Mohrig (Stevens Inn)
May 26-28 AM Guadalupe Mts. projects; Drs. Kerans & Mohrig (Stevens Inn)
May 28 PM       Travel to Alamogordo; Drs. Kerans & Mohrig (camping, Lincoln National Forest)
May 29 AM       White Sands N.M. project; Drs. Kerans & Mohrig
        PM      Travel Ghost to Ranch; Drs. Kerans & Mohrig (camping, Ghost Ranch Conference Center)
May 30-31       Ghost Ranch project; Drs. Kerans & Mohrig (camping, Ghost Ranch Conference Center)
 May 31 AM      Ghost Ranch project; Drs. Kerans & Mohrig
        PM      Travel to Los Alamos; Intro. to Valles Caldera; Drs. Helper & Gardner (camping, Bandelier N.M.)
June 1-June 4   Valles Caldera projects; Drs. Helper, Faccenna & Gardner (camping, Bandelier Nat.Mon.)
June 5          Valles Caldera projects; Drs. Helper & Gardner (Hampton Inn, White Rock, N.M.)
June 6          Travel to Questa, N.M.; Drs. Helper, Faccenna & Tisato (camping, Rio Grande del Norte Nat.Mon.)
June 7-8        Taos Plateau Project; Drs. Helper, Faccenna & Tisato (camping, Rio Grande del Norte Nat. Mon.)
June 9          Day Off; Dr. Helper (camping, Rio Grande del Norte Nat. Mon.)
June 10         Travel to Casper, WY; Dr. Helper (Super 8, Casper, WY)
June 11-14      Alcova, WY Mapping Projects; Drs. Helper and Hennings (camping, Bear Trap Meadows)
June 15         Travel to Cody, WY; Big Horn Basin structure; Drs. Helper, Hennings, & Horton (Buffalo Bill’s Antlers Inn)
                                                       END Geo660A
June 16         Travel to Sawtooth Mts., near Augusta, MT; Heart Mountain detachment, Sunlight Basin, Canyon Mouth
                 Anticline; Drs. Helper, Hennings, & Horton (camping, Sun Canyon Lodge)
June 17-20      Sun River Cross Section project; Drs. Helper, Hennings, & Horton (camping, Sun Canyon Lodge)
June 21         Travel to Helena, MT, shop, set camp; Drs. Helper & Horton (camping, Kim’s Marina)
June 22-27      Big Belt Mts. mapping projects; Drs. Helper & Horton (camping, Kim’s Marina) – Day Off June 25
June 28         Field Test; Dr. Helper & Horton (camping, Kim’s Marina)
June 29         Travel to Butte, MT (Berkeley Pit) and Hecla, MT; Dr. Helper (primitive camping, Deer Lodge N.F.)
June 30-July 3  Hecla project; Drs. Helper and Stockli (primitive camping)
July 4          Travel to Price, UT; Dr. Helper (Holiday Inn Express)
July 5          Travel to Bernalillo, NM; Dr. Helper (Motel)
July 6          Travel to Austin; Dr. Helper
                                                         9


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                             MONEY FOR MEALS
    All meals while camping and all lunches, except on some travel days, will be provided.
    All hotels during the trip will provide at least a continental breakfast (bread, pastry, juice, coffee) and
     some may have hot food. If you eat a hardy breakfast you may want to purchase addition breakfast food
     – it will not otherwise be provided.
    You will need to purchase lunch and dinner during some hotel stays. These days for 660A are May 26,
     27, 29; June 10, 15; for 660B July 4 ,5, 6.
Ice chest/refrigerators will be available to store food/medicine during hotel stays. You will be able to make
a lunch from food we purchase for this purpose before going into the field, provided you are leave yourself
time to do so before departure. All lunch food is put away at 7:45 AM.
                                                        10


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                             Geo660A&B Trip Addresses, Summer 2019
              660A: May 26-June 15                          660B: June 16-July 6
May 26&27                        June 11-14                 June 16-20
Best Western Stevens Inn         Bear Trap Meadows          Sun Canyon Lodge
1829 S Canal Street              Campground                 8571 Sun Canyon Lodge Rd
Carlsbad, NM 88220               Natrona County, WY         P.O. Box 327
575-887-2851                                                Augusta, MT 59410
                                 June 15                    (888) 749-3654
May 28                           Buffalo Bill’s Antlers Inn
Upper Fir Group                  1213 17th St.              June 21-28
Campground                       Cody, WY 82414             Campground
Lincoln National Forest          307-587-2084               Kim's Marina and Resort
No phone or mailing address                                 8015 Canyon Ferry Rd.
Emergency Calls only:                                       Helena, MT 59602
575-682-2551                                                (406) 475-3723
May 29-31                                                   June 29 –July 3
Ghost Ranch Conference Center                               Beaverhead National Forest,
HC 77, Box 11, Abiquiu, NM 85710-9601                       Dillon Ranger District
EMERGENCY Contact:                                          Primitive camping at Hecla,
Phone messages: (505) 685-4333, ext. 152                    Pioneer Mts., near Melrose, MT
                                                            No phone or cell service
June 1-4
Group Campsite                                              July 4
Bandelier National Monument                                 Super 8
Los Alamos, NM                                              180 N Hospital Dr.
No phone or mailing address                                 Price, UT 84501
Emergency Calls - 505-672-3861                              435-637-8088
June 5                                                      July 5
Hampton Inn                                                 Motel
124 State Highway 4                                         Bernalillo, NM
Los Alamos, NM 87544
505-672-3828
June 6-9
Campsites
Rio Grande Del Norte
 National Monument
Cerro, NM
No phone or mailing address
Emergency Calls - 575-758-8851
June 10
Super 8
3838 C Y Avenue
Casper, WY 82609; (307) 266-3480
                                                     11


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                            12


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
4/30/2019
M. Helper
                     COURSE DESCRIPTION, GEO 660A&B, SUMMER 2018
WEEK 1 – Drs. Mohrig, Kerans and Martindale – See Figure 2 and 3
(May 26-June 1 AM)
Introduction to Guadalupe Mountains and Permian Basin Stratigraphic Setting/
Permian Reef Geology Trail, McKittrick Canyon
There is perhaps no more famous setting to begin your exploration of the field observation and interpretation
of depositional processes than the Guadalupe Mountains. Tertiary faulting and uplift has caused the exposure
of a shelf-to-basin setting that contains both carbonate and terrigenous sediments. Dramatic 2000-3000 ft
high walls of carbonate and clastic shelf, slope and basin deposits are laid out in spectacular vistas. We will
present the stratigraphic setting, and then sketch and interpret several of these major walls in terms of stratal
geometric relationships and depositional processes.
An all-day hike on Day 2 up the 2000 vertical feet of the Permian Reef Geology Trail reveals the depositional
facies and stratal geometries of a major reef-rimmed carbonate platform. We will use the Permian Reef
Geology Trail guide as background material but formulate our own model of a representative depositional
profile from observations made along the trail.
Sacramento Mts. and White Sands National Monument, near Alamogordo, NM (May 29 AM)
The Sacramento Mountains, together with the Guadalupe and Franklin Mountains, comprise the outcrop
trilogy used by industry and academic groups since the 60’s to illustrate different styles of carbonate facies
and reef styles. Exceptional exposures of unique Pennsylvanian phylloid algal mounds in Dry Canyon illustrate
both a unique style of carbonate deposition and the distinct depositional patterns of an icehouse system, with
repeated large amplitude swings in sea-level. These exposures, plus the Mississippian buildups of the Lake
Valley Group provide a broad spectrum of carbonate and mixed systems. Reconstruction of environmental
conditions associated with deposition of the Holder Formation, a Virgilian (Upper Pennsylvanian) mixed
siliciclastic–carbonate sequence is a theme here. The White Sands gypsum dune field nearby also provides an
ideal setting for examining dune geometries and aeolian processes that are a modern analog for our next
project.
Travel to Abiquiu, NM (May 29 PM)
The drive north to Abiquiu and the Ghost Ranch Conference Center takes us across a young lava flow (the
Carrizzo flow) and up the axis of the Rio Grande Rift (Fig. 3), the site of Tertiary crustal extension. Proceed
north and northwest within the rift, we skirt Santa Fe and the giant Valles Caldera (our focus during week 2)
along the western edge of the Espanola Basin, one of rift’s central valleys. Following the Chama River, we
drive up and out of the rift onto the eastern edge of the Colorado Plateau near Abiquiu, NM. Flat lying Triassic
and Jurassic strata of the Plateau at Ghost Ranch (Fig. 3) are the next topic of study.
Aeolinites and evaporites – sedimentology and stratigraphy of the Jurassic Morrison, Todilto and Entrada
Formations (May 30-June 1 AM)
Here we measure, describe and interpret the stratigraphic and depositional contrasts between aeolian dune
sandstone of the Entrada Formation and overlying gypsum and carbonate beds of the Todilto Formation, as
exposed in the walls of the canyons surrounding our campground.
                                                        13


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
WEEK 2+ – Volcanology; Drs. Gardner, Helper Faccenna and Tisato – see Figure 3
(June 1 PM-June 8)
Geology and volcanology of a supervolcano – the Valles Caldera, Jemez Mountains, New Mexico – Drs.
Gardner and Helper (June 1 PM – June 5)
Following a short drive south to Los Alamos, NM (Fig. 3), we begin our study of the Valles Caldera. The Valles
Caldera of the Jemez Mountains is the classic locality for understanding the nature of large-volume caldera
eruptions. Exception preservation and outstanding exposures of Pleistocene eruptive products (ash flow
and air fall tuffs, lava flows, lava domes) provide an unparalleled opportunity to examine, map and describe
the hallmarks of these gigantic eruptions. A field trip our first afternoon examines the caldera proper and its
youngest products. The main eruptive rocks and their precursors are studied the following day.
  Days 2-4 are devoted to learning to recognize, interpret and map the intrusive and eruptive products of
calderas through a mapping exercise that examine the geometry and sequence of volcanic deposits.
Geology of the Taos Plateau Volcanic Field – Drs. Helper, Faccenna, and Tisato (June 6-9)
Late Miocene to Pliocene eruptive rocks and interlayered sediments of the northern Rio Grande Rift of
northernmost New Mexico are spectacularly exposed in the gorges of the Rio Grande and Red River near
Questa, NM, within the recently created Rio Grande del Norte National Monument. The uppermost part of
this succession comprises the Taos Plateau volcanic field, which caps the San Luis rift basin alluvial fill. Here
we document and map the eruptive history of the Servilleta Basalts, older more silic lava flows and domes,
and the interlayered alluvial fill. What are the relative ages of the rocks, how do we tell them apart, and
when did the river gorges form?
Week 3 – Basement-Cored Structures of the Wyoming Laramide Province; Drs. Hennings, Helper and Horton
– see Figure 4 (June 10-15)
Travel to Casper, WY (June 10) – Dr. Helper
After a day off on June 9, we travel a long day’s drive north to Casper, Wyoming. Shortly after crossing the
border into Colorado and into the northern-most part of the San Luis Basin (Fig. 3) we skirt the
paleoshoreline of ancient Lake Alamosa. As recently as c. 500 Ka, the northern San Luis Basin in Colorado
was a closed basin that hosted a giant pluvial lake, Lake Alamosa. Southward draining of the lake is thought
to have created the northern segment of the Rio Grande River in New Mexico (Fig. 3), helping integrate a
vast drainage catchment that by 200 Ka resembled the modern Rio Grande watershed. We leave the Rio
Grande Rift near Fort Garland, Colorado, cross the Laramide Front Ranges of the Rockies (here the Sangre de
Christo Mountains) and emerge onto the high plains at Walsenburg, Colorado. Skirting Denver, we follow I-
25 north along the Front Range into Wyoming (Fig. 4), where we enter the Wyoming Laramide Province of
Precambrian-cored uplifts and intervening basins. These are our next topic of study.
Mapping a basement-rooted Laramide anticline, Alcova Reservoir, central Wyoming – Drs. Hennings and
Helper (June 12-14)
With topographic maps and aerial photos, we will map the structural and stratigraphic relationships and
interpret the subsurface geology of a small Laramide anticline. This will be accomplished with the aid of a
stereonet and cross section. We will also visit the regional geology of the Alcova area and become familiar
with the complexity of natural fractures. This relatively simple mapping and cross section exercise is a prelude
to later, more complex mapping and subsurface interpretation.
 Big Horn Mountains and Big Horn Basin Transect – Drs. Henning, Helper and Horton (June 15)
After finishing the Alcova project, we travel north and west to Cody, Wyoming (Fig. 5). From Sheridan to
Cody, your job is to observe Laramide fold and fault geometries and speculate on their subsurface
continuations. This information will inform your ~E-W regional cross section of the Big Horn Mountains and
Basin at the latitude of Cody, which you will complete before day’s end. Spectacular vistas in the Big Horn
                                                         14


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
Mountains and westward across the Big Horn Basin, and Dr. Henning’s guidance, will allow you to do so! We
spend the evening in historic Cody, WY, where we will be joined by a new group of T.A.s and Geo660B
students.
                                   This ends the first 3-week class, GEO660A
WEEK 4 & 5– Structural Geology of the Thin-skinned Sevier Fold-Thrust Belt, Western Montana; Drs.
Hennings, Helper and Horton – See Figure 5
June 16-28
Clark’s Fork Canyon and Travel to Sawtooth Mountains – Drs. Henning, Helper and Horton (June 16)
Departing Cody, we travel a short distance north to the mouth of Clark’s Fork Canyon at the eastern end of
the Beartooth Mountains (Fig. 5), another Laramide basement uplift. Here Big Horn Basin and older folded
and faulted stratigraphy is brought above ground to partially onlapped by strata deposited as the Beartooths
were uplifted ( the Beartooth Conglomerate), a classic example of so-called growth strata. Proceeding north
and westward, we cross the leading edge of the Cretaceous Sevier fold-thrust belt near Bozeman and later
Helena, MT (Fig. 5), and travel along its leading edge to our destination in the Sawtooth Range (Sun Canyon
Lodge) near Augusta, MT. Along the way we enter the country explored by Lewis and Clark, with spectacular
Big Sky vistas of isolated, snow-capped mountain ranges.
Leading Edge of the Sevier Belt, Sawtooth Range, Montana – Drs. Henning, Helper and Horton (June 17-
20)
From a camp near the Sun River in the Sawtooth Range, we examine, measure and map in cross section the
geology and geometry of the leading edge of the Sevier belt. The spectacular Sevier Fold and Thrust Belt is a
Late Cretaceous to Early Paleogene belt of thin-skinned deformation that extends the length of the Rocky
Mountains. The end result of our field work in the Sun River area is a cross section constrained by surface
observation, map data, and a seismic reflection profile. You will learn how practicing structural geologists
make use of a combination of tools and techniques to arrive at a constrained subsurface interpretation in a
structural complex setting.
Travel to Helena and Canyon Ferry, MT – Drs. Helper and Horton (June 21)
As we turn our vehicles south, a short drive takes us back to Helena, the state capitol, last seen five days
earlier on our trip north. Here we grocery shop and set up camp nearby along the northern edge of Canyon
Ferry Reservoir, the largest of a series of reservoirs along the upper Missouri River.
Structural geology of a fold-dominated portion of the Sevier Belt – Drs. Helper and Horton (June 22-28)
Working from our camp at Kim’s Marina (Fig. 5) on the southern edge of the Big Belt Mountains, you will
learn how to map, measure and describe the geology of this fold-dominated salient of the Sevier Belt. This
is accomplished during two 3-day projects, a day off, and a field mapping test. Each of the projects share
common components:
      Day 1: Introduction to setting and stratigraphy
             o Compile a stratigraphic column of map units, recon. the field area, begin mapping
      Day 2: Continued mapping
             o Begin constructing cross section and stereonets
      Day 3: Finish mapping
             o Turn in map, cross section and stereonets
Evening lectures provide information on stereonets, cross-section construction and the geology of the Sevier
and Laramide Orogenies.
                                                         15


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
WEEK 6 – Ore Deposits; Drs. Helper and Stockli (June 29-July 3) – See Figure 6
Ore deposits introduction: Field trip to Butte, Montana; travel to Hecla, near Melrose, MT - Drs. Helper and
Stockli (June 29)
After completing work in the Big Belts, we travel southwest to Butte, MT (Fig. 6) to see what remains of "the
richest hill on earth". The topics this day are giant porphyry copper deposits, EPA superfund sites and
mining in the west. After buying supplies, we drive south into the Pioneer Mountains, where we establish a
camp near the ghost towns of Lion City and Hecla, once the center of the richest silver mining district in
Montana. Here we spend four days documenting and unraveling field relationships among deformation,
plutonism, contact metamorphism and mineralization within facies equivalents of the same rocks mapped in
the previous two projects.
 Hecla Project: Ore deposit geology and geologic processes - Drs. Helper and Stockli (June 30-July 3)
This project integrates different geological disciplines to unravel the geological history of this late-1800’s
silver-zinc mining district. Field data will be collected over four days to understand the sedimentary,
structural, metamorphic, magmatic and hydrothermal history of this area and to produce a concise report
that synthesizes this information. In addition to introducing concepts in metamorphic and ore geology, this
exercise offers a unique chance to integrate different types of data to understand the geological history of
an area – a common exercise for any earth scientist.
Travel to Austin - Dr. Helper (July 4-6)
The first day of this 3-day drive takes us across the Snake River Plain hot spot track, across southern down
through the flats of ancient pluvial Lake Bonneville along and across the Wasatch Range near Salt Lake City
and onto the Colorado Plateau near Price, Utah. Day 2 is a long drive across the Colorado Plateau, with a
stop at Arches National Monument near Moab, UT and across the San Juan Basin back into the Rio Grande
Rift near Albuquerque, NM. Day 3 transits the high plains of eastern New Mexico and the Texas panhandle
(Figs. 3 and 1), the Llano Estacado, and ends on the Edwards Plateau (Fig. 2), a largely featureless drive
across a vast portion of these two great state. It’s been 6600 miles of geologic immersion, with experiences
to last a lifetime - what a class, what a trip!
                                                          16


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                         Figure 1. Geo660 Summer 2019 Geological Route Map
                                                17


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                   Figure 2. Route Map 2 – Austin, Texas to Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                                   18


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                Figure 3. Route Map 3 – Albuquerque, New Mexico to Denver, Colorado
                                                19


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                  Figure 4. Route Map 4 – Denver, Colorado to Rock Springs, Wyoming
                                                  20


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                   Figure 5. Route Map 5 – Casper, Wyoming to Great Falls, Montana
                                                 21


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
Figure 6. Geological Route Map – Idaho Falls, Idaho to Great Falls, Montana
                                                     22


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
                                     Being Academically Prepared
Sedimentary Geology
         Below are listed some general aspects of sedimentary geology that you will be expected to have
mastered by the time you leave for Geo 660. All of this material was covered in Geo 416M and Geo 420K.
The best sources for your review are your notes, the text, and the web sites for these courses.
1. Classification of rocks and sediment by texture
         You must be able to classify terrigenous sediments and rocks by texture (e.g., poorly sorted,
immature, fine-grained sandstone). This means that you must be able to identify the mean grain size, estimate
the grain sorting, recognize the four stages of textural maturity, and recognize grain shape and roundness.
You should be able to tell if the sorting reflects a unimodal, bimodal or polymodal grain distribution. Impact
scars on pebbles and larger grains are important to identify. Rock color also reflects important aspects of the
rock. You must have an understanding of the factors that control these sediment/rock characteristics. For
sandstones and conglomerates be able to estimate the abundance of framework grains, matrix, cement, and
porosity using your hand lens.
         You must be able to distinguish those rock aspects that are depositional in nature from those that
result from weathering. For example, weathering commonly results in the oxidation of pyrite and other
ferrous minerals, differential dissolution of minerals, hydration, oxidation, and case-hardening of joints.
Precipitation of travertine crusts and soluble white salt crusts (efflorescence), as well as Liesegang bands, are
post-depositional products. In addition, it is usually possible on outcrop to recognize basic lithology (e.g.,
sandstone, limestone, shale) by weathering habit.
         Be able to classify carbonate rocks according to the Dunham classification, including identification of
major grain types. Know the major taxonomic groups of invertebrate fossils and their environmental
significance. Know the marine evaporite mineral sequence.
2. Classification of rocks and sediment by mineralogy
         Be able to classify sediment and rocks by mineralogy (e.g., arkose). For sandstones be able to estimate
the type of common cements (quartz, calcite, dolomite, siderite, iron oxides, kaolinite), the abundance of QFR
components, and clan name using the Folk classification. Understand the relationship between mineralogy,
source area, and other controls such as climate, tectonism and nature of transport.
3. Sedimentary structures
         You must be able to identify sedimentary structures and understand under what conditions they form.
Be able to identify common fossils, know their age ranges, and environmental significance. Below are listed
some common sedimentary structures and other features of sedimentary rocks. You should be able to
recognize these, understand how they form, and interpret their genetic significance.
                                                        23


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
         Laminations                                               Breccia
         Wind-ripple laminations                                   Paleokarst
         Trough cross-strata                                       Evaporite molds
         Tabular cross-strata                                      Inter vs. intraparticle porosity
         Current ripple and climbing ripple cross-strata           Boundstone
         Wave ripple cross-strata                                  Geopetals
         Hummocky cross-strata                                     Fenestral fabric
         Textural mottled bedding
         Structureless (massive) bedding
         Graded and reverse graded bedding
         Contorted bedding
         Nodular bedding
         Flaser and lenticular bedding
         Herringbone cross-strata
         Scour-and-fill structures
         Channel walls and channel-fills
         Cryptalgal laminations, stromatolites (laterally linked and stacked hemispheres)
         Bouma sequence
         Wave and current ripple marks
         Trace fossils: burrows, tracks, and trails
         Flute casts, groove casts, load casts
         Parting lineation
         Mud cracks
         Stylolites
         Liesegang bands
         Chert and other nodules, calcite-cemented concretions (and other types)
         Cone-in-cone structure
         Adhesion structures
4. Depositional and diagenetic environments and processes
         You must be able to make a basic interpretation of environment of deposition (e.g., deep-sea turbidite
sequences, meandering fluvial channel). You should be able to determine whether the seafloor was well
oxygenated, suboxic, anoxic. Clues are TOC (reflected in rock color), presence of absence of trace fossils,
abundance of pyrite, etc. Most information is derived from the larger-scale geometry of the strata. You should
always scan an outcrop for the continuity of beds, the overall strata arrangement, faults, channel structures,
and vertical trends before studying the rock up close.
         For carbonate and evaporite environments, review the shelf-to-basin facies tract, the environmental
factors important for carbonate/evaporite production, the different styles of carbonate shelf architecture as
a function of changes in sea level, climate, time in geologic history. Review the principal mechanisms
proposed for (1) changing sea level, (2) dolomitization, (3) subaerial and subaqueous evaporite deposition, (4)
cyclic sediment deposition.
                                                        24


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
5. Field methods
         You must be able to perform basic field procedures including (1) measuring a section with a staff and
Brunton compass or similar instrument, (2) identifying textures and mineralogies with a hand lens, and (3)
using a Brunton compass or similar instrument to measure bedding and foreset orientations, (4) operate a
hand-held GPS instrument.
6. Data presentation
         You must be able to display geological information in various formats including (1) vertical sections,
(2) scaled field sketches, (3) cross-sections, (4) neatly drafted maps, (5) stereonets.
7. Basin-scale processes
         You must have a basic understanding of (1) tectonic basin types, (2) the types of environments
associated with these, and (3) the types of sediments characteristic of the different types of basins and source
areas.
8. Global-scale processes
         You must have a basic understanding of the depositional architectures and their scales as a function
of cycles of sea level, climate and tectonism. Know the general history of Earth change (e.g.,
greenhouse/icehouse periods, first-order sea-level curve), and the basics of higher order processes such as
orbital forcing of Earth’s climate.
Structural Geology & Mapping
         The topics and the skills outlined below were covered in GEO428, 426P, 420K, 416K and 401/303,
particularly in labs and/or field trip exercises. Notes, texts, old labs and web sites for these courses are
particular valuable resources for review.
     1) Be able to read a topographic map, construct a topographic profile along a line of section, and have
         the ability to accurately locate yourself with a topographic map.
     2) Have a good understanding of strike lines (structure contours), 3-point problems, the rule of V's, and
         how these are manifest on geologic maps by unit contacts, fault traces, fold axial traces.
     3) Be able to correctly use a compass to measure the attitudes of linear and planar features.
     4) Be able to construct stereographic projections of the attitudes of lines and planes, and determine a
         fold axis from attitude measurements of folded layers.
     5) Be able to appropriately label maps and cross sections (and where these items belong on a finished
         product): title, author, date, north arrow, scale bar, contour interval, stratigraphic symbols,
         explanation of symbols, location of cross section; endpoints of cross section, orientation of cross
         section, vertical scale, and vertical exaggeration.
     6) Be able to draw a structural cross section; know how to project data from a map into the plane of a
         cross section.
                                                         25


GEO660: Field Geology, 2019
    7) Know fold terminology and map symbols: fold axis, axial surface, hinge line, axial trace, plunge, fold
       limbs, cylindrical, overturned vs. upright, parallel vs. non-parallel, angular vs. curved.
    8) Know fault terminology and map symbols: thrust, normal, strike slip, footwall, hanging wall,
       displacement, dip and strike separation, fault tip, fault ramp, detachment, listric, thin-skinned vs.
       thick-skinned, releasing and restraining bends.
    9) Be able to interpret a geologic map, including relative ages from superpositional or cross-cutting
       relationships, dip directions from map patterns, anticlines vs. synclines and directions of plunge, axial
       trace symbols, up vs. down sides of faults from map patterns.
Igneous Geology
    1) Know how to classify igneous rocks using compositional criteria (intrusive rocks: granite, granodiorite,
       gabbro, peridotite; extrusive rocks: rhyolite, andesite, dacite, basalt) and textural criteria (tuff, welded
       tuff, vitrophyre, etc.), and apply appropriate adjectives (porphyritic, aphanitic, phaneritic, etc.).
    2) Be able to identify common minerals in igneous rocks with a hand lens. These include, but are not
       limited to, quartz, plagioclase, k-feldspar, biotite, muscovite, clinopyroxene, amphibole (hornblende)
       and olivine.
    3) Have an appreciation for the geological settings in which different igneous rocks might be found.
Metamorphic Geology
    1) Know how to classify metamorphic rocks (slate, phyllite, schist, gneiss, hornfels) and apply
       appropriate adjectives (granoblastic, porphyroblastic, foliated, etc.).
    2) Be able to identify common metamorphic minerals with a hand lens. These include, but are not
       limited to: i) minerals common to most metamorphic rocks: quartz, plagioclase, k-feldspar, biotite,
       muscovite, chlorite, ii) pelites: garnet, aluminosilicates (andalusite, kyanite, sillimanite), staurolite,
       iii) metabasites: clinopyroxene, orthopyroxene, amphibole (hornblende, tremolite/actinolite), and
       iv) metacalcsilicates/metacarbonates: calcite, dolomite, talc, tremolite, wollastonite, diopside.
    3) Have an understanding of the concepts of metamorphic facies, P-T and T-X grids and isograds,
       including an appreciation of the dependence of mineral assemblages on rock composition,
       temperature, pressure and fluid composition/availability.
    4) Understand the relationship of fabrics defined by metamorphic minerals to minor and major folds and
       faults/shear zones.
    5) Know metamorphic index minerals for pelitic and mafic rocks.
                                                       26
