                       THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                  Engineering Communication
             Summer 2019 COURSE DESCRIPTION AND SYLLABUS
                                   Instructor: Dr. John Cline
OBJECTIVES
333T is an integral part of your engineering coursework. No, seriously. If you go to your
department’s website, you’ll find a list like the one below. This one’s for ME specifically
(http://www.me.utexas.edu/undergraduate/objectives-outcomes) but they’re very similar across
the Cockrell School:
     1. Knowledge of and ability to apply engineering and science fundamentals to real
         problems.
     2. Ability to formulate and solve open-ended problems.
     3. Ability to design mechanical components, systems and processes.
     4. Ability to set up and conduct experiments, and to present the results in a professional
         manner.
     5. Ability to use modern computer tools in mechanical engineering.
     6. Ability to communicate in written, oral and graphical forms.
     7. Ability to work in teams and apply interpersonal skills in engineering contexts.
     8. Ability and desire to lay a foundation for continued learning beyond the baccalaureate
         degree.
     9. Awareness of professional issues in engineering practice, including ethical responsibility,
         safety, the creative enterprise, and loyalty and commitment to the profession.
     10. Awareness of contemporary issues in engineering practice, including economic, social,
         political, and environmental issues and global impact.
In this class, we’ll be addressing the latter part of #4, as well as all of #6, #7, #9, and #10. And
maybe a little bit of #8…
It’s my hope that 333T functions as a bridge between some of your prior coursework and what
you’ll be doing, both in your subsequent classes and in the rest of your careers. We begin this
summer session by writing two Observation Reports based on things you’ll see during our
excursion to the north and the south of Chile.
This course carries a Writing, Ethics, and Global Cultures Flag. Consequently, we’ll spend time
considering the impact of engineering design in a context specific to the people and environment
of Chile. The final project, a General Report drawn from a list of topics I’ve identified in
advance, will consider the intertwining of economic interests and environmental concerns in
Chile, using both your Observation Reports and library research. You’ll also be presenting on
your topic because effective communication skills, both written and oral are a means to
achieving engineering best practices.
TEXTS


Required readings are posted to Canvas.
PREREQUISITES (
Rhetoric 306 is a prerequisite for this course.
GRADING
Your course grade will be based on the sum of the course requirements, adjusted for weight. To
pass the course, you must submit all major assignments before semester's end. We will not give
any incompletes. Final course grades will be weighted as follows:
                Observation Report 1                                                  15%
                Observation Repo                                                      15%
                General Report                                                        30%
                Presentation of General Report                                        20%
                Participation/Short Assignments                                       20%
Your final grade for the semester will be calculated on a plus/ minus basis using the following
scale:
  A = 94-100             B+ = 87-89          C+ = 77-79         D+ = 67-69        F= 0-60
  A- = 90-93             B = 84-86           C = 74-76          D = 64-66
                         B- = 80-83          C- = 70-73         D- = 60-63
When an assignment is returned, please respect a 24 moratorium on any questions to your TA or
myself about your score, excepting calculation errors. Read our comments carefully and consider
them over the course of a day; if you still have questions, please see your TA or myself as
appropriate. With final grades, my policy is to round at the .5% mark. For example, an 89.5%
will be considered an A-. While I will oblige all requests to reconsider an assignment score—or
your final grade made before I am required to submit the latter to the university—I reserve the
right to potentially lower as well as raise the number/letter in question.
PLAGIARISM
You must acknowledge any source you quote, paraphrase, or summarize, and any work you do
on an assignment must be your own or your team’s. Plagiarism can result in a failing grade for
the course and notice to the dean. We will discuss plagiarism in more detail later in the semester.
For more on UT’s policy on scholastic dishonesty, please see:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
SPECIAL NOTES:
The University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic adjustments for qualified
students with disabilities upon request. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TDD or the College of Engineering Director of Students with
Disabilities at 471-4321.
                                                2


CELL PHONES AND COMPUTERS
Please don’t use your phone during class. You are required to bring a laptop to every class
and every workshop. Please use laptops during lecture only for taking notes, looking up
information relevant to the topic at hand, or working on in-class assignments. When other
students are giving presentations, you should put your computer away.
SYLLABUS CALENDAR
While we’re in Temuco and Antofagasta, students should be keeping careful notes during
lectures and site visits to use in the Observation reports, which will be sent electronically to the
TA.
June 3st: Observation Report 1 due
June 10th: Observation Report 2 due; Final Report assignments handed out; workshop on using
library resources and summary/paraphrase/quote
June 12th: Workshop on writing about data
June 17th: Draft Statement of Problem + workshop
June 19th: Draft Corporate and Indigenous/Environmentalist Position sections + workshop
June 24th: Draft Claim Evaluation section + workshop
June 26st: Draft Solutions section + workshop
July 1nd: No class; national holiday
July 3h: Presentations + papers due
                                               3
