ARH 339M (19600)             AMERICAN ART 1958-1985                John R. Clarke
AMS 325 (30570)                     *     Fall 2019      *        j.clarke@austin.utexas.edu
 T-TH 9:30-11:00      ART 1.110       Office: DFA 2.114 Office Hours: W 1-3 and by
appointment
COURSE OBJECTIVES, ASSIGNMENTS, EXAMINATIONS, AND GRADING
Objectives or Goals of the Course:
1) To survey the major movements in American art from about 1958 to about 1985. We will look
at the work of selected artists associated with the major trends, including pop art, minimalism,
conceptual art, site-specific art, performance and body art, photorealism, patterning and
decoration, and the varieties of figural art that emerged in the 1980s, including neo-
expressionism, graffiti, narrative, and appropriation.
 2) We will look at these trends from three principal points of view: their relationship to prior
historical developments, their self-stated aims, and their treatment by contemporary critics.
 3) To introduce you to contemporary critical writing.
Procedure and Grading:
CANVAS
In this class I use CANVAS—a Web-based course management system with password-protected
access at http://canvas.utexas.edu—to distribute course materials and collaborate online. If you
require support in using CANVAS call the Information Technology Services Help Desk at 512-
475-9400, Monday-Friday, 8AM-6PM, please plan accordingly.
1) This is primarily a lecture course. Lecture outlines will be posted on Canvas. I also post
PowerPoints of lectures on Canvas.
2) Three one-hour examinations:
                 October 1                      33% of final grade
                 October 31                    42% of final grade
                 December 5                     25% of final grade
 3) Preparation for exams. Students will be expected to identify and discuss slides. There will
be both slide identifications (one work) and comparisons (two works). Slides on exams will be
chosen from a list of slides. You will be able to study these slides beforehand on DASe (Digital


Archive Services). This is the link for exam 1:
https://dase.laits.utexas.edu/tag/clarkejr/clarke_american_art_since_1960_exam_1
 4) There will also be essay questions, chosen from questions that you submit; you will choose
one and prepare it at home before the exam.
 5) Papers: Students with an average of B+ or above may elect to write an 8-10 page paper in
lieu of the third hour exam. If you are eligible and wish to write a paper, notify me by November
14 at the latest to get my approval, and follow the instruction sheet posted on Canvas. Papers due
December 5.
 6) Class Attendance. You must sign in each day on an attendance sheet. Three or more
unexcused absences may result in lowering your final grade one letter.
Religious Holy Days
It is university policy that you must notify me of a pending absence at least 14 days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, assignment, examination or
in-class project in order to observe, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
7) Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
 8) Assigned readings are uploaded to Canvas and most books that the readings come from are
on reserve in the Fine Arts Library.
 9) + Presentations: students may raise their most recent exam grade by a + with a successful 5-
minute visual presentation at the beginning of class. I will give you the details in class.
10) I will assign plus/minus grades.
11) There will be no final exam.
12) University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
13) Notetaking Suggestion: I strongly suggest that you get an unlined notebook and take class
notes in it, rather than using a laptop or other e-device. Many reliable studies have shown that
hand-written notes are much more effective for learning than even verbatim notes typed into a
laptop. In fact, verbatim notes are the worst! The advantage of an unlined notebook is that you
can makes sketches of the works of art we spend some time on in class, and they make the work
of art your own.


14) Other Resources Available
The University has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning:
       The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
       Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
       Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
       Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
       Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
14) Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire
alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies
regarding evacuation:
       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building
       If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class
       In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors
       Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire
        Department, the University Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
15) Behavior Concerns Advice Line
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center, the Employee Assistance Program, and The University of Texas Police
Department. Call 512-232-5050 or visit https://www.utexas.edu/campus-life/safety-and-security.
CLASS MEETINGS AND READING ASSIGNMENTS
August
29 Duchamp. Abstract Expressionism.
Read: Rose, American Art since 1900, 130-160; 161-180.
September
3 Rauschenberg and Johns.


Read: Alloway, American Pop Art, 52-75; Diamonstein 305-315 (Rauschenberg and Castelli)
5 Pop painting: Lichtenstein, Rosenquist,
Read: Alloway, American Pop Art, 75-98; Diamonstein 211-225 (Lichtenstein and Castelli)
10 Dine, Indiana, Wesselmann. Sculpture: Kienholz,
Read: Diamonstein 97-109 (Dine); 155-166 (Indiana)
12 Segal, Oldenburg. Pop counterculture: Warhol
Read: Alloway, American Pop Art, 98-104 (Segal, Oldenburg); Diamonstein 354-366
 (Segal); Alloway 104-114 (Warhol)
17 Warhol. Kaprow and Happenings.
Read: Kaprow, “Legacy of Pollock”
19 Minimal or Systemic painting: Stella, Noland,
Read: Sandler, 1960s, Chapter 1, “Painterly Painting and Post-Painterly Painting”
24 Olitski. Op painting: Poons, Anuskiewicz
Read: Sandler, 1960s, Chapter 9, “Op Art and Kinetic Sculpture”
26 Minimal sculpture: Andre, Flavin, Judd,
Read: Bourdon, “Carl Andre”
October
1 Hour Exam
3 Bell, Morris,
Read: Morris, “Notes on Sculpture;” Fried, “Art and Objecthood”
8 LeWitt, Serra
Read: Kraus, Passages, “The Double Negative: A New Syntax for Sculpture”
10 Site-specific art: Smithson, Heizer,
Read: Alloway, “Robert Smithson’s Development”
15 De Maria, Oppenheim, Christo
Read: Diamonstein 81-96 (Christo and Jeanne-Claude)
17 Conceptual/body (ontological): Nauman, Samaras, Acconci,
Read: Pincus-Witten, Postminimalism: Introduction; “Bruce Nauman;” “Vito Acconci”


22 Oppenheim, Gilbert & George, Burden, Wilke
Read: Pincus-Witten, Postminimalism: “Theater of the Conceptual”
24 Conceptual/didactic (epistemological): Bochner, Kosuth, Huebler, Weiner, Haacke
Read: Pincus-Witten, Postminimalism: “Mel Bochner;” Heubler, “Heubler;” Haacke “On Social
Grease;” Bongartz, “How Do You Buy;” Lippard, Six Years, “Escape Attempts,” and “Preface”
[1973]
29 Conceptual/story: Baldessari, Beckley. Post-conceptual performance: Antin, Anderson
Read: Clarke, “Life/Art/Life;” Antin, “An Autobiography;” Berger, “Reflections on Laurie
Anderson;” Smith, “A Laurie Anderson Story;” Owens, “Amplifications.”
31 Hour Exam
November
5 Realist painting: Pearlstein, Bechtle, Goings, Estes, Flack, Close
Read: Karp, “Rent is the Only Reality;” Dyckes, “Chuck Close”
7 Realist sculpture: Hanson, DeAndrea.
Read: Mascheck, “Hanson and De Andrea”
12 Patterning and decoration: Schapiro, Kozloff, Carlson, Kushner, MacConnel.
Read: Perreault, “Issues in Pattern Painting;” Clarke, “Decorative Revisited”
14 Post-modernist returns: Neo-expressionism I: Schnabel, Salle, Fischl,
Read: Hughes, “Zeitgeist;” Pincus-Witten, “Sheer Grunge;” Pincus-Witten, “Julian Schnabel;”
Storr, “Desperate Pleasures;” Pincus-Witten, “David Salle”
19 Neo-expressionism II: Longo. Dumb and Graffiti Art I: Borofsky, Haring, Basquiat,
Read: Berger, “Robert Longo;” Foster, “Art of Spectacle;” Simon, “Double Takes;” Robbins,
“Meaning of the New
21 Dumb and Graffiti Art II: Cutrone, Scharf, Wojnarowicz.
Read: Brenson, “Neo-Expressionism?”
26 Playing with style: Bartlett; Appropriation: Bidlo, Levine, Kruger, Bender.
Read: Smith, “Bartlett’s Swimmers;” Dowd, “A Different Bohemia;” Mascheck and Schjeldahl,
“Bidlo’s Picasso”
28 Thanksgiving
December


3 “Simulacra:” Steinbach, Koons
Read: Joselit, “Investigating the Ordinary;” Smith, “Rituals of Consumption;” Tompkins,
 “Between Neo- and Post-”
5 Hour Exam
