                          THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
              Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics
                                           EM 306 Statics
                                            Summer 2019
                                             SYLLABUS
UNIQUE NUMBER:              74825
TIME:                       MTWThF 3:00 - 4:30 pm
INSTRUCTOR:                 Gregory Rodin at gjr@oden.utexas.edu
                            Office Hours: MTWThF 4:30-5 pm right after the class or by
                            appointment
TEACHING ASST.:             Kirill Rebrov, kirill.rebrov@sbcglobal.net
                            Office Hours: MTWThF 12-1 pm
DISCUSSION
SECTIONS:                   TTh 5:00-7:30 pm
CATALOG DESCRIPTION:
Force systems, free-body diagrams; engineering applications of equilibrium, including trusses,
frames, friction, distributed loads; vector algebra, centroids, moments of inertia. Three lecture
hours and two discussion hours a week for one semester.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES:
To be able to analyze systems of forces and moments using free-body diagrams and to solve
problems involving rigid bodies in equilibrium, including basic structure members such as
trusses, frames, and beams.
PREREQUISITES:
Credit with a grade of at least C or registration for Mathematics 408D or 408L, and Physics
303K.
KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES STUDENTS SHOULD HAVE BEFORE
ENTERING THIS COURSE:
Basic geometry, trigonometry, and mechanics portion of college physics


KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES STUDENTS GAIN FROM THIS COURSE:
Basic principles of equilibrium, analysis of forces and moments in statically determinate
structures, free-body diagrams, distributed loads and friction, shear force and bending moment
diagrams in beams.
IMPACT ON SUBSEQUENT COURSES IN CURRICULUM:
The topics of this course are basic engineering subjects that must be understood by anyone
concerned with structures and materials. The course is an essential prerequisite for subsequent
courses, EM 311 and EM 319.
RELATIONSHIP OF COURSE TO PROGRAM OUTCOMES:
This course contributes to the following ABET Criterion 3 outcomes and those specific to the
EAC accredited program.
   Outcome                                        Outcome                                      
   a. An ability to apply knowledge of            g. An ability to communicate effectively
   mathematics, science, and engineering
   b. An ability to design and conduct               h. the broad education necessary to
   experiments, as well as to analyze and            understand the impact of engineering
   interpret data                                    solutions in a global, economic,
                                                     environmental, and societal context.
   c. an ability to design a system,                 i. A recognition of the need for and an
   component, or process to meet desired             ability to engage in life-long learning
   needs within realistic constraints such as
   economic, environmental, social,
   political, ethical, health and safety,
   manufacturability, and sustainability.
   d. An ability to function on multi-               j. A knowledge of contemporary issues
   disciplinary teams
   e. An ability to identify, formulate, and      k. An ability to use the techniques, skills, 
   solve engineering problems                        and modern engineering tools necessary
                                                     for engineering practice
   f. An understanding of professional and
       ethical responsibility
                                              2


ABET PROGRAM CRITERIA ACHIEVED:
Program criteria are unique to each degree program and are to be compiled from the program
criteria given for each degree program and listed in table format below. The faculty should check
which of the program criteria are achieved in the course.
            Criterion                      Criterion                      Criterion            
   A. Aerodynamics                 G. Orbital Mechanics            M. Preliminary/Conceptual
                                                                  Design
   B. Aerospace Materials          H. Space Environment            N. Other Design Content
   C. Structures                 I. Attitude Determination        O. Professionalism
                                  and Control
   D. Propulsion                   J. Telecommunications           P. Computer Usage
   E. Flight Mechanics           K. Space Structures           
   F. Stability and Control        L. Rocket Propulsion
                                             3


TOPICS:
   1. Introduction to basic concepts and conventions (2 lectures)
   2. Forces and moments in two dimensions (2)
   3. Equilibrium in two dimensions (3)
   4. Two-dimensional structures (4)
   5. Beams: distributed loads, shear forces and bending moments (4)
   6. Friction (2)
   7. Forces and moments in three dimensions (3)
   8. Equilibrium in three dimensions (4)
   9. Center of mass and centroids (1)
   10. Area moments of inertia (1)
PROFESSIONALISM TOPICS: None
DESIGN ASSIGNMENTS: none
Laboratory Assignments: none
Computer: none
PREFERRED TEXT: See instructions for online purchasing
ALTERNATIVE TEXT: Bedford and Fowler, Statics, 5th Edition
 VIDEOS: Every week several videos will be posted on youtube: search for “Gregory Rodin
 EM306”. The videos usually focus on more difficult problems, that you are expected to master
 by the end of the course.
CLASS FORMAT
    All communications will be done using Zoom via a document camera.
    For security reasons, you must login into Zoom with valid UT credentials.
    All class meeting will be recorded and posted on the cloud.
    Each week there will be five lectures, one discussion session, and one exam.
    Each lecture will discuss concepts and demonstrate problem solving procedures.
    Each discussion session, led by the TAs on Tuesdays from 5:00-7:00 pm, will cover more
        examples and answer questions you may have.
    Each exam will be held on Thursday 5:00-7:00 pm.
HOMEWORK POLICY
    Every day you will be assigned several homework problems. You must post your
        solutions by 3 pm next day on Gradescope.
    Homework problems may be graded, so it is imperative that you solve them.
    Use of Chegg and similar unsavory resources is CHEATING.
    The only authorized internet resources are those posted on Canvas. You are welcome to
        use any book, including the one recommended for the class. If in doubt talk to me.
    Homework will be graded, but indirectly, as I reserve the right to replace weekly exam
        problem(s) with homework problem(s) of my choice.
                                            4


EXAM POLICY
   All exams will be closed books and notes.
   Basic formulae will be provided.
   Calculators are allowed.
   No make-up exams will be given.
   The final exam will be comprehensive and conducted in accordance with the university
    schedule.
   Solutions must be posted on Gradescope before the deadline.
   You must have a web camera so that I can monitor you during the exams. No exceptions.
GRADING POLICY
   All grading issues must not be discussed with the TA.
   Exams should be treated as professional reports.
   It is your responsibility to present your solutions in an intelligible and clear manner,
    including good handwriting. The grader is allowed to take away points for poor
    presentation, which will be non-negotiable.
   Exam grades are not discussed, but you can request by sending me an e-mail within 24
    hours after the grades are posted. Make sure to compare your solution with the posted one
    first.
   Each weekly exam will consist of three problems. When I grade your exam, I reserve the
    right to replace any of those, one and all are included, with homework problem(s) of my
    choice.
   The final exam is not subjected to regarding.
   The letter grade is nonnegotiable.
   Attendance of classes is required but not used for grading.
   Plus/minus grades will NOT be assigned for the final grade.
GRADING COMPONENTS
   Weekly exams: 60% (15% each)
   Final exam: 40%
GRADING SCALE
   A: a weighted total score above 90
   B: a weighted total score between 80 and 90
   C: a weighted total score between 60 and 80
   D: a weighted total score between 50 and 60
   F: a weighted total score below 50
                                           5


SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
Scholastic dishonesty will not be tolerated and will be prosecuted to the fullest extent. You are
expected to have read and understood the current issue of General Information Catalog,
published by the Registrar's Office, for information about procedures and about what constitutes
scholastic dishonesty.
SPECIAL NOTES:
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TDD or the College of Engineering Director of Students with
Disabilities at 471-4321.
EVALUATION:
The Measurement and Evaluation Center forms for the College of Engineering will be used
during the last week of class to evaluate the course and the instructor.
Prepared by: Gregory Rodin                     Date: June 2, 2020
                                              6
