           SYLLABUS AND COURSE OUTLINE`
                   *********************
 SPORTS CONTRACT NEGOTIATION TECHNIQUES
               ADV 378S, 391K/PR 378S
                          Fall 2019
         Mondays and Wednesdays 8am - 9:30am
                  Location: CMA 3.120
                  Instructor: Joel Lulla, JD
                   Telephone 512-471-9616
           E-Mail: Joel.Lulla@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours and location: By appointment in BMC 4.312
          Graduate Assistant: Kenzie Walker
                                                       1


                         Moody College of Communication
                          University of Texas at Austin
Title:               Sports Contract Negotiation Techniques
                     Course number: ADV 378S, 391K/PR 378S
Description: In this seminar-style class, students will be taught strategies and
    techniques for successfully negotiating contracts, with a special emphasis on the
    negotiation of sports contracts. The class will meet twice times a week for 75
    minutes per class. The first part of the semester will be devoted to learning the
    fundamentals of contract law combined with negotiating philosophy and strategy.
    Subsequent classes will involve students being paired into groups and conducting
    negotiation exercises based on interesting sports and entertainment fact patterns.
    The performances of the negotiating parties will be critiqued.
    There will be assigned readings on contract law basics, as well as sections of books
    on learning negotiating philosophies and developing negotiation skills, sometimes
    from the Program on Negotiation at Harvard Law School. We will also discuss
    topical sports and entertainment negotiations gleaned from recent news reports with
    a focus on identifying the goals of the negotiating parties and their strategies in
    achieving those goals.
    This class represents a unique opportunity for each student to develop a skill that
    will be valuable not only in the sports and entertainment industry, but in all other
    professional careers as well.
Objectives:          The student who successfully completes this course will ideally be able
                     to:
    1.    Understand the basic principles of contract law.
    2.    Identify the issues that must be addressed in a particular contract negotiation.
    3.    Recognize his/her objectives in the negotiation as well as the objectives of the
          other party or parties.
    4.    Utilize the most effective strategies for achieving a successful negotiating
          outcome.
                                                                                           2


                                      COURSE OUTLINE
Approach:
   This course will be comprised of twenty-eight (28) sessions (2 sessions per week), including
   an examination on the fundamentals of contract law, with each individual session being
   approximately seventy-five (75) minutes in length. There will mixture of lecture by the
   principal instructor and guest speakers, negotiation exercises by the students and group
   discussion.
Class Preparation:
   1. It is expected that each student will be prepared to participate in informed and
        constructive discussions.
   2. Reading assignments and homework must be done prior to attending class so that all
        students will benefit from an informed discussion of issues.
   3. Any written assignments are to be typed. Spelling, grammar, and punctuation must
        conform to professional standards. If your written assignments incorporate
        concepts that originated with others, you must acknowledge your utilization of these
        concepts pursuant to MLA citation standards.
   4. All cell phones must be turned off prior to class. Laptops are permitted but such
        privileges may be rescinded in the discretion of the instructor if laptops are used for
        other than class purposes.
Attendance:
   Students are expected to attend classes, which is critical to their success in the course
   and the success of the course itself. As noted below, a substantial proportion of each
   student’s grade will be attributable to in-class activities. Students should be prepared to
   start the class session on time. If for some reason, a student is unable to attend class,
   that student is expected to inform the GA via email prior to class. Being absent or late
   for classes may result in a reduction of a student’s grade for the course. If a student
   misses a class for any reason, it is also the responsibility of the student to be informed of
   the materials covered during the class. Each student is encouraged to find a “class
   buddy” who can share information and assignments.
 Academic Integrity and Standards:
   Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and integrity in
   all course activities and assignments. It is expected that there shall be no deception
                                                                                                 3


    regarding the representation made by the student of his/her preparation, participation or
    performance.
    Plagiarism is presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own and is a form of
    fraud. Plagiarism includes (but is not limited to) the presentation of a sequence of words
    from another writer, utilized without proper attribution. It is critical that students properly
    acknowledge the work of others and that the acknowledgement be accurate and complete.
    The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and plagiarism
    are subject to the standard policies and procedures for all UT-Austin students as established
    by UT-Austin
    .
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students Services at 471-6259 or 471-6441 TTY. Also, see
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Use of Canvas in Class
In this class I will periodically use Canvas—a Web-based course management system
with password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course
materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, and to distribute
assignments. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400,
Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to requests for their
feedback)
 During this course I may be asking students to give me feedback on their learning in
informal as well as formal ways. It’s very important for me to know your reaction to what
we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these surveys, so that together we
can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently. You can find UT
                                                                                                  4


Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting in a disturbing manner, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of
the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember
        that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the
        building.
    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
        class.
    In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
        “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education
may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
You can find advice, models, templates, and other resources for designing your course
syllabus on the DIIA website at http://www.utexas.edu/academic/diia/
Grading and Evaluation:
Individual assessment will be based on attainment of up to 100 points with the number of points
assigned to each means of grading and method of evaluation as listed below:
                                                                                              5


          Class Participation and Performance                    30% (30 points)
          Written Negotiation Assignments                        15% (15 points)
          Oral Negotiation Exercises                             30% (30 points)
          Contracts Examination                                  25% (25 points)
Examination. An exam will be given on September 25 covering the basic principles of
contract law. It will consist of a number of multiple choice, true/false and similar type
questions and will cover material assigned and lectures given in classes up to that date.
Class Participation and Performance. Class Participation (which by implication includes
attendance) and class performance will comprise 30% of each student’s final grade. I
may randomly call upon students to provide analysis of reading assignments and “class
performance” will be a reflection of the preparedness of that student and the quality of
the analysis.
Grading
Course grades will be made according to the following grading scale:
  Under the plus/minus grading system of the university, grades will be calculated as
follows: 100-93, A; 92.9-90, A-; 89.9-87, B+; 86.9-83, B; 82.9-80, B-; 79.9-77, C+; 76.9-73,
C; 72.9-70, C-; 69.9-67, D+; 66.9-63, D; 62.9-60, D-; 59.9-0, F.
.
                                     Reading Materials
Eisenberg, Melvin A., Gilbert Law Summaries: Contracts, Thomson/West, 2002 (this book
is optional)
Fisher, Roger, Ury, William, Patton, Bruce, Getting to Yes: Negotiating Agreement
Without Giving In, Penguin Books, 2011 (Required)
Harvard Business Essentials, Negotiation, Harvard Business School Press, 2003 (Required)
Students will also be expected to stay current with breaking news about important sports
contracts being negotiated, both on their own initiative and by checking Canvas for reading
assignments that I will add based on current developments.
                                                                                            6


                                    Course Plan
Session 1 (Aug 28): Orientation to Class, Review Syllabus and Introduction to
Contracts
    •   Review texts and additional resource material.
    •   Discuss what students can expect of the class and what I will expect from each
        student.
Session 2 (Sept 4): Contract Formation Principles
    •   Examine the contract formation issues of offer and acceptance
    •   Review and discuss handout of examples of challenging contract negotiations
        involving sports and media
    •   Discussion of St. Louis Spirits-NBA negotiation.
    •   Optional readings for session 2: Gilbert Law Summaries: Capsule Summary,
        pages X-XXVI.
 Session 3 (Sept 9): Contract Interpretation Principles
        •   Examine the contract formation issues of consideration and the parol evidence
            rule
        • Optional readings for this session: Gilbert Law Summaries: Capsule
            Summary, pages I-X.
Session 4 (Sept 11): Contract Dispute and Resolution
        •   Examine the enforceability of oral contracts and statute of frauds
        • Examine defenses to breach of contract claims, including indefiniteness,
            mistake, misrepresentation, nondisclosure, duress, undue influence, statute of
            frauds, unconscionability, lack of capacity and illegality.
        • Optional readings for this session: Gilbert Law Summaries: Capsule
            Summary, pages XXVI-XXXIX
 Session 5 (Sept 16): Contract Interpretation Principles
        •   Examine conditions of performance, repudiation and rescission, statute of
            frauds, restitution and promissory estoppel.
        •   Readings for these sessions: TBA
 Session 6 (Sept 18): Remedies for Breach of Contract
        •   Examine mechanics of filing lawsuits, concept of quasi-contract, equitable
            remedies and methods of measuring damages
        •   Readings for this session: TBA
                                                                                           7


Session 7 (Sept 23): Contracts Involving More than Two Parties, Defenses to
Breach of Contract
    •   Examine concepts of assignment and delegation
    •   Examine issues related to third party beneficiaries
    •   Examine impossibility, Impracticability and Frustration of Purpose, Illegality,
        Duress, Misrepresentation
    •   Readings for this session: TBA
Session 8 (Sept 25): Contracts Examination
Session 9 (Sept 30): Guest Speaker TBA
Session 10 (Oct 2): Begin Discussion of Negotiation Principles
      •   Discuss types of negotiation, including distributive and integrative
      •   Discuss multiphase and multiparty negotiations
      •   Discuss how to prepare for a negotiation
      •   Readings for this session: Harvard Business Essentials, Chapters 1-2
Session 11 (Oct 7): Negotiating Principles (continued)
        •   Discuss how to prepare for a negotiation
        •   Readings for these sessions: Harvard Business Essentials, Chapters 3-4
Session 12 (Oct 9): Negotiation Principles (continued)
    •   Examine how to determine each party’s goals
    •   Examine how to know each party’s tentpoles and how to move them
    •   Discuss importance of generating an inventory of your negotiating priorities
    •   Readings for this session: Getting to Yes, pages 1-55
Session 13 (Oct 14): Negotiating Table Strategies
    •   Discuss getting the other party to the table
    •   Examine zero sum negotiations (also called win-lose negotiations) and tactics
        including anchoring and counter-anchoring
    •   Readings for these sessions: Harvard Business Essentials, Chapters 5-6
                                                                                        8


Session 14 (Oct 16): Strategies (cont)
    •  Examine tactics for integrative negotiations (where the parties enlarge the pie
       through trades)
    •  Discuss general tactics including framing and tactics involving price, process
       and people
    •  Discuss barriers to agreement and mental errors
    •  Readings for this session: Harvard Business Essentials, Chapter 7
Session 15 (Oct 21): Strategies (cont)
    •  Discuss how to move past positional bargaining
    •  Discuss how to focus on the parties’ interests
    •  Discuss how to build trust with the other party
    •  Readings for these sessions: Getting to Yes, pages 56-94
Session 16 (Oct 23): Other Negotiation Factors
    •  Discuss the relationship (or lack thereof) between the parties
    •  Examine the differences between negotiating for oneself and negotiating for
       others
    •  Readings for this session: Harvard Business Essentials, Chapter 8
Session 17 (Oct 28): Other Negotiation Factors (cont)
    •  Examine the characteristics of effective negotiations
    •  Discuss learning from negotiating experience
    •  Readings for this session: Harvard Business Essentials, Chapters 9-10
Session 18 (Oct 30): Creativity in Negotiating
    •  Discuss generating a variety of options
    •  Discuss the desirability of having both parties become invested in the process
    •  Discuss whether negotiation is more science or art
    •  Readings for this session: Getting to Yes, pages 94 to end.
Session 19 (Nov 4): Soccer Player and Agent Oral Negotiation Exercises and
Written Negotiation Preparation Assignments.
Sessions 20 and 21 (Nov 6 and 11): Soccer Player and Agent Oral Negotiation
Exercises (continued).
                                                                                       9


 Session 22 (Nov 13): College Conference Realignment Oral Negotiating Exercises
and Written Negotiation Preparation Assignments.
 Sessions 23 and 24 (Nov 18 and 20): College Conference Realignment
Negotiations (continued).
Session 25 (Nov 25): NBA Agent and Sneaker Company Oral Negotiating
Exercises and Written Negotiation Preparation Assignments.
Sessions 26 and 27 (Dec 2 and 4): NBA Agent and Sneaker Company
Negotiations (continued).
Session 28 (Dec 9): Boise State – Big East Conference Oral Negotiating Exercises
and Written Negotiation Preparation Assignments.
                                                                                10
