                             ACC 383K.1 - Standards in Auditing
                                      Spring 2020 (02480 and 02485)
                                                Course Syllabus
Professor                           Jaime Schmidt, CPA, Ph.D.
Office                              CBA 3.206
Office Hours                        F 8:00 – 11:00 or by appointment (via Zoom)
Phone                               wk: 512-471-6434
E-Mail                              jaime.schmidt@mccombs.utexas.edu
Course Web Page                     via Canvas
Class Time:                         TU 12 noon – 3 p.m. (02480) (Class begins March 31st– Both sections)
                                    TU 5 p.m. – 8 p.m. (02485)
Class Location:                     Online via Zoom
Teaching Assistant:                 Mikaela Zamarripa
TA Email Address:                   mikaelaz0623@gmail.com
Course Philosophy, Objectives, and Overview:
This is a second course in assurance services (graduate-level) that assumes basic knowledge from the first
course and addresses contemporary professional issues. Some topics will be technical “nuts and bolts”
requirements or application of professional standards. Other topics will address emerging issues of the
second decade of the 21st century. The readings include key professional standards of the PCAOB, ASB and
IAASB, SEC guidance, scholarly papers, and many articles from the current financial press.
The course covers the following major topics: assurance services and standards, independence and
professional ethics, enforcement & oversight of auditors, liability and viability of the profession, and specific
professional practice challenges such as auditing estimates and group or multi-location audits. Combined,
these topics will help you understand how the profession has evolved and help you be a successful auditor.
Two important things have changed since the fall semester. First, many of you have experienced some of the
conflicts and complexities of professional practice during your internship. Second, many of you have started
the MPA graduate phase of your education and, to deal with professional complexities and conflicts, you
must now take more responsibility for your own education. This course relates to both.
The primary objective of this course is to understand the structure, institutions, operation, mechanics, and risks
of the auditing profession as a demand-driven value-adding endeavor and to evaluate its standards and
regulatory environments.


Jaime Schmidt                        ACC 383K.1 – Studies in Auditing – Spring 2020                     page 2
The course demands synthesis and integration of many different topics. Through class discussions, cases,
assignments, and role-playing we will integrate ideas from the assigned readings. Each class will usually
begin with a structured presentation and interactive class discussion. This will be followed with a hands-on
activity and (sometimes) a quiz.
On most days approximately ten discussion questions will be provided (and available on Canvas) to help
structure our daily discussions. You should come to class prepared to respond to these questions and actively
participate. The class is intended to be interactive because many current auditing issues are not
straightforward and require synthesis of many differing views. A non-trivial portion of your grade will be
determined by your class participation. This is not to scare you but to make the class more rewarding and
productive for all of us.
Discussions will be facilitated by cases and class activities. Some cases are conducted entirely within a class
session and in groups of three students. A few cases are conducted as individuals outside of class and involve
media such as government documents, PCAOB documents, and electronic databases such as Audit Analytics.
For both the discussion questions and the cases, I will ask for volunteers to respond or cold-call on particular
students. Our objectives include enhanced learning and improved real-time responses to professional
questions – you will thank me someday.
We may have some daily quizzes to keep everyone on track but are certain to have one Friday mid-day
mid-term examination and one comprehensive final examination to be held during the finals examination
week. Please be certain that you clear your calendar for both examinations.
Due to the dynamic nature of the profession (and the disruption brought on by COVID-19), the course
schedule is tentative and subject to change. If it does change, you will be notified.
Readings, Preparation, and Assignments:
Our readings will form the primary basis for discussions and are central to our exams. There is no textbook––
all readings will be available at no charge on Canvas. Readings for most sessions are less than 30 pages in
total (not counting professional standards) and most are short articles that capture the essence of a complex
issue.
To prepare for class: I suggest that you set aside a fixed block of time for reading all of the assignments–and
then manage your time so that you get the main idea or thrust of each reading. What is being said, who is
saying it, and what might be their motivation? You should quickly scan all readings for the essentials – trying
to get 80% of the ideas in 15% of the time required. You can come back later to read the details – after
you know which ideas and concepts are most important.
Primary readings that provide background will be available at least one week prior to class, but current
developments that will be discussed in class may not be available until twenty-four hours before class––


Jaime Schmidt                          ACC 383K.1 – Studies in Auditing – Spring 2020                      page 3
because some of our readings have not yet been written. In addition, use of a search engine such as Google
will be essential for some assignments.
Accessing Class Via Zoom
Our class will held via Zoom. You need a computer/laptop with audio and video capabilities to access class.
To access class, follow the instructions on Canvas in the module called “Accessing Online Class”. If you need
help, please refer to the McCombs Student Instructional Resources Wiki page on our course Canvas home
page. If you are still having trouble, reach out to me.
Students who need help getting access to technology in order to do online instruction should fill out the
Student Emergency Services form. For general inquiries, please contact Student Emergency Services.
Zoom etiquette:
Because there will be so many people on these Zoom meetings, here are some best practices for making
sure we are working together to create an efficient, effective, respectful, and ultimately enjoyable
classroom!
      Mute yourself unless you are speaking. This will cut down on background noise and limit any
       distractions. I will also be managing this so you don’t need to overly worry about this
      Be mindful of your surroundings when on camera. We want to make sure we avoid as much
       distraction as possible
      Please add a professional photo of yourself for your Zoom profile picture. This photo will be visible
       during class sessions
      Turn your camera off if you are leaving the meeting temporarily and use the away feedback icon
       (i.e., click on the “coffee cup” icon)
      Try to keep questions and comments brief if you decide to use the Chat screen.
      If the video or audio is choppy, try turning off your video. Class will be better with it on – so leave
       it on until it becomes a problem.
      Please try to use the most reliable WIFI you can access.
Class recording privacy:
Class recordings are reserved only for students in this class for educational purposes. The recordings should
not be shared outside the class in any form. Violation of this restriction could lead to Student Misconduct
proceedings.
Attendance:
Because each class period comprises one week of a typical semester length class and because of the
interactive nature of our lessons, class attendance is especially important. Absences may be excused only if
you notify me prior to class (emergencies excepted). I rarely excuse absences for recruiting events unless
you talk to me and explain why it is imperative that you attend the event. Again, due to the nature of our
course, participation during class is also important if you want full credit for your attendance. I realize that


Jaime Schmidt                         ACC 383K.1 – Studies in Auditing – Spring 2020                      page 4
many of you probably have not taken an online class before. Please do not overly stress about this. We will
all learn together and this will be good practice for your future teams (as many global audit engagements
have teams that work remotely).
Our class periods are 150 minutes each. For most class days, we will have approximately 75 minutes of
presentation, questions, and background discussion followed by a break, in-class activity or case discussion,
and specific follow up discussions. Again, I expect you to be on time and to participate in class discussions.
Tentative Course Requirements, Grading, and Missed assignments:
Your grade in the course will be determined as follows:
                                                                                     Points
     Mid-term / In-Class Quizzes                                                     100
     Comprehensive Final Examination                                                 120
     In-Class Contribution to Group Discussion and Discussion Questions              120
                                                                          Total:     340
Plus/Minus grading applies to this course.
In-class quizzes and the mid-term should help you keep up with the material and aid your preparation for
the final examination. The in-class contribution points are obtained through active participation in class
discussion of assigned questions, presentation of course material to the class, and acting professionally
including respect of your classmate’s opinions.
Missed assignments due to a medical or personal emergency will be accepted late or excused. For such
instances, you should provide supporting documents through Student Emergency Services. Other missed or
late assignments will not be accepted.
Academic Dishonesty:
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. Such acts damage the
reputation of the school and the degree and demean the honest efforts of the majority of students. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in
the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-
Ethics.aspx.
By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe the faculty responsibilities described in that document.
By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe the student responsibilities described in that
document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any
way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student
Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the General Information Catalog to
access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further
elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.


Jaime Schmidt                           ACC 383K.1 – Studies in Auditing – Spring 2020                       page 5
As specific guidance for this course, you should consider all examinations to be an individual effort.
Group preparation for examinations is acceptable. Homework assignments are to be turned in
individually but I encourage you to work together in answering the questions. You should, however,
develop your own answer and not cut and paste the work of others.
Classroom Professionalism Policy:
This class embraces the BBA Community Values which are:
      Lead with integrity, improve the world
      Respect our differences, leverage our diversity
      Challenge old ideas, inspire innovation
      Dream big, work hard, never give up
The highest professional standards are expected of all members of this classroom. The MPA classroom
experience is enhanced when:
    Students arrive on time.
    Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks.
    Students are fully prepared for each class.
    Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues.
    Phones and wireless devices are turned off.
To facilitate fairness to all students, cell phones and programmable calculators will not be permitted during
the mid-term or final examination. Use of either may result in a zero on the examination. You may use a
simple four-function calculator to the exams.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course,
that students’ learning needs be addressed, and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me
at any time with any concerns.
University Policy on Class Websites (i.e., Canvas) and Student Privacy
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at The University.
Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available within
these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and
exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not
want their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the
Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi02-03/app/appc09.html.
Privacy in Canvas
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that I will use a merged Canvas
site for all sections of the course that I am teaching this semester. This will allow students in other sections
to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not
actually learn your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you


Jaime Schmidt                         ACC 383K.1 – Studies in Auditing – Spring 2020                     page 6
have any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from
view of other students.
Changing Sections
Per University policy, students cannot change sections because of a time or instructor preference. There is
a waitlist process in effect. If you have a desire to change sections, please contact the Undergraduate
Program Office or MPA office and they will do their best to accommodate your request.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Personal Pronoun Use
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. I rely on the name listed in the Class Roster provided by the Registrar’s office. However,
I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what is on the roster,
and by the gender pronoun you prefer.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Mental Health Counseling
College can be stressful and sometimes we need a little help. Luckily, we have a wealth of resources and
dedicated people ready to assist you, and treatment does work. The Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and prevention services that facilitate
student academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and well-being. CMHC counselors
are available Monday-Friday 8am-5pm 5th floor of the Student Services Building (SSB) in person and by
phone (512-471-3515).
If you are experiencing a mental health crisis (e.g. depression or anxiety), please call the Mental Health
Center Crisis line at 512-471-CALL(2255). Call even if you aren't sure you're in a full-blown crisis, but
sincerely need help. Staff are there to help you.
A helpful resource is the MindBody Lab, a self-paced environment designed to help UT students explore
various resources for improving their emotional and physical health. The Lab currently features audio and
video instruction on a variety of topics, including sleep issues; food and body image; health and well-
being; relaxation and meditation. Most of the material is experiential, enabling students to follow along
and practice the skills as they are being discussed. MindBody Labs are located in SSB 5th floor, SAC
2.106 and NUR 3.156D.


Jaime Schmidt                         ACC 383K.1 – Studies in Auditing – Spring 2020                     page 7
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms where all students, faculty, and staff can learn, work, and thrive.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered ``Responsible Employees'' or ``Mandatory
Reporters,'' which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator
at UT Austin. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies
without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more info
about reporting options and resources, visit https://titleix.utexas.edu/campus-resources or contact the
Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.


  Jaime Schmidt                       ACC 383K.1 – Studies in Auditing – Spring 2020                    page 8
  Tentative* Course Schedule (abbreviated):
 #       Date      Topic Readings and Assignments are listed in Canvas & are due at start of class
 1       Mar. 31 Introduction to the Course & Overview of Assurance
 2       Apr. 2    Audits and Reviews of Financial Statements
 3       Apr. 7    Direct Assurance: Audits of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
 4       Apr. 9    Expanded Auditor’s Reporting Model & Report Modifications
 5
 6       Apr. 14 Independence & Professional Ethics
 7       Apr. 16 Auditing and Corporate Governance
 **      Apr. 17 Mid-term Examination – Part I: 9 – 10 a.m. (online)
         Apr. 17 Mid-term Examination – Part II: Group Project and Presentation
 8       Apr. 21 Professional Judgment & Auditing Estimates
 9       Apr. 23 Materiality
10       Apr. 28 Group/Component/Multi-location Audits
11       Apr. 30 PCAOB Regulation: Standard Setting and Inspections
12       May 5     Technology and the Audit
13       May 7     Threats to the Profession: Litigation, Relevance, Technology
14                 Course Summary & Review for Final Examination
***      May 14 Comprehensive Final Examination, 2 - 5 p.m.
         May 17 Year-end pizza party, 4-6 p.m. (TBD and subject to change if social distancing is still in
                   effect)
  *While this is our roadmap, don’t be surprised if there are changes later. We are studying a dynamic
  profession and our course will respond accordingly. If and when there are schedule changes, you will be
  promptly notified.
  **Out-of class mid-term examination. Please make a note of this on your calendar. I will not offer an
  alternative exam time unless I am notified of a conflict within the first week of class.
  ***Similar to the mid-term examination, please note the final exam time now so that we do not have any
  conflicts later.
