                                  History 365G / AMS 321
                                     The Vietnam Wars
                                   Unique number 39120
                                Tuesday, Thursday, 2-3:15 p.m.
                                          JGB 2.216
                                      Mark A. Lawrence
                                malawrence@austin.utexas.edu
                                Office: GAR 3.220, 475-9304
            Office Hours: Tuesday, 12:15-1:45 p.m.; Thursday, 3:30-4:30 p.m.,
                                     and by appointment
This course has two main objectives. First, it aims to introduce students to the complex
and controversial history of the Vietnam Wars during the second half of the twentieth
century. Although we will spend most of our time examining the “American war” of
1961-1975, the course places this event within a broad geographical and chronological
context. We will spend a good deal of time considering Vietnamese history as well as the
French, Japanese, British, and Chinese experiences in Vietnam predating U.S.
intervention. As we move toward the 1960s, we will focus increasingly on the major
controversies surrounding U.S. involvement in Southeast Asia. Why did U.S.
policymakers believe the defense of South Vietnam was worth a massive expenditure of
lives and other American resources? Why did the United States fail to achieve its
objectives? Was the 1961-1975 war winnable for the United States in any meaningful
sense? What social, political, and cultural impacts did the war leave on the United States,
Southeast Asia, and the world?
Second, the course aims to encourage students to think like historians. That is, it requires
students to evaluate primary sources (documents as well as memoirs and films), weigh
competing interpretations of historical events, and defend their own conclusions in
argumentative essays. Indeed, students will be evaluated largely on the basis of a series of
such essays (both the take-home paper described at the end of this syllabus and essays
written during in-class tests).
Students are not expected to have any familiarity with the Vietnam Wars, but they should
have a basic understanding of U.S. and world history since 1941. Students lacking this
background should consult Walter LaFeber, America, Russia, and the Cold War and/or a
standard U.S. history text such as Davidson, et al., Nation of Nations.
Requirements
    1. Five brief quizzes (lowest score dropped, 15 percent)
    2. 75-minute test on February 28 (25 percent)
    3. Final exam, May 17, 2-5 p.m. (30 percent)
    4. Paper of 5-7 pages, roughly 1,500-1,800 words (30 percent)


Required readings
Philip Caputo, A Rumor of War (1977)
Duong Van Mai Elliott, The Sacred Willow: Four Generations in the Life of a
         Vietnamese Family (2000)
George C. Herring, America’s Longest War: The United States and Vietnam, 1950-1975,
         5th edition (2013)
Mark Atwood Lawrence, ed., The Vietnam War: An International History in Documents
         (2014)
Robert S. McNamara, In Retrospect: The Tragedy and Lessons of Vietnam (1996)
Photocopies readings posted to Canvas
Other Important Notes
• Attendance at class is required, but there will be no formal mechanism to monitor
absences. Students will be responsible not only for all course material discussed in class
but also for all announcements about course logistics and all handouts distributed.
• The instructor may occasionally hand out primary sources or other materials for use
during class. These should be treated as required reading.
• Quizzes will be announced one class period in advance and will be given during the
first 10 minutes of the class periods in which they take place. Students arriving late will
not be allowed to take the quiz, and there will be no makeups under any circumstances.
Each student’s lowest quiz score will not count toward her/his term grade.
• Each quiz will cover the reading for the day on which the quiz is given, as well as the
readings and lectures from the two previous class sessions.
• Students can find the syllabus on the course Canvas site, along with lecture outlines,
documents, and copies of any other relevant material handed out in class. We will also
use Canvas to report grades and to receive and return the take-home papers.
• Students who attend class are required to arrive on time, stay for the entire session,
and obey basic rules of civility and decorum. Students may enter or leave in the middle of
the class period only with permission of the instructor. Using cell phones, sending or
receiving text messages, and using laptops for purposes unrelated to the course are
strictly forbidden. Students using laptops must sit in the first two or three rows of the
lecture hall.
• If you have a disability requiring accommodations, please let the instructor know no
later than February 10. To receive accommodation, a student must give the instructor a
letter from Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). A student may request
accommodations from SSD at 471-6259 or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
• Participation in discussions during class is not a course requirement. Students should
be aware, however, that they may receive substantial extra credit for regular and
constructive participation.
• All of the required books are available for purchase at the University Coop. Materials
handed out during class will be posted to the Canvas site for the course.
• Under no circumstances will the instructor or Supplemental Instructor make available
lecture notes.
• This syllabus and all materials presented in lectures are copyrighted by Dr. Mark A.
Lawrence. No materials may be directly or indirectly published, posted to the internet, or


rewritten for publication or distribution in any medium. Neither these materials nor any
portion thereof may be stored in a computer except for personal and non-commercial use.
• Paid note-takers are strictly forbidden from attending this class.
• Students must be fully aware of university rules regarding academic dishonesty. The
instructor assumes full compliance throughout the semester and will rigorously enforce
all university procedures in cases of violations. For more information about the
university’s expectations for academic integrity, see:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
• This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the
university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established
by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical
thinking skills, personal responsibility, and social responsibility.
• By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class or assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to make up missed work without penalty.
• Late papers will be penalized one-third of a grade (for example, from a B+ to a B or
from a B- to a C+) for each 24-hour period they are overdue.
• The course will employ the grading system that permits the use of pluses and minuses
(A-, B+, B, B-, etc.).
• A grade of C will be given to students who fulfill the basic course requirements. This
means you come to class regularly and adequately recite information from readings and
lectures on your exams and papers without adding analysis of your own. In other words, a
C will be given for average work. To earn a B or an A, you should come to class every
day having read and actively thought about that day’s readings. Your exams must show
original and critical thinking and analysis on the topics we explore in the class and
integrate ideas from lectures and readings. To receive an A, your work needs to be truly
outstanding, revealing a mastery of the material and an ability to put it all together in an
original and thought-provoking way. A grade of D will be given for work that falls short
of the requirements or that is too error-laden to be considered good college-level material,
with F’s reserved for work that shows little to no effort or comprehension.
• While the roster indicates your “official” name according to UT’s records, the
instructor is eager to learn the name you wish to be called. Please let him know your
preference so he can maintain accurate spreadsheets and rosters. Also, if you have a
pronoun preference that you would like him and other students to be aware of, please let
him know. The goal is to create an inclusive and supportive classroom environment.
• Title IX makes it clear that violence and harassment based on sex and gender are
Civil Rights offenses subject to the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of
support applied to offenses against other protected categories such as race, national
origin, etc. If you or someone you know has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the
appropriate resources here: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-h/


                       Schedule of Classes and Assignments
January 22  Introduction: Big Questions
January 24  Imperial Encounters
            READING: Elliott, prologue-chapter 2; Doc. 1.1
January 29  The Rise of Vietnamese Nationalism
            READING: Elliott, chapter 3-4; Doc. 1.2
January 31  Colonialism and Cold War
            READING: Herring, pp. 3-25; Elliott, chapters 5-7; Docs. 1.3 and 1.7
February 5  The End of the French Era
            READING: Herring, pp. 25-51; Elliott, chapter 8; Docs. 2.4 and 2.5
February 7  The Geneva Settlement
            READING: Elliott, chapters 9-10; Doc. 3.1
February 12 Nation-Building in the North
            READING: Elliott, chapter 11; Doc. 3.3
February 14 Nation-Building in the South
            READING: Herring, chapter 2; Doc. 3.2
February 19 A New Insurgency
            READING: Elliott, chapters 12-13; Doc. 3.5
February 21 JFK and the Vietnam Problem
            READING: Herring, chapter 3; McNamara, preface-chapter 1; Doc. 4.1
February 26 Two Murders
            READING: McNamara, chapters 2-3; Doc. 4.4
February 28 MIDTERM
March 5     LBJ and the Vietnam Problem
            READING: Herring, chapter 4; McNamara, chapter 4; Doc. 5.5 and 6.2
March 7     Decisions for War: Part I
            READING: McNamara, chapters 5-6; Doc. 5.2
March 12    Decisions for War: Part II
            READING: McNamara, chapters 7-8; Doc. 5.1
March 14    The Air War
            READING: Herring, chapter 5; Elliott, chapter 14; Doc. 6.6
March 26    The Ground War
            READING: McNamara, chapter 9; Caputo, prologue-p. 39; Doc. 6.3
March 28    Veterans Panel
            READING: Caputo, pp. 40-74


April 2  Politics of War: Diplomacy and Nation-Building
         READING: Caputo, pp. 75-109; Doc 4.6
April 4  Politics of War: Public Opinion and Protest
         READING: Caputo, pp. 110-149; Doc. 6.4
April 9  The Tet Offensive
         READING: Herring, chapter 6; McNamara, chapter 10; Doc. 7.1
April 11 A New Kind of Stalemate
         READING: Caputo, pp. 150-208; Doc. 7.5
April 16 Nixon, Kissinger, and Vietnam
         READING: Herring, chapter 7; Doc. 8.3
April 18 Expansion and Contraction
         READING: Caputo, pp. 209-262; Doc. 8.6
April 23 Toward the Decent Interval
         READING: Caputo, 263-335; Doc. 8.7
April 25 Peace at Last
         READING: Elliott, chapter 15; Caputo, 336-354; Docs. 9.1 and 9.2
April 30 The War after the War
         READING: Herring, chapter 8; Elliott, chapter 16; Doc. 9.5
May 2    Nations in Torment
         READING: Elliott, chapter 17-epilogue; Doc. 10.1
May 7    Contested Legacies, 1975-1989
         READING: McNamara, chapter 11; Gary R. Hess, “From the Streets to
         the Books: Origins of an Enduring Debate” (Canvas); Docs. 10.2 and 10.3
May 9    Legacies of Vietnam in the Post-Cold War Era
         READING: H. Bruce Franklin, “Missing in Action in the Twenty-First
         Century” (Canvas); Doc. 10.6


                                    ESSAY ASSIGNMENT
Each student must write ONE essay on a topic drawn from the list below. The essay
should be between 1,500 and 1,800 words in length (roughly 5-7 pages of double-spaced,
12-point type). No matter which question you choose, be sure to state a clear thesis and to
support your argument with specific evidence drawn from readings and lectures. Also, be
sure to use footnotes to cite all information, argumentation, and quotations drawn from
your sources. Provide a title and a word count. Students may not submit more than one
paper. Please choose your topic carefully. For all of the essays, you may wish to draw on
parts of the document book that are not strictly required.
    1. (Due February 12) Many historians and other commentators have criticized U.S.
        policymakers for rebuffing Viet Minh appeals for support in 1945 and then
        backing the French war effort five years later, arguing that the United States
        should have remained true to its anticolonial traditions and recognized Ho Chi
        Minh’s movement as fundamentally nationalist, rather than communist, in
        inspiration. To what extent do you agree or disagree with this way of thinking?
        Think about whether the United States erred in rejecting Ho’s appeals and
        permitting the return of French control. Think too about whether there were
        reasonable alternatives to the course chosen by Washington.
    2. (Due February 19) It is August 1, 1954, and you are the U.S. secretary of state.
        President Eisenhower has asked you for advice about the policy the United States
        should adopt toward southern Vietnam. Write a memo advising the president. Try
        to limit yourself to information you could reasonably have known at the time. Be
        sure to organize your memo in a clear and concise fashion. Remember that the
        president is a busy person and expects direct and succinct advice.
    3. (Due March 7) The most famous films dealing with the Vietnam War focus on the
        experiences of U.S. combat soldiers after 1965. Several lesser-known films focus
        on the relationship between Americans and Vietnamese recipients of U.S. aid and
        advice in earlier “advisory” years. Write an essay comparing and contrasting any
        two of the following films from this genre: “The Quiet American” (1958 or 2002
        version), “The Green Berets” (1968), and “Go Tell the Spartans” (1978). You
        may wish to consider how the films depict American motives, the attitudes of the
        Vietnamese people, and/or the effect U.S. personnel have in Vietnam, among
        other possible subjects. (If you use film version(s) of “The Quiet American,” you
        may use either the 1958 or 2002 version, or you may use both as your two films.)
    4. (Due March 26) It is December 1, 1964, and you are the U.S. secretary of defense.
        President Johnson has asked you for advice about how to proceed in Vietnam.
        Write a memo advising the president. Try to limit yourself to information you
        could reasonably have known at the time. Be sure to organize your memo in a
        clear and concise fashion. Remember that the president is a busy person and
        expects direct and succinct advice.


5. (Due April 4) Many Americans understand the Vietnam War and the
   controversies that surround it through the high-profile movies that have been
   released in the years since 1975. Write an essay comparing and contrasting two of
   the following movies that appeared between the mid-1970s and mid-1980s: “Deer
   Hunter,” “Apocalypse Now,” “Platoon,” and “Full Metal Jacket.” You are free to
   focus on any dimensions of the films that you consider significant, though you
   might consider, for example, the characterizations of American decision-making,
   the personal qualities of ordinary ground troops, the ways in which Americans
   interact with Vietnamese, and the depiction of the physical environment in
   Vietnam.
6. (Due April 11) Historians have often pointed out that the “antiwar movement”
   was hardly a single, unified movement. Yet distinguishing different schools of
   thought and identifying lines of fracture between different groups is not easy.
   Write an essay exploring the range of opinions that made up the antiwar
   movement. What do you see as the key distinctions among different strands of the
   “movement”? In answering this question, please draw on the documents posted to
   Canvas for essay 5.
7. (Due April 25) Many commentators have sharply criticized Richard Nixon and
   Henry Kissinger for failing to end the Vietnam War in 1969 and for continuing
   the fighting for four more bloody years. Others defend Nixon and Kissinger for
   making the best of a difficult situation. What is your opinion of this controversy?
   Think about whether the American administration erred by refusing to end the
   fighting during its first year in office and how you would rate the administration’s
   new approach to waging the war.
