       Landscape Ecology
                  GRG f335N
               Unique 80329
               Summer 2020
                  M, T, W, Th
        11:30 PM – 1:00 PM
                       Online
                                                Instructor
                                           Molly H. Polk, Ph.D.
                            Department of Geography and the Environment
                                          mollypolk@utexas.edu
                                    Office hours: Mondays 2:00-3:00
                                           and by appointment
                                                 on Zoom
Course Overview
Landscape ecology is the study of spatial patterns in the Earth's biosphere, the processes that
produce those patterns, and the interactions between pattern and process. Landscapes are
defined in many ways and exist at many scales, but in this course, we will focus on landscapes at
the level of a human. As an interdisciplinary approach, landscape ecology draws from ecology and
geography, but it is also a perspective used by hydrologists, foresters, wildlife biologists, social
scientists, landscape architects, and others. We will examine the current state of knowledge and
research on the patches and corridors that constitute landscape mosaics. We will explore the
causes of landscape heterogeneity from geographical and ecological points of view. Throughout
the semester, we will explore practical applications of landscape ecology to natural and urban
environments. To conclude the course, we will explore the intersection of sustainability and the
potential contributions of landscape ecology to maintaining and improving human well-being.
This course will be taught entirely online, as are all courses at The University during the 2020
summer school term. Canvas will be our hub for all learning and teaching. The course will be
taught both synchronously and asynchronously.
Course Goals and Expectations
The overarching goal of this course is to develop the ability to think like a landscape ecologist.
More specifically, by the end of the term, you will be able to:
             •  Define and describe heterogeneous landscapes using the patch-corridor-matrix
                model.
             •  Understand the importance of scale in geography and ecology.
             •  Interpret the effect of process on patterns and vice versa using quantitative
                methods.
             •  Synthesize landscape ecology principles and apply them to real-world examples
             •  Read, understand, interpret, evaluate, and present peer-reviewed literature.
             •  Learn through interactive activities (lab assignments)
                                                                                    Updated 5/28/20


When you finish this class, you will be capable of synthesizing landscape ecology principles,
applying them to real-world examples, and presenting those findings to audiences.
Enrollment assumes a background in physical geography or ecology.
Our Weekly Routine
For consistency and simplicity, every week will follow the same rhythm and routine as seen in the
general weekly schedule below. There is one exception: Exam 1 will be on Friday, June 19
when you will be able to complete the exam anytime between 8:00AM and 5:00 PM. See the last
page for a detailed schedule.
         Day              Online and Offline Activities
         Monday           • 11:30 Required class attendance on Zoom
                          • Introduction to the Module by Dr. Polk
                          • Occasional lab presentation from the previous week
                          • Listening to and watching lecture videos on your own
                          • Reading as assigned on your own
                          • Dr. Polk’s office hours 2:00-3:00
         Tuesday          •  No class meeting
                          •  Listening to and watching lectures on your own
                          •  Reading as assigned on your own
         Wednesday        •  No class meeting
                          •  Quiz available 8:00AM to 5:00PM
         Thursday         •  11:30 Optional attendance - Lab workshop on Zoom
                          •  Lab available at 8:00AM due 5:00PM
Grading
        5 Lab Assignments (5% each)          25%
        4 Quizzes (5% each)                  20%
        2 Exams (20% each)                   40%
        Office Hours or Lab Workshop           5%
        Attendance                           10%
        Total                                100%
Late assignments will lose 10% credit per day. Final letter grades are assigned by percentages:
 > 92% = A            88-89.99% = B+       78-79.99% = C+        68-69.99% = D+     <60% = F
 90-91.99% = A-       82-87.99% = B        72-77.99% = C         62-67.99% = D
                      80-81.99% = B-       70-71.99% = C-        60-61.99% = D-
Assignments
You are expected to complete all assignments and attend every Monday class meeting.
The course is organized by Modules. Every week there is an “Online Practice” that contains video
lectures and other materials that you should watch and listen to on Mondays and Tuesdays on
                                                  2


your own time. There is also a reading assignment under each module called “<Module Name>
Reading”.
Quizzes
There is a quiz that must be completed every week to ensure you are keeping up with the offline
practice and to assess your progress. It will be on Canvas and will become available on
Wednesday morning at 8:00AM and will close at 5:00PM. The quizzes are designed to confirm that
you are listening to and digesting the material in each module. The quizzes are closed book and
you will have two chances to complete the quiz. The Quiz will be on Canvas under the weekly
Module for the week.
Lab Assignments
Lab assignments will give you an opportunity for hands-on, interactive, and collaborative learning.
Thursday is our lab day. There are 5 labs and each one will be completed with your lab partners in
a team effort. Lab Groups have been randomly assigned and you can find your lab partners on
Canvas > People > Lab Group. Only one lab assignment needs to be submitted by each Lab
Group. Details for each Lab will be on Canvas under the weekly Module. The Labs will become
available on Thursdays at 8:00AM and are due the same day by 5:00 PM. We will hold a weekly
lab workshop during class hours on Thursdays that is optional, but attendance is highly
recommended. Some labs will have a required in-class presentation on Mondays.
Exams
There are two exams that will evaluate your progress toward the course goals. They will test
vocabulary, concepts, the ability to synthesize material, apply concepts to real-world situations,
and formulate solutions based on landscape ecology principles. The Exams will be administered
through Canvas and Proctorio. They are closed book and should be completed individually. The
UT Honor Code applies. Exam dates are Friday, June 19 and Thursday, July 9.
Office Hours or Lab Workshop
You must participate in at least one office hours or lab workshop. In this new online learning
environment, it is easy to be and feel disengaged from your classmates and your instructor. To
counter that tendency and to increase your learning, this course requires you to participate in either
office hours with Dr. Polk or the lab workshop on Thursdays. You can choose whichever day/date
is convenient for you.
     •  For Office Hours, participation means that you bring a question, or you need clarification on
        material from the online lectures or reading, or you’re inspired by the material and want to
        know what else you can read.
     •  For Lab Workshops, participation means that you are working with your lab partners
        towards completing the lab. You are encouraging their participation, offering help to your
        partners if they need it, aiding the flow by staying on topic, and building on each other’s
        comments constructively.
Attendance
You are expected to attend every Monday class meeting on Zoom with your video camera on and
your audio muted. Promptness is expected – you should make every effort to join the Zoom
session on time. If you miss a class, plan on getting the notes from a classmate.
Required Readings and Other Materials
All required and recommended readings should be completed prior to the Wednesday quiz.
Readings and other resources will be posted on Canvas.
                                                     3


A complete pdf of the textbook is available for download through the UT Library for FREE. It will
also be available through Canvas.
http://link.springer.com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/book/10.1007%2F978-1-4939-2794-4
          Turner, M. G., & Gardner, R. H. (2015). Landscape Ecology in Theory and Practice: Pattern
          and Process (2nd ed.). New York: Springer.
In addition to the textbook, we will read (and listen to) other relevant sources. Others may be
added.
          Bioscience Talk: Landscape Ecology and its Role in Policymaking. An interview with Dr.
                Audrey Mayer. 2016. https://bioscienceaibs.libsyn.com/episode-13-landscape-ecology-
                and-its-role-in-policymaking
          Kupfer, J. A. 2012. Landscape ecology and biogeography: Rethinking landscape metrics in
                a post-FRAGSTATS landscape. Progress in Physical Geography 36:400–420.
A laptop or tablet will be required for some of the lab assignments.
Dr. Polk will also be drawing from the following new book, which is only available as a hard copy
through the UT Library at present:
          With, K.A. 2019. Essentials of Landscape Ecology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Course Policies
Makeups
There will be no makeup exams, quizzes, or lab assignments, except with a valid written excuse
presented at least 2 weeks in advance of the exam or lab. Medical excuses must be presented to
Dr. Polk within 24 hours following the missed exam, quiz, or lab.
A valid written excuse is on official letterhead, is signed, and includes a contact name and phone
number. Possible valid written excuses: a doctor’s note, letter from a parent/guardian, letter from
UT Athletics for a university function, military service, jury duty, religious holy days. Possible invalid
excuses: I was throwing up, I had a flat tire, I slept through my alarm clock…and many more.
Honor Code: Students are expected to uphold the University of Texas’ Academic Honor Code: As
a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.
          Intellectual integrity is expected in all work. Collaboration and the use of a wide range of
references are encouraged, but any plagiarism, use of un-cited materials, or un-credited
assistance will result in a recommendation of course failure. If you have any questions about what
is acceptable and what is not, please ask. Also see:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
          You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy, which can be found
at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
          Violations of the UT honor code, including cheating or plagiarism, will result in: 1) a zero for
the assignment/exam; 2) an assigned ‘F’ for the final grade; and/or 3) notification to the UT
Academic Judiciary Committee for further disciplinary measures.
E-mail Communication with Dr. Polk: When emailing Dr. Polk, please be professional, polite, and
follow all grammatical rules. Start with a greeting: “Dear Dr. Polk,” or “Dr. Polk,” Subject lines
should be concise and descriptive. Abbreviations commonly used in text messages should be
                                                        4


avoided. Remember to use please and thank you. Edit and proofread for spelling and grammar
prior to sending. If your email is longer than 2 paragraphs, let’s discuss the matter during office
hours. You should expect a reply to emails within 24 hours between Monday and Friday. Emails
received over the weekend will receive a response on the following Monday or Tuesday.
Video Lectures and PowerPoint Slides: Recordings and learning materials developed by Dr. Polk
are reserved only for students and instructor in this class for educational purposes. The recordings
should not be shared outside the class in any form. Violation of this restriction could lead to
Student Misconduct proceedings.
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 4th class day (for summer sessions), you will
need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the
semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public
Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations: Students with a documented disability may request appropriate
academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     ▪ Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations.
     ▪ Please notify Dr. Polk as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
        accessible or if any part of the online course learning environment is difficult for you.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify Dr. Polk of your pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class,
an examination, or a lab assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counselling and Mental Health Centre (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 232-5050
or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements: Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the
professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further investigation any information
concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking committed
by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also requires reporting
incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as
Title IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such incidents
that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality, please
contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and
Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these
services for any needed support and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
                                                     5


                                                  COURSE SCHEDULE
Week   Date                     Module                 Online Practice (Your tasks)                     Reading
First  Thursday, June 4, 2020   Introduction            • What LE is & Origins of LE                    Textbook pp. 1-15
Day                                                     • What is a Landscape? Ecology? Applications
                                                        • Dr. Mayer's podcast
                                                        • Complete Survey
Week 1 Monday, June 8, 2020     Foundational Concepts   • P-C-M Framework                               Textbook pp. 15-31
       And                                              • 5 central concepts
       Tuesday, June 9, 2020                            • Cartographic vs. Ecological scale
                                                        • Spatial and temporal scale
                                                        • Biotic hierarchy
       Wednesday, June 10, 2020                        Quiz 1: Foundations and Scale
       Thursday, June 11, 2020                         Lab 1: Interpreting the Landscape + Monday
                                                       presentation
Week 2 Monday, June 15, 2020    Causes of Pattern        • Abiotic, biotic, and human causes of pattern Textbook Ch. 2
       And                                               • Disturbance                                  and Ch. 6
       Tuesday, June 16, 2020                            • Ecological succession video
       Wednesday, June 17, 2020                        Quiz 2: Causes and Disturbance
       Thursday, June 18, 2020                         Lab 2: Corridors
       Friday, June 19, 2020                           EXAM 1
Week 3 Monday, June 22, 2020    Measuring Pattern        • Remote sensing                               Textbook Ch. 4
       And                                               • Thematic maps                                Kupfer 2012
       Tuesday, June 23, 2020                            • Pattern metrics
       Wednesday, June 24, 2020                        Quiz 3: Measuring pattern
       Thursday, June 25, 2020                         Lab 3: Pattern Metrics
Week 4 Monday, June 29, 2020    Species and Landscapes   • Conceptual underpinnings                     Textbook Ch. 7
       And                                               • Responses to heterogeneity
       Tuesday, June 30, 2020                            • Invasive species
                                                         • Video on Asian carp
                                                         • Podcast on Grackles
       Wednesday, July 1, 2020                         Quiz 4: Species and Landscapes
       Thursday, July 2, 2020                          Lab 4: Invasive species + Monday presentation
Week 5 Monday, July 6, 2020     Ecosystem Processes      •   Horizonal and lateral fluxes               Textbook Ch. 8
                                                         •   Models
       Tuesday, July 7, 2020                           Lab 5: Modeling P
       Wednesday, July 8, 2020  Review Session         No Quiz
       Thursday, July 9, 2020                          EXAM 2
                                                                        Updated 5/28/20
