                                       ALD 333 Children’s Literature
                                                 09560
                                               Spring 2020
Class Meets: 4:00pm – 6:45pm. Wednesdays.       Sanchez Building, SZB 324
 Instructor: Dr. Denise Dávila                       Office: Sanchez Building 334M
 Pronouns: she/her/hers                              Office hours: By appt via phone, video, or chat.
 Email: ddavila@utexas.edu
 Phone: (512) 232-3805 [Office]
 Teaching Assistant: Lo DeWalt                       Office: Sanchez Building 334 Suite
 Pronouns: she/her/hers                              Office hours: By appt via phone, video, or chat.
 Email: lodewalt@utexas.edu
 Phone: (512) 232-3805 [Office]
                                                    1


                                                    Course Description
University Catalog Course Description
For future teachers, an investigation of literature written for children from early childhood through age twelve. Includes an
investigation of genres, authors, themes, and forms, and an introduction to ways of bringing literature to children, facilitated
by extensive discussion.
What will I learn?
We focus in this course on the texts that children engage with in elementary schools. Following the Library of Congress, our
working definition of children’s literature is material written and produced for the information or entertainment of children
and young adults. Children’s literature includes all non-fiction, literary and artistic genres, and physical formats. We extend
this definition slightly to include the texts (textbooks) that are used in support of children learning to read and write and
children learning in disciplinary studies.
We envision you, the students enrolled in this course, as future elementary teachers (EC through 6) who will be responsible
for making decisions around the texts they will include in their classroom and how these texts will be used. You are not
blank slates in the world of children’s literature. You enter into this course with vast experiences with texts from your lived
experiences at home and in schools. We hope to build on these experiences with texts in ways that will expand your power
as a teacher.
We will consider the sources, structures, purposes, qualities and potential uses of texts in elementary teaching. Mostly, we
will consider texts as they relate to the teaching of reading and language arts, but we will extend our scope to include texts
related to content area teaching. While this course is not a methods course per se, we have organized the course to
engage you with texts through some activity structures where texts play a prominent role in classroom life.
We will advocate for the use of texts that can serve critical functions for young minds. We will explore texts that stretch our
lived experiencers, disrupt commonly accepted norms, and expand our world views. Texts are seldom neutral in the ways
they represent the past, the present and the envisioned future. We will strive to foster imagination, moral thinking, and the
appreciation of human rights through literature.
Through your engagement in this course experience we expect you will:
                   §    Deepen your understanding of the ways in which children’s literature supports the development of
                        language and literacy practices as well as the acquisition of content knowledge;
                   §    Deepen your understanding of the ways in which children’s literature is important as a resource for
                        teachers in creating a classroom literacy program that includes work across disciplines;
                   §    Deepen your understanding of the qualities of children’s literature that are important: language, design,
                        accessibility (including issues surrounding readability) and content including attention to (and cautions
                        around) awards for children’s books.
                   §    Deepen your understanding for how children’s literature can reinforce or disrupt stereotypes;
                   §    Consider all sides of censuring in literature for children with implications for your responsibilities as a
                        classroom teacher
                   §    Examine the narrative bias in children’s literature and its roots;
                   §    Deepen your understanding of the ways in which children’s literature is used for different purposes and
                        different audiences;
                   §    Deepen your understanding of the classical and emerging genres for children’s literature as well
                        distinctions between books for children and YA literature;
                                                                    2


                   §     Deepen your understanding of literature response and ways of using literature response to promote
                         engagement with literature;
                   §     Explore writers and artists as composers who can scaffold young writers and artists
                   §     Embrace the understanding that children’s literature must offer mirrors, windows, and sliding glass
                         doors for all children – including international perspectives;
                   §     Embrace the understanding that children’s literature can create spaces for children to explore critical
                         social issues:
                   §     Consider the production of literature (and economic influences on publishing and consumption cycles);
                   §     Develop awareness of the ways in which technology is reshaping access to and forms of literature for
                         children – the good, the bad, and the ugly (e.g., accelerated reader).
                   §     Suggest possibilities and frameworks for personally organizing literature for use in classrooms.
  Pre-requisites for the course
  None
  How to succeed in this course
  Be engaged and open to new ideas during class
  Be prepared to turn in assignments on time
                                                    Course Requirements
Required Materials
Professional readings are identified on Canvas.
Required Devices
A digital device with Internet connectivity is required.
Classroom expectations
Class attendance. In order to participate fully in this course, weekly attendance is mandatory. Students should inform the instructor
in advance if they are unable to attend a session. Two or more absences could reduce a student’s final grade by one-half to one full
mark. A make-up assignment is required for any absence.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask classmates for notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics
that we covered while you were gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss.
Email specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                                       3


Assignments
 A. Early Experiences with Stories
          Describe your early relationship with stories or storytelling for the following stages associated with elementary schools: 0 –
          Pre K (pre-school); K – 2 (primary grades); 3 – 5 (upper grades). For each stage, discuss the ways you engaged with stories
          in- and/or out- of school. Reflect on the kinds of experiences that encouraged and/or discouraged your current relationship to
          stories and books. Did/do you consider yourself a “storyteller” and/or a “reader”? Why or why not? Organize your paper
          according to each age category. Minimum: 1-page, double-spaced, 12pt font.
 1. Group Book Award Presentation
     Each presentation must include a classroom display of at least 20 winners (honors) for the selected Award. Each team will
     develop a presentation (with Powerpoint or another tool) and an accompanying document that provides a clear overview of a
     children’s book award, including:
     • A brief overview and history of the award
     • Description of the goal of the award
     • Display of the book winners since 2000 to present
     [If the award includes multiple winners, please bring the most recent 20 - 30 books for grades K – 5.]
     • Includes a brief review of the most common genres, themes, formats, styles, and artistic qualities of the winners of the last
     decade (since 2010). [This requires a thoughtful examination of the books in advance of the presentation.]
 2. Author Presentation
     Each person will prepare an online presentation about a contemporary children’s author. No physical books are
     required. Please be prepared to lead your group through the social media, interviews, read-alouds, and other resources that are
     accessible and available online. Each presentation should include the covers of the author’s books and highlight the
     contributions the writer has made to the field of children’s literature. The presentation must provide:
     • a rationale for selecting the author;
     • author’s biographical information and online interviews;
     • images of the books
     • highlights about the author's primary writing style or approach to bookmaking
     • online resources/social media about author’s work; and
     • online resources/social media about using author's work in the classroom or at a school
     • online read-alouds from the author’s body of work to excited prospective readers
 3. Children’s Literature in the Online / Social Media Community
     General overview: Each person will engage with two (2) children’s literature events in the community or online. In-person,
     community options include events such as: public library storytime or book club; author/illustrator talk at bookstore; Texas Book
     Festival, etc. Online events include: podcasts, video interviews or panels with illustrators/authors, virtual public library storytime
     sessions, etc. Each person will submit a one-two page report and personal reflection on each of the events.
 4. Read-Aloud Video
     General overview: Each person will prepare a read-aloud video of a picturebook. It will be necessary to develop a set of deep-
     thinking / philosophical questions to correspond with the books.
 5. Participation
     Class attendance and participation are important elements of the learning process. Therefore, it is important that you have read,
     pondered, inquired, and responded to the weekly readings prior to class. Your preparation and presence will allow for deeper and
     more enriched conversations and understandings during class activities and discussions.
     It is necessary to arrive on-time. Attendance is taken at the beginning of each class session. Each person is expected to be
     present in class with all necessary class materials, class assignments ready for submission (when applicable), and active
     participation in class and online discussions and activities (if/when applicable).
                                                                         4


Assignments                               Points
Early Experience with Stories                 05
Book Selections & Responses to Readings       25
Group Award Presentation                      10
Author Presentation                           10
Children’s Literature in the Community        10
Storytime / Read-Aloud Project                15
Participation                                 25
TOTAL                                        100
                                        5


                                                                Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
    Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are aspects
    of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let us know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop
    strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. We also encourage you to reach out to the student resources
    available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
    As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. If you miss a smaller
    assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be impacted significantly. Consequently, the final
    grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
             Grade           Cutoff
             A               94-100%
             A-              90-93%
             B+              87-89%
             B               84-86%
             B-              80-83%
             C+              77-79%
             C               74-76%
             C-              70-73%
             D               65-69%
             F               <64%
Student Rights & Responsibilities
    • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    • You have a right to respect.
    • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning environment.
    • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded or
         diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team and
         with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
    • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your experience
         with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality
         of your peers’ experiences.
    • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
                                                                        6


     •     You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards, and
           holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
       Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race,
       culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor
       with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please
       advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
       Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of
       Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken
       very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class),
       you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including
       failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code
       which can be found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
       If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline, which typically
       occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public
       Texas institution. For more information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 Email Notification Policy
           All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility
 to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and
 regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
 critical. It is recommended that email be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and
 instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564.
           We will be using Canvas as our central online instructional space for this course. Please familiarize yourself with Canvas to
 ensure you are properly receiving messages and alerts. The student Canvas Support Hotline is available at 1-855-308-2494 and video
 tutorials can be found at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials.
 University Resources for Students
       Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are aspects
       of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop
       strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
       This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our
       learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
       arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
       environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
       confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
       Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
       http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     •     Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g., instructional
           videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
                                                                          7


     •    Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are required.
          Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
          accessibility, etc.).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
      Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough
      sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus
      and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often
      helpful.
      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly
      encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512.232.5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their
      academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
      specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
      information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and
harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to
build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns
      Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
      instincts and share your concerns.
      The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-
      5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
      activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may
      not be the one you used when entering the building.
 •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions
      by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
 •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
                                                                          8


       www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual
       misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a
       learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
       university can:
            1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
            2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a Title
                  IX investigation.
            3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
       Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that
       they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any
       Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
       member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
       someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
       information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                                                                           9
