                                                ADV 343K/483-2​                      Portfolio 1
                                                                                              (Unique Numbers: 06595, 06330)​.
Who are you people?
Person 1: Sean LaBounty                                                    Person 2: Willy Lamb
seanlabounty@utexas.edu                                                    Email: willylamb@utexas.edu
Office: BMC 4.302                                                          Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: Wed 2-6                                                             Hours: TBD
Get it! Get it NOW!
Pre-Req:                                         Required:                                         Highly Suggested:
Hey Whipple, Squeeze This                        The Advertising Concept Book                      Read Me.
by Luke Sullivan                                 (3rd Ed)                                          by Horberry and Lingwood
                                                 by Pete Barry
A note on books: ​If this is your chosen profession, this isn’t like any other book list you’ve ever been handed. These are books that
will sit on your shelf (or in your device) and you will go back to again, and again, and again. Whether for inspiration, to get you
out of a rut, or just to get your dumb ol’ brain moving. Trust me. Buy them all. Read them 6 times. Follow their instructions and
you’ll do a billion times better in here and in your career. No joke.
Man, what did I sign up for?
Prerequisite: ADV 325 with a grade of at least a “B-” and admission to the Texas Creative program. Of course, you’ve
done this already. So, go you.​ ​Now​ ​you’re here to practice basic creative skills, “big idea” thinking, conceptualization
and other multisyllabic words associated with being on the hip and happening side of “the biz”.
“Creative” as a noun
You’ve joined a club. If you’re like most of our other members, it’s probably the only one that would have you. By
choosing to call yourself a creative and pursue a life of long hours, bocce ball tournament Tuesdays, tight deadlines,
and throwing fruit off of tall buildings, you’ve picked a career that will be the envy of the friends who stick around
despite your constant inattention.
From here on in, unless you bail (and you may choose to do so, no judgment), you are officially a copywriter or an art
director. We’ll joke a lot, we’ll have fun, but you will be judged at and so expected to perform at a professional level.
Seriously.


The P1 experience…of a lifetime
This class is basically an ad agency. We say “basically” because there will be far less alcohol (read “none”) and the
client is very, very quiet. You will choose clients/products to work on, go forth to create advertising campaigns for
them, and then put said solutions on the wall, in front of everyone, for evaluation and occasional ridicule through
class critique.
          NOTE: Thicker skin through advertising
          Advertising is not a private endeavor. Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes harshly, by your
          colleagues and me. We improve by sharing our ideas early and often with other creatives. Fair and honest
          critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. Don’t take things personally, keep your cool and know that
          very few ideas make the final cut.
You will fully execute the best of the best ideas using all digital, manual, bought, borrowed and stolen methods
available. In final critique you will show a minimum of 12 pieces. Most likely, that means 3 campaigns, each
containing at least 4 pieces. Don’t worry, you’ll get it done. Remember, this is not a “work done in class” type of deal.
You will be busy, on your own, out there in the real world [insert I​ Believe I Can Fly c​ horus here].
          NOTE: The lightnin’ round
          If you don’t show the required work in final critique you cannot earn a grade higher than a 80, and that’s
          basically an impossibility. I must see and approve all portfolio work prior to the final show. WORK SHOWN
          WITHOUT MY APPROVAL MAY BE REMOVED. If I remove work and you don’t meet the minimum requirements
          you may not participate. If you can’t participate, chances are you’ll be saying hello to Mr. C (or D, or F) and
          goodbye to Mr. P2.
Don’t know how to push pixels? You will. One of the “required texts” for this course are mandatory online classes
from Lynda.com. The sooner these are taken care of, the better off you’ll be. Guidelines to come, but mostly the
classes are your choice. It may seem like more work, but you’ll thank me when your final executions look all…final-y.
The process is frustrating at times. Advertising is subjective. There are no right answers. Do better each time and
play nice with others. The ad biz is small and incestuous. Your friends here will be your colleagues, competitions and
cohorts soon enough. Love them. Fear them. Respect them. You’re all in this together.
You will learn the business. Read the industry mags, follow the blogs..in general learn stuff about the world you’re
about to enter into.
                     ​ o buy this stuff (or be damn sure you can borrow it):
                      G
                    ‣ 500 sheets of white copy paper (cheap is good)
                    ‣ A stack of Sharpie Fine Point markers (the most common point, not like a pen)
                    ‣ 1-2 Sheets of black on black foam core board
                    ‣ A fresh X-Acto #1 knife + pack of extra blades (borrowable/shareable)
                    ‣ A metal straightedge ruler (borrowable/shareable)
                    ‣ One black queen-size FLAT bed sheet (lowest thread count wins)


Grades
Your final course grade will be calculated by my big ol’ brain like so:
60% = Final Portfolio (12 pieces minimum)
10% = Final Critique
10% = Industry awareness assignment (Pinterest)
10% = Lynda Courses
10% = Participation, attitude, and professionalism
Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum grade of C in all
communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major.
Grades are true to form. You earn a C by being average. That means doing all your work and doing it correctly.
Impress me and get a B. If I think you could start a business with me tomorrow you might just be gunning for an A.
How to succeed
‣ Treat this like it’s already your job.
‣ Fail big! Make mistakes and own them. We all learn from them.
‣ Play nice. Be a good partner. Seriously. Do your end and then some.
‣ Spend at least 10 hours outside of class for every one hour in class. No, really. Do it.
‣ Study award shows and latest work. Seek out all kinds of existing/emerging creativity. Develop your skills. Keep
your eyes open.
‣ Seek a balance. Absorb advertising and culture as much as possible but leave yourself time for your own
contributions. Remember, you’re a creative now. Create.
Legal stuff. Read it anyway.
Attendance + Late Work
As a budding professional in a deadline-driven industry, you are expected to complete every project on time – no
exceptions. That means you will hang at least the minimum amount of work during class on the date indicated on the
calendar and to do that you have to be there. ​I’m not heartless. If grandma is sick, let me know. If your chihuahua
explodes and you need the day off, lemme know. If your lack of dedication becomes apparent you will not move
forward and risk failing the class. You read that correctly. That doesn’t just hurt you in this class. That could mean
bye-bye Texas Creative. So, I suggest you commit.
Cheating
The usual university rules apply to cheating and plagiarism. Look around to see if your idea has been done. It’s not
just a legal thing, it’ll help you get a job. When it doubt, refer to Wheaton’s law. If you are caught cheating, you will
automatically fail this course. Please familiarize yourself with the university’s policy on plagiarism​ ​here.
Moving on to P2
To move forward in the highly competitive Texas Creative sequence, you must earn at least a “B-” in this class
(79.5% or higher) to be eligible for admission to Portfolio 2. Earning a “B-” or better DOES NOT guarantee your


progression to P2. Evidence of exceptional work, mastery of concepts, and professionalism is also required.
E-Mail and Canvas
In this course, email and Canvas will both be used to communicate. I’m very reachable on my email. So you will be as
well. Make sure your Canvas email is updated to a current, reachable account. You will be responsible for checking it
regularly for class work and announcements.
It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful than usual lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated
or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for support. Our CARE Counselor in the Moody
College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW | CMA 4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is unavailable)
          Need Immediate Help?
                        - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471- 3515
                             |cmhc.utexas.edu
                        - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at
471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.


But, when? WHEN?!​ ​(subject to change)
T, 1/21     Welcome: Syllabus, Introductions
R, 1/23     Observe & Connect
T, 1/28     Findings
R, 1/30     Findings
T, 2/4      Yes, and…
R, 2/6      Yes, and…
T, 2/11     Story
R, 2/13     Story
F, 2/14     Improv Show
T, 2/18     100 Thumbnails
R, 2/20     100 Thumbnails
T, 2/25     Solo Round 1
R, 2/27     Solo Round 1
T, 3/3      Solo Round 2
R, 3/5      Solo Round 2
T, 3/10     Solo Round 3
R, 3/12     Solo Round 3
3/16 - 3/20 Spring Break
T, 3/24     Campaign 2 round 1
R, 3/26     Campaign 2 round 1
T, 3/31     Campaign 2 round 2
R, 4/2      Campaign 2 round 2
T, 4/7      Campaign 2 round 3
R, 4/9      Campaign 2 round 3
T, 4/14     Campaign 3 round 1
R, 4/16     Campaign 3 round 1
T, 4/21     Campaign 3 round 2
R, 4/23     Campaign 3 round 2
T, 4/28     Campaign 3 round 3
R, 4/30     Campaign 3 round 3


T, 5/5  Critique rehearsal
R, 5/7  Critique rehearsal
W, 5/13 Final Critique!
                   8:00am  - Doors open and setup.
                   8:30am  - Doors close. You’re there or you don’t participate.
                   9:00am  - Tables finished. You leave.
                   12:00pm - Doors reopen. Late students do not advance.
