                SYLLABUS AND COURSE OUTLINE`
                        *********************
                   COLLEGE SPORTS MEDIA
                        ADV 378S/PR 378S
                              FALL 2019
                   Mondays and Wednesdays
                            12:30 pm-2pm
                     Location: PAR 1
                       Instructor: Joel Lulla, JD
                        Telephone 512-471-9616
                E-Mail: Joel.Lulla@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours and location: After class by appointment in BMC 4.312
                Graduate Assistant: Reece White
                                                                   1


                            College of Communication
                          University of Texas at Austin
 Title:              College Sports Media
                     Course number: ADV 378S/PR 378S
Description:         This course will examine the media and methods by which colleges,
intercollegiate athletic conferences and the NCAA distribute sports events and other
sports-related content to fans/consumers throughout the country and the world.
Students will learn about the history of college sports media, starting with the early
days of sports television when the NCAA controlled essentially all intercollegiate sports
content and only a tiny fraction of college football and basketball games was televised,
through the present time when almost all intercollegiate athletics events of major
universities are available via broadcast, cable and/or digital media.
The course will examine national sports broadcast networks such as CBS Sports, NBC
Sports and Fox Sports and their sister cable networks, as well as an in-depth
examination of ESPN--the acknowledged industry leader. Additional topics of study
will be college conference cable networks including the Big Ten Network, Pac-12
Networks, SEC Network and ACC Network, as well as university-branded cable and
digital networks, with particular emphasis on The Longhorn Network. Talk radio,
digital networks and the impact of social media on college sports will also be discussed.
Students will learn about the different college conferences, both the power conferences
and mid-majors, and how conference realignment has been shaped by the pursuit of
television dollars and exposure. We will discuss the evolution of the bowl system into
the College Football Playoff, the history and growth of the NCAA basketball
tournament and the economic model of the NCAA under attack via a number of major
lawsuits filed on behalf of current and former student-athletes. A backdrop for all of
our discussions will be enormous sums of money generated by today’s college sports
media and the effect of the pursuit of that money on the student-athlete.
 The course will be primarily lecture and discussion of important issues in college sports
 media with guest speakers who are key executives in college sports and/or sports media.
 Objectives:         The student who successfully completes this course will ideally be able
                     to:
     1.    Appreciate the history of college sports media and the impact of this history on
           the current shape of the industry.
                                                                                           2


       2.    Understand the various distribution platforms of college sports media.
       3.    Analyze the structure and economics of important current and past media deals
             for college sports programming.
       4.    Recognize the important players in college sports and college sports media and
             understand the motives for certain of their actions.
       5.    Understand the current challenges confronting the economic model of major
             intercollegiate athletics.
                                      COURSE OUTLINE
Approach:
   This course will be comprised of twenty-eight (28) sessions (two sessions per week),
   including a mid-term examination and an examination on the last day of class (December
   9), with each individual session being approximately seventy-five (75) minutes in length.
   There will mixture of lecture by the principal instructor and guests, group discussion,
   student presentations and in-class quizzes and examinations.
Class Preparation:
   1. It is expected that each student will be prepared to participate in informed and
       constructive discussions.
   2. Reading assignments and homework must be done prior to attending class so that all
       students will benefit from an informed discussion of issues.
   3. Students will be paired during the semester into groups of two or three, and each
       group will be responsible for making a video report to the class of approximately 5-
       10 minutes in duration on a topic related to college sports media. Any written
       assignments are to be typed. Spelling, grammar, and punctuation must conform to
       professional standards. If your presentation or assignments incorporate concepts
       that originated with others, you must acknowledge your utilization of these concepts
       pursuant to MLA citation standards.
   4. LAPTOP AND CELL PHONE USE IS NOT PERMITTED AND ALL LAPTOPS
       AND CELL PHONES MUST BE TURNED OFF PRIOR TO CLASS.
Attendance:
   Students are expected to attend every class, which is critical to their success in the
   course and the success of the course itself. As noted below, a substantial proportion of
   each student’s grade will be attributable to in-class activities. Students should be
   prepared to start the class session on time. If for some reason, a student is unable to
   attend class, that student is expected to inform the GA via email prior to class. Being
   absent or late for class may result in a reduction of a student’s grade for the course. If a
   student misses a class for any reason, it is also the responsibility of the student to be
                                                                                                3


    informed of the materials covered during the class. Each student is encouraged to find a
    “class buddy” who can share information and assignments.
Academic Integrity and Standards:
    Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and integrity in
    all course activities and assignments. It is expected that there shall be no deception
    regarding the representation made by the student of his/her preparation, participation or
    performance.
    Plagiarism is presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own and is a form of
    fraud. Plagiarism includes (but is not limited to) the presentation of a sequence of words
    from another writer, utilized without proper attribution. It is critical that students properly
    acknowledge the work of others and that the acknowledgement be accurate and complete.
    The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and plagiarism
    are subject to the standard policies and procedures for all UT-Austin students as established
    by UT-Austin
    .
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students Services at 471-6259 or 471-6441 TTY. Also, see
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Use of Canvas in Class                                                                        In
this class I will periodically use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with
password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to
communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to distribute assignments, and to give
students quizzes and/or surveys. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help
Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to requests for their feedback)
 During this course I will be asking students to give me feedback on their learning in
informal as well as formal ways. It’s very important for me to know your reaction to what
we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these surveys, so that together we
can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
                                                                                                  4


Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend
daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies
and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting in a disturbing manner, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of
the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember
        that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the
        building.
    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
        class.
    In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
        “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education
may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
                                                                                            5


You can find advice, models, templates, and other resources for designing your course
syllabus on the DIIA website at http://www.utexas.edu/academic/diia/
Grading and Evaluation:
Individual assessment will be based on attainment of up to 100 points with the number of points
assigned to each means of grading and method of evaluation as listed below:
          In-Class quizzes, class participation, attendance
          and student presentation                            40% (40 points)
          Midterm Exam                                        30% (30 points)
          Exam on last class day                              30% (30 points)
In-Class Quizzes shall be given via Canvas. It is expected that a quiz will be given each
Wednesday on the reading materials that were assigned in that week’s issue of Sports Business
Journal. Those in attendance on the date the quizzes are given will receive a minimum of 1
point for participating in the quiz and receiving a minimum of one correct answer on that quiz.
Please note that you may not be able to participate in the quiz unless you have your smart
phone or laptop in class . Also please note that unless you are in attendance, you will not
be able to earn points from that day’s quiz toward your final grade. Therefore,
attendance is very important.
Midterm Exam. A Midterm exam shall be given on October 23. It will consist of a number
of multiple choice and similar type questions and will cover material assigned and lectures
given through the date of the exam.
Last Day Exam. An exam shall be given on December 9, the last day of class. It will
consist of a number of multiple choice and similar type questions and will cover material
assigned and lectures given throughout the entire semester.
Grading
Course grades will be made according to the following grading scale:
  Under the plus/minus grading system of the university, grades will be calculated as
follows: 100-93, A; 92.9-90, A-; 89.9-87, B+; 86.9-83, B; 82.9-80, B-; 79.9-77, C+; 76.9-
73, C; 72.9-70, C-; 69.9-67, D+; 66.9-63, D; 62.9-60, D-; 59.9-0, F.
.
                                                                                              6


                                Required Reading Materials
  Miller, James Andrew and Shales, Tom, ESPN: Those Guys Have All the Fun (Inside the
                               World of ESPN), Little Brown, 2011
Students will also be expected to stay current with breaking news about college sports media,
both on their own initiative and by checking Canvas for reading assignments that I will add
based on current developments. Students will be required to subscribe to the on-line edition of
Sports Business Journal. Sports Business Journal, which is available on-line weekly
commencing Monday mornings, must be read each week prior to that Wednesday’s class.
                                             Course Plan
      Session 1 (Aug 28): Orientation to Class and Review Syllabus
           •  Review reading materials and additional resource material including SBJ.
           •  Discuss what students can expect of the class and what I will expect from each
              student
      Session 2 (Sept 4): Introduction to Broadcast Television
           •  Discussion of structure of broadcast television, including network-affiliate system,
              dayparts, syndication, and those time periods on local stations which are
              programmed by the networks and those which are programmed by the local
              stations themselves.
           •  Discuss basic business model of broadcast television and reasons that broadcast or
              “free” television is not free anymore for the great majority consumers due to
              retransmission fees.
           •  Examine the formula for determining whether a sports event on broadcast
              television will be profitable.
        Session 3 (Sept 9): Introduction to Cable Television
              •    Discuss structure of cable television and similarities and differences with the
                   structure of satellite television and television services offered by
                   telecommunications companies such as AT&T and Verizon.
              • Discuss basic business model of cable television and concept of
                   subscriber/carriage fees.
              • Examine concept of a la carte programming and danger it presents to cable
                   business model
                                                                                                   7


      • Contrast business models of broadcast television and cable television.
      •   Readings for this session: ESPN: Those Guys Have All the Fun, Chapter 1,
          pages 1-58.
Session 4 (Sept 11): Audience Measurement (Ratings) and Commercial Sales and
Sponsorships
       •   Examination of AC Nielsen Co. and its methodology and metrics for
           measuring audience size and characteristics
       • Discuss importance of ratings in determining advertising rates.
       • Examine ratings histories for past college sports telecasts
       • Discuss Concepts of Title and Presenting Sponsorships
       • Readings for session 7: TBA
Sessions 5 and 6 (Sept 16 and 18): History and Role of the NCAA in College Sports
Media
  •   Discussion of early days of sports television where the NCAA controlled the
      broadcast of all intercollegiate sports events
  •   Discuss 1984 Supreme Court decision that the NCAA’s control over college
      football broadcasts was an illegal restraint of trade and that the individual schools
      should be free to make their own broadcast deals.
  •   Discuss the birth and death of the College Football Association.
  •   Readings for session 5: TBA
  •   Readings for session 6: TBA.
Sessions 7 and 8 (Sept 23 and 25): Intercollegiate Athletics Conference
Composition
      •   Discuss how the pursuit of television dollars paid to intercollegiate athletics
          conferences by the television networks led to the conference realignment
          frenzy of the past few years
      •    Examine the current composition of the major and mid-major athletics
          conferences and discuss possible future changes to the conference landscape
      •    Readings for these sessions: TBA
Session 9 (Sept 30): Guest Speaker: Dave Brown, Former ESPN VP of College
Programming and Founder of Gridiron
                                                                                           8


Sessions 10 and 11 (Oct 2 and 7): Conference Television Deals
  •   Discuss difference in magnitude of television deals between the major and mid-
      major conferences
  •   Examine television deals of “power conferences” ACC, Big 12, Big Ten, Pac-12
      and SEC
  •   Examine conference-branded networks including the Big Ten Network, Pac-12
      Networks, SEC Network and ACC Network
  •   Readings for these sessions: TBA
Session 12 (Oct 9): Conference Television Deals (continued): The Mid-Majors
and Notre Dame
  •   Discuss Notre Dame’s unusual hybrid role as an independent in football with its
      own NBC contract and also a member of the ACC for all other sports.
  •   Examine the television deals of the mid-major conferences including the
      American Athletic Conference (formerly the Big East), Conference USA, MAC,
      Sun Belt and Mountain West.
  •   Discuss lack of conference-branded networks for the mid-majors and the birth and
      death of The Mountain, which was the conference-branded network of the
      Mountain West.
  •   Examine unusual basketball-only television deal of the new Big East Conference
      (the 7 schools that broke away from former Big East and subsequently added
      Butler, Creighton, Xavier and U Conn) with FOX Sports.
  •   Readings for these sessions: TBA
Session 13 (Oct 14): The Longhorn Network
    •   Examine factors leading to the formation of LHN.
    •   Examine financial structure of LHN
    •   Discuss distribution and other challenges facing LHN
    •   Contrast LHN with BYU-TV, the only other 24/7/365 university-branded
        regional sports network, as well as the part-time networks of the other Big 12
        schools.
    •   Readings for this session: UT-ESPN Contract for LHN
Sessions 14 and 15 (Oct 16 and 21): NCAA Men’s Basketball Tournament and
College Football Playoff
                                                                                       9


    •  Discuss broadcast history of NCAA Tournament.
    •  Examine reasons behind the recent partnership between CBS and Turner Sports
       (Warner Media) on NCAA Men’s Basketball Tournament telecasts.
    •  Discuss broadcast history of BCS and evolution to new College Football
       Playoff.
    •  Readings for this session: TBA
Session 16 (Oct 23): Midterm Examination
Session 17 (Oct 28): The Twitter Effect
    • Discuss use of twitter by college athletes, coaches, telecasters and reporters
    • Discuss attempts by coaches and administrators to prohibit twitter use by student-
       athletes and even reporters
    • Examine influence of social media on college sports, including the hiring and
       firing of coaches and administrators
    • Readings for this session: TBA
Sessions 18 and 19 (Oct 30 and Nov 4): ESPN: The Dominant Force in College
Sports Media
    •  View ESPN “Coaches Car Wash video
    •  Examine college sports rights controlled by ESPN
    •  Discuss influence of College GameDay and SportsCenter
    •  Examine various platforms of ESPN including the emergence of ESPNU
    •  Discuss whether it is healthy for intercollegiate sports at non-profit educational
       institutions when a for-profit corporation has so much power and influence
    •  Readings for session 24: NY Times article (8/25/2012) “College Football’s
       Most Dominant Player: It’s ESPN”.
    •  Readings for session 25: NY Times article (8/26/2013) “At Louisville,
       Athletic Boom is Rooted in ESPN Partnership”
    •  Readings for session 26: NY Times article (8/27/2013) “ESPN Stays on the
       Offensive”
                                                                                        10


Sessions 20 (Nov 6): Fox, NBC and CBS: Can Anyone Compete with ESPN?
    •   Examine broadcast and cable holdings of Fox, NBC and CBS
    •   Examine college sports rights controlled by those networks
    •   Discuss whether any of these networks can challenge ESPN’s dominance
    •   Readings for these sessions: TBA
Sessions 21 and 22 (Nov 11 and 13): The Baylor Scandals. College Sports News:
The Conflict between Accuracy and Speed in Reporting, the Manti Te’o Reporting
Fiasco and the Need to Make News
       •    Discuss the recent scandal at Baylor involving sexual assault by football
            players and the action/inaction of the Baylor head coach and administration
            as well as the 2003 basketball scandal involving the murder of a player and
            the attempted cover-up by the head coach.
       •    Discuss events and reports surrounding the Manti Te’o girlfriend hoax
       •    Examine role of media in both perpetuating the hoax and failing to uncover
            it.
       •    Readings for these sessions: Sports Illustrated’s 5-part “Expose” on
            Oklahoma State University Athletics (2013)
Session 23 (Nov 18): NCAA Litigation and the Future of the NCAA
•   Examine issues arising from the O’Bannon and other lawsuits against the NCAA
    and the potential consequences for the NCAA and intercollegiate athletics of
    adverse rulings, including changes in the economic relationship between
    universities and student-athletes
•   Discuss current NCAA regulations regarding student-athlete compensation and
    issues raised by the Cam Newton, Aaron Pryor/Ohio State and Johnny Manziel
    investigations.
•   Discuss differences in the role and responsibilities of the student-athlete in
    universities that are members of power conferences as opposed to universities that
    are members of the mid-majors (or NCAA Divisions II and III) and whether there
    should be different sets of rules for student-athletes (e.g., compensation) depending
    upon their sport and/or university/conference affiliation.
•   Readings for these sessions: TBA
                                                                                        11


Session 24 (Nov 20): The ABC’s of Sports Television Production
           •   Discuss basics of how college sports events are produced for television
               and digital streaming, including equipment, personnel, facilities, budgets
               and the role of on-air and off-air talent.
               Readings for this session: TBA
Session 25 (Nov 25): Television: Is the Enormous Television Money in Major
College Athletics Healthy for Universities?
Print Media: Does it Still Have an Important Role in Covering College Sports?
           •   Discuss impact and pressure on student-athletes, particularly in
               “revenue sports” of football and men’s basketball
           •   Discuss whether big money athletics is in conflict with the non-profit
               educational mission of universities
           •   Examine role of print journalism covering college sports in today’s
               world
           •   Readings for theses sessions: USA Today: 1/15/2010 “Big-Time
               College Athletics: Are they Worth the Big-Time Costs? The
               Atlantic (magazine): October 11, 2011 “The Shame of College
               Sports”
   Session 26 (Dec 2): Title IX and Women’s Gender Equity Issues
                          Sports Talk Radio
           •   Examine Title IX issues as well as the role college sports media plays in
               covering women’s athletics
           •   Discuss pay equity for women’s coaches vs men’s coaches
           •   Examine influence and role of sports talk radio on student-athletes,
               coaches and administrators
           •   Readings for these sessions: TBA
   Session 27 (Dec 4): Course Wrap-up and Review for Dec 9 Exam
   Session 28 (Dec 9): Examination
                                                                                      12
