                                                                            Remoquillo 1!
         AMS 311/AAS 310 : Gendering Asian America
                                      MWF 1-2 pm
                                        BUR 436A
                             Instructor: Andi T. Remoquillo
                   Office: BUR 408. Hours: M/W 11:00 am -12:30 pm
                                   atremo@utexas.edu
Course Description:
In this course, students will study representations of gender and sexuality in Asian
America from the Chinese Exclusion Era to the 21st century. Students will be taught
how to study race and subject formation through an intersectional and transnational
feminist lens, thereby encouraging a more complex understanding of how race is al-
ways-already constituted by gender, sexuality, and class. For Asians in America, their
belongingness and struggles with inclusion/exclusion have been readily predicated on
racialized and gendered representations created by Euro-American discourses. This
course will (re)introduce students to key moments of Asian American history — span-
ning from Chinese Exclusion, Japanese internment camps, the dropping of the atomic
bombs, the Vietnam War, and more — while focusing on how these historical moments
were represented to the American public. The final unit of the course will focus on
contemporary representations of Asian America, and how Asian Americans today are
mobilizing socio-politically in and outside of popular culture.
Lastly, Gendering Asian America is conceptualized around the idea of home making/
remaking. As we travel through history and study the intersections of gender and
Asian American identity, we will also grapple over the ways in which “home” is imag-
ined, created, protected, maintained, and contested.
Writing Flag:
According to UT guidelines, courses with a Writing Flag must meet the three follow-
ing criteria:


                                                                              Remoquillo 2!
• Students must write regularly and complete writing projects of quality.
• Students must receive feedback from the instructor to help them improve, and they
  must be given an opportunity for at least one revision.
• Students’ writing must make u pat least one-third of their total grade.
For more information, visit: https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/writing
Learning Objectives
• Become familiar with interdisciplinary methods and scholarship, as well as using a
  feminist intersectional lens when studying U.S. history.
• Learn how to make an argument in your writing, and think critically while sharpen-
  ing your analytical skills. In other words, you will not be solely graded on your ability
  to regurgitate lecture, but also on how you synthesize your own thoughts.
• Become more comfortable with public speaking skills through class participation.
• Become familiar with introductory concepts of transnational feminism when study-
  ing racial formation in the U.S.
Rather than taking racial and gender representations at face value, I urge students to
ask: how does time, place, gender, and sexuality shape our understandings of Asians in
America? How have gender and sexuality been used as a means to marginalize Asians/
Asian Americans, and how have individuals themselves engaged with these concepts
as tools for subject formation and national belongingness? These are the questions
that frame Gender in Asian America, and will guide students as they deconstruct the his-
tory of making Asian America.
Readings, Analytical Responses, Blog Posts, and the Final Research Paper:
Readings:
        Each meeting is heavily organized around assigned readings, therefore it is es-
        sential that students come to class fully prepared for discussions — this entails
        doing the readings and brining in hard copies to class. I tried my best to
        choose readings that can be accessed electronically through the UT library.
        APIA Women will need to be purchased/borrowed, and all other readings are on
        Canvas. While there are no in-class exams, if I sense that students are not doing
        the readings then I will begin assessing your attendance through pop quizzes


                                                                             Remoquillo 3!
       on assigned readings. Therefore, it is in your best interest to do the readings,
       take notes, and come to class ready to have some engaging conversations!
Analytical Reading Responses:
       Students are expected to write three analytical reading responses and one final
       research paper. I will provide 5 opportunities to write a response — it’s up to
       you to decide when you’d like to write them. Responses are not simply sum-
       maries of the readings, but original analyses that discuss the readings in rela-
       tion to broader conversations on gender, sexuality, and Asian American identity
       formation. Responses are 3-5 double-spaced pages, and must be analyzing at
       least 2 of the readings from the current unit. For example, if you are writing a
       response for Unit 2, readings from Unit 1 are not permitted. Your responses
       must have: an original title, heading, numbered pages, proper citations, and a
       work cited page. Lastly, always proofread before turning in a final product.
       While I am always happy to answer questions regarding papers, I cannot read
       your papers before they are due. Therefore, in addition to utilizing my office
       hours, I heavily encourage students to use the UT Writing Center’s services.
       Appointments and helpful handouts can be accessed on their website: http://
       uwc.utexas.edu/.
       Revisions: you are allowed to revise and resubmit one analytical response pa-
       per. In order to do so, you must meet with me first about your paper so we can
       discuss my comments/edits made. Revisions must be submitted no later than
       one 1.5 weeks after papers are returned.
Attendance and Participation:
Attendance
       Each student is allowed two unexcused absences throughout the semester. If
       you have already used your unexcused absences, but have a family or personal
       emergency come up, please provide some sort of documentation.


                                                                                Remoquillo 4!
Participation
        In addition to attending class regularly, you will also be expected to participate
        during in-class discussions. This is a seminar course, which means I will spend
        little time lecturing the class material and instead work as a leader and facilita-
        tor for classroom discussions that are very much dependent on students’ active
        engagement.
        I understand that speaking in front of people you don’t know can be a little
        uncomfortable — particularly when it’s on material you may not be familiar
        with. However, engaging with others in the classroom is one of the most salient
        ways to succeeding in any seminar course. Seminar-style classrooms are also
        meant to facilitate a community style of intellectual growth. If you are con-
        cerned about your ability to speak up during class but would still like to remain
        in the course, come talk to me during my office hours so we can figure some-
        thing out.
Civility Code
While difference of opinion during certain topics is expected, the safety of everyone is
always the priority. Our classroom is a space that is meant for intellectual growth,
which can often times be difficult when we aren’t used to the material, or feel at odds
with it. However, I assure you that being critically engaged and open as possible can
only benefit you in this course. With that being said, if you ever feel uncomfortable I
urge you to let me know ASAP, either in class or during my office hours. While I al-
ways try my best to pay attention to the dynamics of a classroom and to take care of
the safety and well-being of each of your, it’s likely that I’ll miss a few things in a class
this large. Lastly, in accordance to UT policy, please ask me about my policy regarding
armaments in my office.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability that requires academic accommodations
should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) through the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement at: 471-6259 (voice), or 471-4641 (TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter


                                                                               Remoquillo 5!
outlining authorized accommodations. Please submit this official letter to me within
the first two weeks of class. If you require testing onsite at the SSD office, you will
need to fill out an SSD Test Reservation Form at least 10 business days before each
exam. You will need to provide me with the Instructor Portion of the form, as well. For
more information regarding onsite testing at SSD, please see:
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/adaptive-testing/ (Links to an external site.) Links to
an external site.
Grading
Attendance & Participation: 20%
Response Papers (3): 10% (30% overall)
Proposal and Bibliography: 20%
Final Paper: 30%
Required Texts:
• Asian/Pacific Islander Women: A Historical Anthology Edited by Shirley Hune and Gail
  M. Nomura (one copy on reserve at PCL)
• Pratt, Geraldine; Families Apart: Migrant Mothers and the Conflicts of Labor and Love.
  Electronic copy available at UT library.
                                       SCHEDULE
                              *schedule is subject to change*
             Unit 1: Exclusionary Politics and The Making of Asian America
Week 1: Intro to Course
8/28: Syllabus day and intro to course.
8/30: Read intro from Said’s Orientalism (Canvas)
Week 2: Combining Gender Studies and Asian American Studies
9/2: Labor Day — no class.
9/4: Read intro from Gary Okihiro’s Margins and Mainstreams [electronic copy at UT
library] and ch. 2 “Unlearning Orientalism” from APAI Women


                                                                                 Remoquillo 6!
9/6: Read Espiritu’s article, “Race, Gender, Class in the Lives of Asian Americans” and
chapter from Yuval-Davis’ Gender and Nation (Canvas). Lecture and discussion on fem-
inist interventions into Asian American Studies.
Week 3: Yellow Peril & Chinese Exclusion
9/9: Read “Fearing Yellow, imagining white: media analysis of the Chinese Exclusion
Act of 1882” by Sang Hea Kil (Canvas).
9/11: Ch. 4 ”Chinese Women during the Chinese Exclusion” from AIPA Women.
9/13: Read “Asian Women in Hawaii: Migration, Family, Work, and Identity” by Carol C.
Fan (Canvas). First analytical response opportunity due Friday in Class.
Week 4: Spatializing Race, Gender, and Vice
9/16: Read intro and first chapter of Chinatown Trunk Mystery (Canvas).
9/18: Read Ch. 9 “‘Ministering Angel of Chinatown’ Missionary Uplift, Modern Medi-
cine, and Asian American Women’s Strategies of Liminality” from APIA Women.
9/20: Read “Inside the Story of America’s 19th-Century Opiate Addiction” by Erick
Trickey https://www.smithsonianmag.com/history/inside-story-americas-19th-century-opiate-
addiction-180967673/ and “Opium Dens Are a Terrible Theme for Bars” by Linda Poon
https://www.citylab.com/life/2017/05/the-opium-dens-of-chinatown/528108/
Week 5: Masculinity and the Rise of Imperialism
9/23: Read ch. 1 “Remaking Manhood through Race and ‘Civilization’ from Manliness
and Civilization: A Cultural History of Gender and Race in the United States, 1880-1917 by
Gail Bederman [electronic copy at UT library].
9/25: Read “Sexuality, Medicine, and Imperialism” from Briggs’ Reproducing Empire
9/27: Read “The Filipino Woman” by Carmen Guerrero Nakpil (Canvas)
                      Unit 2: Home, War, and Imagining the Other
Week 6: Reconceptualizing Homemaking and Domesticity
9/30: Read ch. 5 “Race, Ethnic Culture, and Gender in the Construction of Identities
among Second-Generation Chinese Americans” from Claiming America by Kevin Scott
Wong & Sucheng Chan [electronic copy of book UT library].
10/2: Read ch. 5 “Housewives, Men’s Villages, and Sexual Respectability” and ch. 6
“Redefining Traditional Gender Roles” from APIA Women. Second analytical response
opportunity due Friday in Class.


                                                                           Remoquillo 7!
10/4: Read ch. 3 “What Happened to the Women? Chinese and Indian Male Migration
to the US in a Global Perspective” from APIA Women.
Week 7: South Asian Immigrants pre-1950s US
10/7: Read Introduction and selected chapter from Bengali Harlem and the Lost Histories
of South Asian America [electronic copy found at UT library]
10/9: Read “Rural Dependency and Intimate Tensions” from Stranger Intimacy by
Nayan Shah (Canvas)
10/11: Read ch. 21 “Opening Spaces: South Asian American Women Leaders in the
Late 20th Century” from APIA Women.
Week 8: Orientalism, World War Two, and the Atomic Age
10/14: Read chapters 1 and 5 from War Without Mercy by John W. Dower [electronic
copy @ UT library]
10/16: Read chapter from Hiroshima in America By Robert J. Lifton (Canvas).
10/18: Read newspaper article on War Brides and “Like a Bamboo: Representations of
a Japanese War Bride” by Debbie Storrs(Canvas). Watch Fall Seven Times, Get Up Eight
in class.
Week 9: Cold War Orientalism
10/21: Read intro and ch. 4 “Family Ties as Political Obligation" from Cold War Orien-
talism by Christina Klein [electronic copy at UT library].
10/23: Read ch. 11 “Contested Beauty” from APA Women; other reading tbd.
10/25: Schedule TBD Third analytical response opportunity due Friday in Class.
Week 10: The War in Vietnam and the Model Minority
10/28: Intro and chapter from Body Counts: The War in Vietnam and Militarized Refuge(es)
by Yen Le Espiritu (Canvas).
10/30: Read “From Yellow Peril to Model Minority: Perceived Threat by Asian Ameri-
cans in Employment” by Jenny Nguyen et al. and “From Forever Foreigners to Model
Minority: Asian American Men in Sports” by Yomee Lee (Canvas).
11/1: Schedule TBD


                                                                              Remoquillo 8!
          Unit 3: Rethinking the Connections Between Home and Movement
*Week 11: American Studies Association — Conference Week*
11/4: ASA - schedule TBD; read Families Apart: Migrant Mothers and the Conflicts of La-
bor and Love by Geraldine Pratt [electronic copy at UT library].
11/6: ASA — schedule TBD; cont. reading Families Apart.
11/8: ASA — schedule TBD; cont. reading Families Apart.
Week 12: Domestic Workers and Tourism in the age of Globalization
11/11: Read chapter from Gonzalez’s Securing Paradise: Tourism and Militarism in Hawai’i
and the Philippines [electronic copy at UT library] and “America’s longtime foreign poli-
cy in Asia: booze, prostitutes, and bribes” from The Washington Post: https://www.wash-
ingtonpost.com/news/made-by-history/wp/2018/02/15/americas-longtime-foreign-policy-in-
asia-booze-prostitutes-and-bribes/?noredirect=on
11/13: Video in class; cont. reading Families Apart.
11/15: Have Families Apart Complete by Today. Fourth analytical response opportunity due
Friday in Class.
Week 13: Gendering Critical Refugee Studies
11/18: Read introduction and Ch. 1 from Unsettled: Cambodian Refugees in the New York
City Hyperghetto [electronic copy at UT library]
11/20: Read ch. 2 “Housed in the Hyperghetto” from Unsettled.
11/22: Read ch. 15 “Scarred Yet Undefeated: Hmong and Cambodian Women and
Girls in the US” from APAI Women and selected online articles on work and industry
of SE Asian refugee women.
Week 14: Planning for Final Paper
11/25: Proposal for final paper due with rough bibliography. Bring in hard copies to
class and prepare to discuss in groups.
11/27-29: Thanksgiving Break — no class.
Week 15: Asian-Americans in Pop Culture Today
12/2: Discussion on representation; read introduction to The Hypersexuality of Race:
Performing Asian-/American Femininity on Screen and Scene by Celine Parreñas Shimizu
(Canvas).


                                                                              Remoquillo 9!
12/4: Read “Bound by Expectation: The Racialized Sexuality of Porn Star Keni Styles”
by Celine Parreñas Shimizu (Canvas) and “Jeremy Lin says racist remarks he hear from
opponents were worse in NCAA than NBA” from ESPN: https://www.espn.com/nba/sto-
ry/_/id/19353394/jeremy-lin-brooklyn-nets-says-heard-racist-remarks-more-frequently-college-
nba.
12/6: Read “Dogmeat” chapter from Dubious Gastronomy (Canvas) by Robert Gi-Sung
Ku and watch Episode of Huang’s World. Final analytical response opportunity due Friday
in Class.
12/9: Final papers due on Canvas.
