                                              Title: Experimental Storytelling
                                              Location: CMA 3.114
                                              Professor Erin Reilly
                                              Phone: 207-251-1617
                                              Email: ebreilly@utexas.edu
                                              Spring 2019
                                              Office Hours: T 2-3 / TH 11:30-12:30
                                              Office Location: BMC 5.306
                                              Demo Location: CMA 6.154
Course Description
As the media landscape becomes populated with more and more screens—from television and computer
screens to mobile displays, but also virtual reality headsets, other wearable devices, and a rapidly growing
Internet of Things—we have quite literally a whole world of possibilities for creating experimental
storytelling experiences. These technologies offer unique potential for creating new and different kinds of
experiences, including ones that respond with increasing precision to people’s behavior and input. So how
might these screens (and the ecosystem within which they function) change the stories we share, but also
how we share them? What might be the next step beyond the screen?
This course aims to introduce students to experimental storytelling that explores our senses, the physical
and virtual world to create an immersive story experience. Using design thinking and human computer
interaction, students will ideate, synthesize concepts, create user scenarios based on the story’s audience
and develop a POC (proof of concept) for feedback and entry into becoming new creators.
Recommended Texts
     •    Andrea Phillips, A Creator’s Guide to Transmedia Storytelling (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2012)
     •    Matt Madden, 99 Ways to Tell a Story (London: Penguin Books, Ltd, 2005)
     •    Don Norman, Design of Every Day Things (New York: Basic Books, 2013)
     •    Charlie Fink, Metaverse - an AR enabled guide to AR & VR (USA: Cool Blue Media, 2018)
I may periodically post additional required readings to the class website at Canvas. These readings will be
short articles in mainstream publications, such as newspapers and magazines, that help shed contemporary
light on issues discussed in this course.
Required Device
     •    Mobile SMART phone, Computer and ability to record, edit and publish photos and videos.
Course Learning Outcomes
     ●    Expose students to new affordances of emerging media.
     ●    Introduce students to different models of storytelling
     ●    Encourage students to test out multiple forms of storytelling through their mobile device and
          computer.


Course Schedule: A Weekly Breakdown
 Week     Topics/Daily Activities         Readings, Viewings &         Deliverable/ Due Dates
                                               Homework
  1    1/22: Introduction            Homework:
                                       • Social Media Experiment -
                                         @48moods | THEME: Who
                                         Am I?
                                       • Review 99 Ways to Tell a
                                         Story
                                       • Bring in your favorite
                                         children’s story
       1/24: What is Storytelling?   Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
        • Activity: Story Generator   • Social Media Experiment -   @48moods | THEME: Who
        • Introduce Project #1:          @48moods | THEME: Your     Am I?
          Screenlife (Solo Project)      Emotion
                                      • Story Generator for Project
                                         #1
  2    1/29: Defining Character      Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
                                      • Social Media Experiment -   @48moods | THEME: Your
                                         @48moods | THEME:          Emotion
                                         Character
                                      • Watch What is Screenlife?
                                      • Share 1 example of a
                                         Screenlife film to the
                                         discussion.
       1/31: Designing Character     Homework:                      Story Generator for Project
        • Review Story Generator      • Social Media Experiment -   #1: Screenlife
          for Project #1: Screenlife     @48moods | THEME:
                                         Stimulate a Sense of       Social Media Experiment -
                                         Wonder                     @48moods | THEME:
                                                                    Character
  3    2/5: Enter the Story          Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
                                      • Social Media Experiment -   @48moods | THEME:
                                         @48moods | THEME:          Stimulate a Sense of Wonder
                                         Human Touch
       2/7: Guest Lecture            Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
        • Geoffrey Long, What is      • Social Media Experiment -   @48moods | THEME:
          Transmedia Storytelling?       @48moods | THEME: An       Human Touch
                                         Environment
  4    2/12: Leveraging              Homework:                      DUE - Project #1:
       Affordances                    • Social Media Experiment -   Screenlife – Post Film to
                                         @48moods | THEME: A        Canvas


                                    Soundscape
                                • Watch Screenlife videos.      Social Media Experiment -
                                • Critique 3 peer projects      @48moods | THEME: An
                                    with rubric.                Environment
  2/14: Sandbox Demos!         Homework:                        Social Media Experiment -
  @CMA 6.154                   Social Media Experiment -        @48moods | THEME: A
   • Review a variety of       @48moods | THEME: One of         Soundscape
     applications to use       the 5 Senses
   • Introduce Project #2:
     Keep Austin Weird
     (Teams of 2)
5 2/19: New Screens            Homework:                        Social Media Experiment -
   • Guest WORKSHOP: Rick      Social Media Experiment -        @48moods | THEME: One of
     Harmon, The Story of      @48moods | THEME: A              the 5 Senses
     Water                     Reaction
  2/21: Sandbox Demos!         Homework:                        Social Media Experiment -
  @CMA 6.154                   Social Media Experiment -        @48moods | THEME: A
                               @48moods | THEME: A              Reaction
                               Connection
6 2/26: Sandbox Demos!         Homework:                        Social Media Experiment -
   • Possible 3Data activity / Social Media Experiment -        @48moods | THEME: A
     workshop                  @48moods | Unwanted              Connection
                               Solicitation
                                                                Social Media Experiment -
  2/28: Sandbox Demos!         Homework:                        @48moods | THEME:
  @CMA 6.154                   Social Media Experiment -        Unwanted Solicitation
                               @48moods | Something left
                               unfinished
7 3/5: The Next Screen         Homework:                        Social Media Experiment -
                               Social Media Experiment -        @48moods | THEME:
                               @48moods | Agency                Something left unfinished
  3/7: Guest Lecture           Homework:                        Social Media Experiment -
   • Brent Friedman &          Social Media Experiment -        @48moods | THEME:
     Francesca Marie Smith,    @48moods | A Behavior            Agency
     Location-based
     Storytelling
8 3/12: Guest Workshop         Homework:                        Social Media Experiment -
   • John Gaunt, Autonomous    Social Media Experiment -        @48moods | THEME: A
     Vehicles & Storytelling   @48moods | Sense of Place        Behavior
  3/14: Sandbox Demos!         Wrap up Project #2! Enjoy        Social Media Experiment -
  @CMA 6.154                   your Spring Break! (3/17-3/23)   @48moods | THEME: Sense
                                                                of Place
                                                           Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 3 of 4


 9 3/26: Tangible Storytelling  Homework:                      DUE - Project #2: Keep
                                Social Media Experiment -      Austin Weird – Post link
                                @48moods | A Memory            for all to access experience
                                                               to Canvas
   3/28: Guest Lecture          Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
    • Chat with David Weiss &   Social Media Experiment -      @48moods | THEME: A
      Mike Swinney              @48moods | Nostalgia           Memory
    • Introduce Final Project:
      The Nexus
   3/30: San Antonio Field Trip
   Experience Alamo "Battle for
   Texas"
10 4/2: No Class due to Field   Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
   Trip on 3/30                 Social Media Experiment -      @48moods | THEME:
                                @48moods | A look to the       Nostalgia
                                future
   4/4: Pre-Production
    • Conduct Market Research   Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
                                Social Media Experiment -      @48moods | THEME: A look
                                @48moods | Something           to the future
                                abstract
11 4/9: Pre-Production          Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
    • Lightning Rounds          Social Media Experiment -      @48moods | THEME:
    • Narrow in on Concept      @48moods | The Humor in…       Something abstract
      Designs
   4/11: Pre-Production         Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
    • Short Design Bursts of    Social Media Experiment -      @48moods | THEME: The
      Mind Mapping & Crazy      @48moods | Underground         Humor in…
      Eights
12 4/16: Pre-Production         Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
    • Technical Review          Social Media Experiment -      @48moods | THEME:
                                @48moods | Mainstream          Underground
   4/18: Pre-Production         Homework:
    • Review User Experience    Social Media Experiment -      Social Media Experiment -
                                @48moods | The Unexpected      @48moods | THEME:
                                                               Mainstream
13 4/23: Production             Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
                                Social Media Experiment -      @48moods | THEME: The
                                @48moods | Unexplained         Unexpected
   4/25: Production             Homework:                      Social Media Experiment -
                                                          Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 4 of 4


                                          Social Media Experiment -           @48moods | THEME:
                                          @48moods | The Best of Me           Unexplained
  14    4/30: Production                  Homework:                           Social Media Experiment -
                                          Social Media Experiment -           @48moods | THEME: The
                                          @48moods | Tribe                    Best of Me
        5/1: Production                   Homework:                           Social Media Experiment -
                                          Social Media Experiment -           @48moods | THEME: Tribe
                                          @48moods | In Motion (no
                                          wheels)
  15    5/7: Final Project                Homework:                           1-6 Teams - Final Projects
        Presentations                     Social Media Experiment -           DUE! (10 minutes each MAX)
                                          @48moods | Lost
                                                                              Social Media Experiment -
                                                                              @48moods | THEME: In
                                                                              Motion (no wheels)
        5/9: Final Project                Homework:                           7-12 Teams - Final Projects
        Presentations                     Social Media Experiment -           DUE!
                                          @48moods | The End                  (10 minutes each MAX)
                                                                              Social Media Experiment -
                                                                              @48moods | THEME: Lost
Assignments
   1. Social Media Experiment - @48moods | 25%
      In numerology the number 48 resonates with creative expression, so nothing better than having a
      class of 48 students in Experimental Storytelling develop a collective story together. Stories are
      complex, yet simple; participatory, yet controlled; and unequivocally are visceral, can trigger
      behavior and over time are reflective of our individual agency, our shared moment in time and the
      culture that we live in. Using 99 Ways to Tell a Story as inspiration, your goal with each assignment
      is to compose an original photo and haiku that best represents your personal take on the theme
      proposed, then post it to @48moods on Instagram.
      Haiku is a traditional form of Japanese poetry. Haiku poems consist of 3 lines. The first and last
      lines of a Haiku have 5 syllables and the middle line has 7 syllables. The lines rarely rhyme. Many
      people consider Haikus as unfinished poems, a poem that the reader finishes in his or her mind.
      Often keeping a journal is encouraged in creative classes, a place to write down ideas, draw
      images, and jot down potential projects. In a digital-first world, my choice for using @48moods as
      a form of journaling is for you to learn to get a nugget of a story idea down quickly, to practice
      being creative “in public” – giving way to better understanding how to pitch an idea in its simplest
      form and have a chance for public to react immediately.
      Over the course of the semester, sharing and commenting on each other’s work… the posts that
      evoke a visceral, behavioral or reflective moment for you individually is encouraged. Be ready to
                                                                         Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 5 of 4


   share your comments on your own work as well as your peers… students will randomly be called
   on each class to reflect on @48moods. For examples, see @erinbreilly.
2. Solo Project - Screenlife | 15%
   Screenlife is a new format of filmmaking and is a format that can tell the viewer a lot about who
   you are. You’ll begin by watching an example of a Screenlife film, such as Unfriended or Searching
   and post a review and what you’ve learned about this new genre to the discussion board. Then,
   using the Story Generator, you’ll develop your own overall concept for a solo 2 minute film.
   You’ll have two weeks to create and post your Screenlife film to Canvas. You can use tools like
   Screenlife’s Recorder or feel free to choose other screen capturing tools and “fix it in post” if you
   choose to go that route. Make sure to strongly define your character and use the different
   techniques learned in class to generate a story that effectively uses the format of a computer
   screen, mobile device or other, such as an augmented reality application.
   Your project will be graded on an original theme, use of at least 2 different platforms to shape
   the plot, use of character, action and a deep understanding of emotion and screen behavior to
   help shape the story.
3. Teams of 2 Project - Keep Austin Weird | 15%
   In 2000, Wassenich phoned into KOOP Radio's The Lounge Show to donate money. When the radio
   host asked why he was contributing, Wassenich replied, "I don't know. It helps keep Austin weird."
   With that reply, a slogan was born, and Austin's international reputation for being weird, zany, and
   slightly off-kilter was established. Keep Austin Weird has grown not only in notoriety but has
   become the core ethos of Austinites to “buy local” and weird attractions only limited by one’s
   imagination such as Chicken Shit Bingo at Ginny's Little Longhorn Saloon or the Museum of the
   Weird. With this in mind, teams of 2 will identify a location, shape a story and share the funk that
   helps Austin stay weird.
   Your team will have X weeks to create this location-based story and post directions and a link to
   Canvas for others to access. There are multiple tools and we will spend some time during the
   production weeks to review these tools and others. Make sure your location-based experience is
   shaped around story, and not just use of a location-based mobile application to deliver a service.
   Using Google Maps as example, I’m not interested in google maps that offer detailed location
   information (Austin Media Scene) and more interested in the use of a google map to shape story
   (Google Earth Lit Trips).
   Your project will be graded on an original location (no 2 teams can do the same location), use
   of location-based story application, use of character, action and a deep understanding of
   emotion to help shape the story.
4. Final Project: The Nexus | 25%
        Nexus:
             • a means of connection; tie; link.
             • a connected series or group.
             • the core or center, as of a matter or situation.
   We communicate to connect with other human beings. We communicate to express our feelings
   or to share a story. We communicate to create a better world. Throughout our existence, humans
   have developed new ways to communicate from grunts and groans to language to the printing
   press and the internet. Every day students and faculty at Moody are discovering new ways to
   communicate, new ways to make the human experience better. This new attraction designed into
   the plaza creates an immersive interactive and compelling experience that not only showcases the
                                                                    Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 6 of 4


   people and work being done at Moody but gives visitors a chance to interact with these stories and
   be inspired to find innovative ways to communicate to make their future, and everyone's better.
   The Moody School of Communication is looking to re-energize the plaza at the center of their
   facilities on campus. This plaza has always been a gathering place for students and now it will
   become a true destination, a place where students, faculty and visitors can celebrate the work
   being done at Moody as well as interact with the history of human communication itself. The
   Nexus is a place to celebrate this, a place for people to gather, a place for people to experience this
   innovative thinking first hand. In a world where we are more digitally connected than ever,
   personal communication has receded. This new tech terrarium is a place for students, faculty and
   the public to reconnect with each other, through the physical space and the technology in their
   hands.
   The goal of the Final Project is to fill the Plaza with a variety of activities and displays as well as
   quiet places for students to gather and work. Visitors can flow easily from one area to the next,
   exploring all the plaza has to offer. It also offers a new place of learning to extend the more
   traditional classroom into a learning lab of the future. Throughout the plaza, visitors find several
   interactive displays set up all based on the history of communication.
   Student teams (team of 3 to 5 students each) will work as a production crew to develop one of
   many experience zones for The Nexus by developing an interactive story experience. Teams will
   choose one of the emerging mediums to design and develop a portfolio piece reflective of the
   discussions and understanding of exploring experimental storytelling. Teams will use Slack as
   means to collaborate on a production and show works in progress, teams will ideate, conduct
   market research, design look and feel, create assets, build proof of concept to get across to
   audience in a pitch an overview of the experience. This will be a working prototype.
5. Demos @CMA 6.154 | 10%
   The best way to understand the future of storytelling is to experience it; to immerse yourself.
   Starting Week 4 through the rest of the semester, we will use CMA 6.154 as a lab to try out a
   curated list of experiences. Each of you will be responsible to coordinate with the TA to arrange a
   time for you to demo.
6. Activities / Discussions | 10%
   Weekly activities and discussions in the classroom as well as on canvas will be graded with a pass
   or fail. This means, you participated and completed the work – pass; you didn’t -- fail. These
   activities and discussions are some of the most valuable and interactive aspects of our course and
   offers us an opportunity to share diverse insights, reflect and collaborate on the course concepts.
   This is an outlet for exploratory learning and expressing ideas and perspectives beyond the
   projects.
   Please note that all activities, discussions and online posts should contribute something
   meaningful to the content at hand. Each should demonstrate your understanding of, and reflection
   on, the concept(s) while building on the ideas of other students and/or digging deeper into the
   prompt offered by the professor.
   In online discussions, you should avoid posts that merely compliment (e.g. "Interesting post...") or
   support (e.g. "I agree with you...") another student's work. You will not be given credit for posts
   that do not meaningfully contribute to the discussion or expand the conversation, as determined
   by the instructor’s assessment.
                                                                         Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 7 of 4


Grades
 The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree
 to which you have done so.
 Assignments                                           Points possible              Percent of Total Grade
  1. Social Media Experiment - @48moods                            140                           25
  2. Solo Project - Screenlife                                     15                            15
  3. Teams of 2 Project - Keep Austin Weird                        15                            15
  4. Final Project                                                 25                            25
  5. Demos @CMA 6.154                                               5                            10
  6. Activities / Discussions                                      15                            10
  7. Extra Credit – Sign Up to Attend Imagine                       2                          Extra
     Moody MeetUp & Write Medium Blog Post
     (Monday 4-5pm BMC 3.206)
                                                                   215                         100%
Each student should keep track of his/her own grades. There are a total of 215 points possible in this
course, and grades will be based on the following:
     •    One Social Media Experiment - @48moods for 28 individual posts worth 5 points (similar to a 5
          star rating) each for a total of 140 points.
     •    Two projects (one solo and one with a partner) evenly weighted at 15 points each.
     •    Participation in class and online consisting of 5 demo days and 15 weekly activities/discussions for
          a total of 20 points.
     •    A final project worth 25 points.
Classroom Expectations
 Class attendance
 Attendance is required at all class, presentation, client and team meetings. We may also have a significant
 number of meetings that are off site and/or outside the scheduled class time. There will be no excused
 absences. Failure to attend any of these meetings will affect your grade and could reduce your final grade
 by as much as two letter grades. Attendance means showing up to the class or meeting on time. Habitual
 lateness will affect your grade.
 Class participation
 Teamwork: This course is primarily structured around teamwork. You will self-assign yourself to a pair and
 a group, and the bulk of your work in the course will be carried out and evaluated based on these teams.
 Teams will consist of varying personalities, skills and interests and you must find a way to manage these
 differences. The ability to cooperate, to communicate and to work effectively is essential to creating
 successful strategies and creative briefs, both in this class and in the real world. Once students have been
 assigned to teams, I will not adjust the membership of these teams. Although I don’t anticipate any
 problems, if issues do arise I expect you to resolve them yourselves, just as you would in a real-world job
 situation.
 Deadlines: This class simulates the real world, and in the real world, deadlines are non-negotiable. All
 assignments must be handed in on time. Late assignments or projects will not be accepted and you will not
 earn any points (i.e. you will receive a grade of 0) for that assignment. The usual litany of excuses (I slept
 through my alarm, I missed the bus, I have a cold, my grandmother died) won’t work. In the real world,
 failure to meet a deadline could result in you losing your job. Now is the time to practice time
 management and adherence to deadlines.
                                                                            Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 8 of 4


Time management: This course is very demanding on your time. Your teammates in this class will judge
you on how much, and the quality of, work you contribute to your class project. Do not lose track of what
is most important.
Communication: The primary way I will communicate with you outside of class is through canvas. You are
responsible for making sure you get any messages from me and you are responsible for the content of
those announcements. I may notify you via canvas about a change in meeting times or assignment
deadlines. Failure to check your canvas does not excuse you from meeting the responsibilities outlined in
the message. At a minimum, you should check your canvas once every day.
Plagiarism: Everything you produce in this class must be your original work. If you have help from anyone
outside this class it will be considered a breach of UT’s policy on Scholastic Integrity and will be dealt with
accordingly.
                                               Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through
UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would
like.
Grading Policies
Weekly meetings and participation – LAB time:
We will not meet during every scheduled class time. Instead, LAB time will consist of you meeting in your
groups or out in the field workshopping the different methods or projects assigned. Your attendance,
attitude, contribution and participation in these meetings and in the field will be assessed and will
contribute to your final grade.
Attendance and Professionalism
Attendance at all classes and meetings is required. It is also assumed that students will be active
participants in class. Simply being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be engaged and
involved scholars. Participation – not just attendance – is integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to
you earning a high grade. Active participation means contributing to the discussion, listening to what your
colleagues have to say and engaging with the readings and in-class activities. It means showing up on time,
not checking Facebook or email on your computer, not texting on your phone. NOTE that if you do not
participate in class discussions, you will not earn full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
Peer Evaluations
You will be asked to provide an assessment of your and your teammates' contributions to the
Final project. They will be taken into account in final assignment of grades.
Grading System:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s provost office
(http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/). Advertising and PR majors are required to have a
                                                                           Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 9 of 4


 minimum grade of C in all communication courses and in all required and elective courses in order to
 continue in the program.
NOTES on Grading:
     • Late work is not accepted.
     • I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6% that translates into
        a B+ and will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
     • Any questions or comments about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7) days after
        the grade is announced or posted.
     • When I grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the
        work and the accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100
        points and then lose them based on mistakes you make. Your final points represent the total
        points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
Absences
 The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating
 circumstances due to an emergency. You will be given attendance/participation credit for any session that
 you miss that is documented to the teaching team in writing by a medical doctor’s statement, or an official
 statement from a UT faculty member about an ensemble or other organization’s off-campus commitment.
 NO OTHER ABSENCES WILL BE EXCUSED.
                                 Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •  You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •  You have a right to respect.
     •  You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •  You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •  You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •  You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
        learning environment.
     •  You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
        isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
        teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. •
        Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
        and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
        excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
        these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                                                        Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 10 of 4


Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender
pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate
changes to my records.
                                              University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use
words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your
sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action,
including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and
the       University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
                                                                            Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 11 of 4


If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                      Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t
feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
      1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
      2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
           become involved in a Title IX investigation.
      3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing,
discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX
related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
      •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
           week of class.
      •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
                                                                           Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 12 of 4


          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
•      Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
  at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                         Syllabus for COURSE-ID, Page 13 of 4
