Concert & Event Lighting / Smith                                                         Spring 2019
                                                   Spring 2019
                           AET 348: Concert & Event Lighting – Unique # 20755
                           TD 354T: Concert & Event Lighting – Unique # 25810
                                      Tuesday 2:00pm – 5:00pm PAC 3.204
Instructors:    Matthew R. Smith
                Chris Muenchow
Office Hours: by appointment
Email: matt.smith@austin.utexas.edu
        chris.muenchow@highend.com
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course is a lecture / lab course designed to teach students advanced lighting programming
techniques utilized for concert and event design.
LEARNING OUTCOMES:
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
• create and implement original design ideas;
• apply principles and elements of design;
• effectively troubleshoot a lighting control network;
• critically examine lighting techniques
COURSE MATERIALS:
•   8GB maximum USB drive
•   Pencil
•   notebook (small or medium in size, easily accessible for notetaking)
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
•   Project 1 (25%):   Previsualization Workflow – “Console Mechanics”
•   Project 2 (5%):    EVOLUTION Preliminary Design Proposal
•   Project 3 (25%):   Designer / Programmer – “Event Lighting”
•   Project 4 (5%):    EVOLUTION Final Design Presentation
•   Project 5 (25%):   Timecode Concert Design – “Concert Lighting”
•   Project 6 (15%):   EVOLUTION – “Dance Lighting”
RESOURCES
PLAI Lab Hours:
Monday – Friday: 5:00pm – 10:00pm
Saturday:           8:00am – 12:00pm
reference online:
www.highend.com


Concert & Event Lighting / Smith                                                            Spring 2019
ATTENDANCE
Attendance is critical in the professional world and in this class. Please do your best to come to class
on time and ready to learn. You are allowed up to two absences during the semester. Beginning with
your third absence, excused or unexcused, your final course grade will be reduced by 5%. Also, two
late arrivals (more than 5 minutes late) are equal to one absence. I highly recommend that you attend
each and every class session. Arrangements for assignments missed due to an absence must be arranged
with the instructor prior to the absence.
If you submit your assignment late it will not be reviewed in class.
All work is due as specified in the assignment listed on canvas. Work not completed prior to the
canvas deadline will be considered late.
Any work turned in late, regardless of the excuse, will result in a grade reduction of one full letter for
each calendar date it is late (an A would become a B and so on).
In summary:
Every assignment has a due date and time.
I do accept work after that, however, assignments automatically lose one full grade for every
day they are submitted late and they will not be reviewed in class.
 Any work turned in more than 4 calendar days late will receive an automatic F. If you are having
difficulty completing your work on time, please speak to me privately so that I can work out an
arrangement with you.
                  All graded assignments will be returned within 7 days of submission date.
Grading Scheme
A- Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work must be completed
on time and with a very high quality of demonstrated skill and technique. There is an evidence of
significant development across all dimensions of learning. The result at this level demonstrates activity
that goes significantly beyond the required course work in one or more areas.
B- Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work must be completed on
time with consistently high quality in course work. There is an evidence of marked development
across all dimensions of learning.
C- Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with generally
good quality in course work. There is evidence of some development across all dimensions of
learning.
D- Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work completed,
with inconsistent quality in course work. The evidence of development across all dimensions of
learning is unclear.
F- Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned work completed,
or very low quality in course work. Development evidence is not available.
Please Note: If you are concerned about your grade – check in with us regularly so that we can
determine where you’re at, and what might need to be done to correct any problems. Do not wait
until the end of the semester!
Please refer to Canvas to view your grades.
                                               Page 2


Concert & Event Lighting / Smith                                                             Spring 2019
Attendance
ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Being a professional requires a habit of discipline and rigor.
Professionals in the arts achieve at the highest level when they work with determination and
dedication to detail. Your attention to attendance and lecture information gathering is an important
element of establishing professional standards and practices. The course lectures and discussions will
involve a significant amount of information that will not be available in any other form (textbook,
handouts); therefore, regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of the class.
If you need to miss class for legitimate reasons it is your responsibility to contact me directly with this
information. Sending a message by way of another student of an impending absence does not
constitute a legitimate notification.
For each absence beyond your first two, your final grade will be lowered by 5%. If you reach
four absences during the semester your final letter grade will be reduced by one full letter. (an
A would become a B and so on). Ten absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
Please be on time for class. If you are more than 5 minutes late for class you will be counted as
tardy. Every two times you are tardy will be counted as one time absent. If you are tardy for every
class session you will automatically fail the class.
Privacy
What we say about each other’s work during this class should remain constructive and in the
classroom. It will not be published in a blog or on any other personal websites, tweeted or posted on
social networks.
CLASS CALENDAR
Instructor reserves the right to adjust the calendar to fit the needs of the class.
Week 1: Matt Smith
 Tues: January 22nd
 -Introduction
 -Syllabus overview
 -PAC 3.204 tour & information
Week 2: Matt Smith
 Tues: January 29th
  -Technical concepts (DMX addressing, power distribution W=VA, rigging)
 -Show & Tell lighting hardware
 -Discussion over common installation issues
 -Hog platform overview (show file management: show file vs backup file) (tracking vs cue only)
 -Introduction to LightConverse (connectivity, editor, visualization)
 -Introduction to pixel mapping and plots within the Hog platform
Week 3: Matt Smith
 Tues: February 5th
 -Design Concepts (principles & elements of design)
 -Pixel mapping & plots continued
 -Utilizing directories to ensure easy updates (touring productions for example)
                                              Page 3


Concert & Event Lighting / Smith                                                     Spring 2019
Week 4: Matt Smith
 Tues: February 12th
 -*DUE – Lighting Examples for in-class discussion (principles & elements of design)
 -Lighting scenery
 -Working with projections and LED arrays
 -EXAMPLE SHOWN: Project 1 – Matt Smith
Week 5: Matt Smith
 Tues: February 19th
 -*DUE – Project 1 – Previsualization Workflow, in-class presentations
 -Payne AET Event discussion & express concerns
Week 6: Lab Day
 Tues: February 26th
 -Matt Smith & Chris Muenchow out of town
 -In-class work day
 -*DUE – EVOLUTION – self-assigned teams
Week 7: Matt Smith
 Tues: March 5th
 -EXAMPLE SHOWN: Project 2 – Matt Smith
 -In-class work day
Week 8: Matt Smith
 Tues: March 12th
 -*DUE – EVOLUTION, Preliminary Design Proposal, in-class presentations
Week 9:
 Tues: March 19th
 -SPRING BREAK – NO CLASS
Week 10: Chris Muenchow
 Tues: March 26th
 -Theatrical vs concert lighting: cut and wash, etc.
 -Lighting the air, beam fx
 -Basic concepts for lighting music and moments
 -Follow spot communication
 -Reaper software introduction
Week 11: Chris Muenchow
 Tues: April 2nd
 -EXAMPLE SHOWN: Project 3 – Chris Muenchow
 -Networking: Hog – PC – OSC - MIDI
 -Using timecode to playback a cuelist: storing timecode and playing it back
 -Using Midi / OSC to trigger cues remotely
 -Overview of LTP concepts
 -Review of covered concepts
                                           Page 4


Concert & Event Lighting / Smith                                                           Spring 2019
Week 12: Chris Muenchow
 Tues: April 9th
 -Design Concepts Q & A
 -High End Systems demo room: light plot discussion & overview
Week 13: Chris Muenchow & Matt Smith
 Tues: April 16th
 -*DUE – Project 3 – Designer / Programmer, in-class presentations
 -Programming Concepts Q & A
 -GRILL CHAT: ask your instructors questions about working in the industry as a lighting
 Professional. This is a potlock event.
Week 14: Chris Muenchow & Matt Smith
 Tues: April 23rd
 -*DUE – Project 4 – EVOLUTION, Final Design Presentations, in-class presentations
 -Q & A with instructors concerning Project 5 and Project 6.
Week 15: Chris Muenchow & Matt Smith
 Tues: April 30th
 -*DUE – Project 5 – Timecode Concert Design, in-class presentations at High End Systems
 -High End Systems Tour
Week 16: Chris Muenchow & Matt Smith
 Saturday: May 4th
 Rehearsal: Payne Stage – 9:00am – 9:00pm (tentative)
 Sunday: May 5th
 Rehearsal: Payne Stage – 9:00am – 9:00pm (tentative)
 Monday: May 6th
 Rehearsal: Payne Stage – 6:00pm – 10:00pm (tentative)
 Tuesday: May 7th
 Rehearsal: Payne Stage – 6:00pm – 10:00pm (tentative)
 Wednesday: May 8th
 Rehearsal: Payne Stage – 6:00pm – 10:00pm (tentative)
 Thursday: May 9th
 Rehearsal: Payne Stage – 6:00pm – 10:00pm (tentative)
 Friday: May 10th
 -*DUE – Project 6 – EVOLUTION, Performance
                POLICIES OF THIS COURSE AND THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                            Page 5


Concert & Event Lighting / Smith                                                           Spring 2019
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
     • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
     “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
     of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student,
by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their
writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
                                             Page 6


Concert & Event Lighting / Smith                                                            Spring 2019
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation,
and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal
growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
          first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                             Page 7
