ARC 327R, ARC 386M, LAR 388, LAS 381, WGS 393
RACE AND GENDER: By Design
SPRING 2020
UNIQUE: 00735/01040/01626/39435/45245
Tuesdays, 5:00 – 8:00 PM, Location: Sutton 2.114
Instructor: Charlton N. Lewis
Office Hours: Th 2:00 - 3:00 (by appointment)
Office: SUT. 4.102A
email: charltonlewis@austin.utexas.edu
If we cannot now end our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity.
(John F. Kennedy, 35th President of the United States)
Design shapes the way we live. So it ought to serve everyone.
(Eva Maddox, Co-Founder, Archeworks) excerpted from Diversity and Design: Understanding Hidden Consequences
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This seminar examines the relationship of design, in its many iterations, relative to the narratives of race, gender, equity, and diversity.
As such, the course will be organized within a multi-disciplinary framing of design and design issues. The seminar will leverage a
growing understanding and comprehension of these issues into shared points of examination and discussion as we look to seek out
and discover both the nuances and complexities of the topics presented.
COURSE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES:
Learning Outcomes:
By the end of this course, the participants will:
            ….have garnered a greater understanding of the myriad of issues and complexities related to an examination of
race, gender, and equity within the built environment and design disciplines
            ….have developed and honed the skills and capacities for a thoughtful, respectful, and critical discussion and discourse of
these same often complex and points of departure
            …..will have further developed analytical skills and sensibilities and leveraged a curiosity and passion towards furthering an
awareness relative to the seminar topics and beyond
RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2020                                                                                      1


CULTURAL DIVERSITY FLAG:
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced
persistent marginalization.
SEMINAR FORMAT AND PROCEDURES:
As a seminar, the interaction will be circular and not linear. Participants will be required to actively engage in the seminar discussion
and to bring to bear a thoughtful dialogue in regards to the topics presented (Assn. type 1). A variety of diverse essays and mixed
media prompts will be posted online weekly for the seminar to consider in advance of the Tuesday seminar meeting.
Individual participants will, generally on a rotational basis, take turns uploading responses (Assn. type 3) to a prompt that will provide
a point of departure for the seminar discussion to come. (Note: At certain points of the semester participants might all be asked to all
upload responses, dependent upon the prompt or engagement).
After the Tuesday seminar discussion, each participant is expected to upload to CANVAS an ongoing seminar “blog” of their individual
seminar reflections. (Assn. type 2).
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
Required Materials and Devices
Access to web-based/online materials (via CANVAS and other means) for uploading and downloading purpose will be required for this
course. Note taking and transcription as a means of archiving individual seminar engagement is also expected.
Classroom Expectations (Assn. type 1):
The expectations for the seminar participation and discussion are that all viewpoints are inherently valuable and to be
respected in this academic setting. Respect for the multiplicity of viewpoints and points of discussion is an absolute.
Attendance is expected at all course meeting times and will be recorded. Active participation during the seminar is particularly critical
as the discussion and interaction is primary to the nature of the seminar typology.
Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or to miss class and to ascertain if the absence will be viewed as
unexcused. A student who misses classes or other required activities for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the
instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal
academic penalties.
COURSE SCHEDULE:
Course Schedule & Delieverables
• Thursdays, Seminar prompt uploaded to CANVAS by Instructor; [or alternatively a seminar engagement noted and direction
  provided]
Student Deliverables:
• Mondays, 9:00 PM; Primary respondents responses to prompts due (“Assn. type 3”, due via CANVAS upload); primary
  respondents rotate per week as directed by Instructor
• Tuesdays, 5:00 - 8:00 PM; Seminar Discussion, in class participation and discussion by ALL (“Assn. type 1”)
• Thursdays, 9:00 PM; Individual Journal reflections to be uploaded every week to CANVAS by ALL (“Assn. type 2” due via CANVAS
  upload)
RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2020                                                                                       2


COURSE ASSIGNMENT TYPES
Coursework over the semester will have the following typological and grading breakdown:
ASSIGNMENT TYPE 1: SEMINAR VOICES, spoken _shared (in-seminar participation, engagement, and discussion) 30%
ASSIGNMENT TYPE 2: SEMINAR VOICE, written _reflection (individual post-seminar summations submitted back to instructor, via
CANVAS, on a weekly basis) 35%
ASSIGNMENT TYPE 3: SEMINAR VOICE, engaged_response (individual content response to assigned prompts and shared with
all seminar prior, via CANVAS, to the next seminar meeting) 35%
Note: ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK, AND LATE ARRIVALS.
Grading for this Course
In addition to the interactions described above, seminar participants are expected to demonstrate evidence of having read and
prepared materials as required on a weekly basis; participants are expected to provide reading/content responses prior to the
seminar meeting and actively participate in the seminar discussion. Thoroughness, effort, and engagement to be judged by the level
of preparation, the presentation of ideas, the quality of discussion/questions, and the thoughtfulness of the points of critique.
SEMINAR RESOURCES AND DETAILS:
Partial Bibliography (from which content will be extracted as needed):
DIVERSITY AND DESIGN: UNDERSTANDING HIDDEN CONSEQUENCES
BETH TAUKE, KORYDON SMITH AND CHARLES DAVIS.
DARK SPACE: ARCHITECTURE, REPRESENTATION, BLACK IDENTITY
MARIO GOODEN
SITES UNSEEN: ARCHITECTURE, RACE, AND AMERICAN LITERATURE
WILLIAM A. GLEASON
RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2020                                                                                       3


ARCHITECTURE IN BLACK: THEORY, SPACE AND APPEARANCE
DARELL WAYNE FIELDS
THE AESTHETICS OF EQUITY: NOTES ON RACE, SPACE, ARCHITECTURE, AND MUSIC
CRAIG L. WILKINS
GENDER AND ARCHITECTURE
EDITORS: LOUISE DURNING, RICHARD WRIGLEY
FEMINIST PRACTICES: INTERDISCIPLINARY APPROACHES TO WOMEN IN ARCHITECTURE
LORI A. BROWN (EDITOR)
TRANSGENDER ARCHITECTONICS: THE SHAPE OF CHANGE IN MODERNIST SPACE (GENDER, BODIES AND TRANSFORMATION) NEW EDITION EDITION,
BY LUCAS CRAWFORD (AUTHOR)
GENDER STUDIES IN ARCHITECTURE : SPACE, POWER AND DIFFERENCE
DÖRTE KUHLMANN
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES TO BE UTILIZED: Community events and resources, CANVAS course uploads, excerpts from Vimeo and
YouTube
Attendance
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final
grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused
absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or
family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with
the instructor to determine due dates.
The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to
determine due dates. If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused
absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify
instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
Religious observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized
for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a
reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the
absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy
day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given
an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for
RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2020                                                                                         4


official University policies and procedures on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php .
University Code of Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Wellness
Mental Health and Support Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important part of being a successful student. If something is getting in your way (e.g.
stress, test anxiety, lack of motivation), there are options available for help.
CARE PROGRAM
The CARE Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better
access to support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. The CARE Counselor in the School of Architecture
is Abby Simpson, LCSW.
- Office Hour: Fridays 1230p – 130p | BTL 114B
- Available by phone: M-F 8-5p | 512.471.3115 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
- cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
For immediate support:
-      Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-      CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
Services at CMHC:
-      Brief assessments and referral services - cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
-      Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-      MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-      Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.htm
-      Tips on self-care - cmhc.utexas.edu/selfcare.html
Other Helpful Offices at UT
-          Student Emergency Services (SES) - deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
-          Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) – diversity.utexas.edu/disability
-          Office of the Student Ombuds - ombuds.utexas.edu/student
Students with disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard
of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Bcal
https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be reported to the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust
your instincts and share your concerns.
Emergency evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated.
Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an
evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency .
RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2020                                                                                        5
