         Advertising 373 (06475)/Public Relations 377K (06940)
                       Integrated Communication Campaigns
                                         Tuesday/Thursday 1230p-2p
                                                   BMC 4.206
Professor         Tracy Arrington
Email             tracyarrington@austin.utexas.edu
Office            BMC 4.356
Office Hours      Tuesday 930-1030a, Thursday 930-1030a and by appointment
TA                To be named
Book              Perfect Pitch: The Art of Selling Ideas and Winning New Business by Jon Steel
Book Avails       The UT COOP, Amazon, Barnes & Noble, Half Price Books and other retail locations
Course Overview and Objectives
Welcome to the capstone course in your undergraduate academic career! Congratulations! But… there
is still work to be done. In this course you will bring together every ounce of experience you’ve had to
date – academic, industry AND life – to create an outstanding and comprehensive communication
campaign for a real-world client with real-world challenges. This course is less about learning new
material and more about practice, implementation and execution of all that you have learned. It will be
what you make of it. So make it great.
Course objectives include:
         Researching, planning, producing, presenting and implementing an in-depth communication
          campaign. We will be learning by doing.
         Leveraging, building upon and honing skills learned in your introduction to advertising and
          marketing, research, creative, media and communication management courses. These include
          strategic and critical thinking, planning, prioritization, organization, written and verbal
          communication, time management, interpersonal communication and teamwork.
         Increasing each student’s level of professionalism.
         Having fun, producing stellar work and finishing your undergrad time at UT on a high note.
Structure & Participation
Teamwork – As is true in industry, no one can build campaigns alone. Not well, anyway. Thus, the lion’s
share of work done in this course will be done in teams. Cooperation, professional courtesy, inter-
disciplinary integration and cohesion will be critical. Disagreements, debates and discussions are a
healthy part of the campaign development process, but ultimately everyone must pull in the same
direction to deliver successful results for the client.
Agency Structure – Our Campaigns class will function as a full-service agency with five key departments:
         Account Service
         Account Planning (Research/Strategy)
         Media
         Public Relations
         Creative


At the beginning of the semester, after a review of cover letters + resumes, interviews, and noting each
student’s level of interest re: working in leadership, I will select an Executive Vice President for the
course, along with five Directors (one per department). Agency professionals will report to their
respective Directors, and Directors will report to the EVP.
Since teamwork is required for success, and accountability a major factor in industry, peer evaluations
will weigh heavily against your final grade. Agency professionals will be evaluated by their departmental
peers, Directors will be evaluated by their departmental peers and the EVP and the EVP will be
evaluated by the Directors.
Attendance & Participation – Attendance will be taken each time we meet in the classroom, as well as
at each departmental team meeting, and participation noted. Directors will take attendance and rate
participation at team meetings. This information will be turned in to the EVP, who will compile and turn
the data in to the course instructor. Of the 10% slated for this course element, 5% will be tied to
attendance, 5% to participation.
Standards & Non-Negotiables
       Late work will receive a 0. If it’s due at 12n, 12:01p is late. Feel free to turn work in early if you
        fear a conflict/issue may arise.
       Late arrival to a meeting (classroom or departmental) will result in loss of attendance credit for
        that meeting.
       All work must be client-ready.
       Your colleagues/classmates, client contacts, professors, TAs and academic staff are to be treated
        respectfully and with professional courtesy at all times.
       Email is the preferred method of communication in industry and will be for this course as well.
        Note that professional courtesy standards apply to email. Ensure that you address message
        recipients appropriately and remove personal chats from work-related emails.
       Assume classes and departmental meetings will take place during our assigned class time. Do
        not schedule internships, work or other activities during this time slot.
       Everything produced for class assignments is to be your original work. Enlisting aid from anyone
        outside the class is considered a breach of UT’s Standards of Academic Integrity and will be dealt
        with accordingly. All written assignments produced outside the classroom are to be composed
        on, and output as, hard copy from a personal computer.
       Grammar, spelling and punctuation errors can derail the impact of great work. Ensure that all
        work is edited by more than one person prior to presentation.
       The EVP and Departmental Directors may create assignments to drive the team forward and will
        issue due dates/times for these assignments. These due dates/times are to be respected as if
        they were issued from the professor.
       Presentations should utilize professional software, such as Microsoft Power Point, Google Slides
        or Adobe InDesign.
       The schedule of events is tentative and is subject to change. Students are responsible for
        changes to the schedule as announced in class or via email.


Grading
     A          93.5-100%
     A-         89.5-93.4%
     B+         86.5-89.4%
      B         83.5-86.4%
     B-         79.5-83.4%
     C+         76.5-79.4%
      C         73.5-76.4%
     C-         69.5-73.4%
     D+         66.5-69.4%
     D          63.5-66.4%
     D-         59.5-63.4%
      F       59.4% or below
  Individual Assignments                                                   10%
  Book Exam                                                                10%
  Campaign Project Part 1 – Concepts + Presentation of Concepts            20%
  Campaign Project Part 2 – Final Book                                     20%
  Campaign Project Part 2 – Final Presentation                             10%
  Peer Evaluation                                                          20%
  Class Attendance & Participation                                         10%
  TOTAL                                                                   100%
Course Schedule
A comprehensive schedule has not been created for this course. The schedule will be set by the student
agency, with guidance from the professor. The following dates will be included on the course schedule:
January 22       Course and Colleague Introduction, Resume + Cover Letter Best Practices
January 24       Agency Structure, Submission of Resumes + Cover Letters
January 29       Interviews
January 31       Interviews
February 5       Client Briefing
February 26      Book Exam
February 28      Presentation Workshop
March 12         Client Pitch (Concepts)
May 7            Client Pitch (Final)
The schedule should also include 1-2 guest speakers. The student agency is to decide what type of guest
speaker(s) they’d most like to host in class – creatives, strategists, media planners, PR professionals, etc.
The professor will arrange for the speakers to participate.
University of Texas Honor Code


The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Mandatory Reading: All students agree to read then abide by the University of Texas at Austin’s
Standard of Academic Integrity and understand the nature of Academic Dishonesty as defined by UT-
Austin at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php and
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a meeting, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support:
For immediate support, visit or call the Counseling and Mental Health Center M-F 8a-5p, SSB 5th Floor,
512.471.3515, cmhc.utexas.edu, or call the CMHC Crisis Line 24/7 at 512.471.2255
The CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW. She is available
M-F 8a-5p in CMA 4.134 or can be reached at 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she doesn’t answer).
