Non-Argumentative Rhetoric in Zen
RHE 330E: Rhetorical Theory and Analysis
Summer 2019
Unique # 83426
M-F, 11:30-1pm
Parlin 308
Dr. Krzysztof Piekarski
kpiekarski@utexas.edu
Office: PAR 27
Office Hours: M 10-11:30; Thursday 10-11:30; by
appointment
                     “Don’t go searching for the Truth. Just let go of your opinions.” ~ Hsin Shin Ming
American rhetoric is strongly grounded in argument and persuasion, and infused with judgments of
good and bad, right and wrong. This is true not only for public discourse in the media, academic
discourse in schools, and professional writing and speaking, it is also true in everyday conversation.
We are constantly trying to convince someone of our judgments, or that something or someone is good
or bad, right or wrong—a restaurant, a movie, a car, a teacher. Everything is evaluated and every
conversation is full of assertions of value. But what if there were a different, equally “real” way to talk
about the world and each other that didn’t create antagonistic relationships? What if we believed that
each person is capable of waking up to the reality around her, and responding appropriately, without
being converted to some position or belief? What kind of language would we use, and how would we
use it?
Zen training begins by pulling the rug out from our customary ways of understanding and talking. It
subverts value distinctions, challenges our habitual ways of expressing ourselves, and denies the
superiority of rat\ionalist, linear logic. It does not do this merely to "deconstruct" language, or to tear
down all meaning. It has a radical project of waking us up out of the trance we create for ourselves and
others through our habitual uses of language. This class will explore how contradiction, negation,
story, surprise, gesture, and silence are used in Zen training as resources for awakening to reality,
rather than as assertions or arguments about it. The cryptic pronouncements of Zen masters seem
impenetrable. They appear to defy our western rhetorical traditions that depend on logic and formal
reasoning as the key to building knowledge. Zen teachers complicate the issue by insisting that
language is only "the finger pointing at the moon, not the moon itself." If you have ever tried to write
about a meaningful experience, you will recognize the problematic relationship between language and
reality. This course engages students in exploring the surprising uses of language and image to create
meaning in Zen tradition and practice.
Students do not need any prior experience or knowledge of Zen rhetoric or Zen practices. The first
part of the class will provide background on Zen concepts including ethical precepts and koans, then
consider the emergence of the American Zen rhetorical tradition. This class is not an introduction to
Zen practice as a religion, but rather an exploration of an alternative rhetoric, a different method of
using language to construct meaning and shape relationships that help foster care and respect rather
than antagonism and aggression.


                                 Inquiry Method of Teaching and Learning
Most schooling is about giving students answers to questions they don’t have, then expecting them to
be able to respond to the questions of others—teachers, exams, and future employers—with the right
answer. It is far better to raise the right questions than to know all the answers. Einstein said that if he
had an hour to solve a problem he would spend the first 55 minutes making sure he was asking the
right questions. If you are forever wedded to sitting passively in class, memorizing answers, and
spitting them back out for a grade, this class will give you a severe headache. Everyone in our class is
encouraged to read A More Beautiful Question: The Power of Inquiry to Spark Breakthrough Ideas by Warren
Berger as a manual to how we will conduct class. You can also find a mind-map of this book on our
course Wiki.
So let’s begin: Why are you taking this course? How will you respond to a different way of seeing the
world from any you have previously experienced? What are you trying to prove and to whom and
why? What is the meaning of life and how does being in this course align with your answer?
Come prepared. Specifically, come prepared to ask meaningful questions—your questions—and to learn
how to ask better questions.
Do not expect the answers to be handed to you by the teacher, the texts, outside experts, or classmates. This is your
inquiry and the response to it can only be discovered, it cannot be given. Sometimes, though, there are
resources that help us by pointing helpfully. This can save us a lot of time and suffering.
Our texts and teachers can only demonstrate what earlier seekers discovered. They are not the treasure, they are
only a treasure map or tales of the treasure hunt.
How can this method be evaluated for a grade? See the grading method below.


Class format: we begin with a period of mindfulness: that means complete stillness and silence. If that is
not possible for you, or you are unwilling to explore your own mind, please consider another course.
Remember too, that the lab work (at least 10 min. of meditation per day) is not optional, but required.
Do not be late. Ever. If you need to be late, don’t be.
                                         Online Class Workspace
This course is wiki based. Don’t worry if you are not familiar with wikis; we will have an introduction
in class. Online class activity, course calendar, and student folders are managed here:
http://zenrhetoric19summer.pbworks.com
                                                Grading Policy
Grades in this course are determined on the basis of the Learning Record, which accompanies a
portfolio of work presented at the midterm and at the end of the course. These portfolios present a
selection of student work, both formal and informal, completed during the semester, ongoing
observations about student learning, and analysis of student work and interpretations with respect to
the student's development across five dimensions of learning:
• confidence and independence
• knowledge and understanding
• skills and strategies
• use of prior and emerging experience
• reflectiveness
• Creativity, originality, imagination
Please notice the RHE policy on absences, which will affect your grade: four unexcused absences
results in automatic failure of the course. If you are late, or leave early, it will count as 1⁄2 an
absence. The door is closed and I take attendance at the very beginning of class. If you arrive late, you
must see me at the end of class in order not to be marked absent.
                                             Grading Criteria
A - A student who respectfully contributes to and mentally engages in class discussions. They turn in
their work on time. Assignments meet all of the requirements and reveal the student's understanding
and thought process. Written work demonstrates clarity and her ideas are expressed in a clear and
concise manner. The student actively challenges themselves to step beyond their comfort zone to
improve skills and creativity as a writer. They come prepared to class with their materials ready,
having made necessary preparations for that lesson ahead of time. This is a student who goes above
and beyond and shows enthusiasm for the class and the material. Student not only helps themselves
but also their peers to be better writers and thinkers. The class is obviously better for them having


been in it. The student has a grasp of the six dimensions of learning and adjusts his/her own qualities
to better follow them. The student doesn't do the work for a grade, especially considering the fact that
we don't use grades in this class. Instead, they work hard for their own benefit and the benefit of
others students, allowing themselves to grow intellectually as well as a person. Student's love of
learning is clear through their work and study habits. They often have a halo.
B - Quality effort is put forth consistently and the student’s finished work meets the requirements but
either the ideas are not fully developed or the clarity of the student’s work is not concise and clear.
Student understands the material given, and completes all the assignments. Student makes an effort to
contribute regularly in class and is mentally present. Shows effort and a desire to learn but sometimes
doesn’t go that extra step to turn in the work that’s up to their highest potential. When a B level
student is absent, the class notices.
C - Assignments are completed but clearly lack full effort. Student only puts enough into the class to
pass but does not try to go above expectations. They are present in body but not necessarily in spirit.
Student does not engage regularly in class. Student’s written work meets the requirements but his or
her ideas are neither expressed in a clear manner or well thought out. They might not listen to peers
when they try to help or take a different approach. A “C” level student’s presence in class is not always
felt.
D - Assignments are not fully completed or do not show an understanding of the material. Student
fails to participate in a meaningful way, or participate at all. Student is always late or has multiple
absences. Student does not seem to care about the class. Ideas are not expressed in a clear way and
lack originality. Student does the work sometimes but not always and when it is done, it's clear that
they didn't really care about what they were doing. A “D” level student does not enrich the class either
by staying silent or by being deliberately contrary and hindering discussions.
F - A student who does not contribute to class discussion, who is late to class or who does not show up
and doesn't complete or turn in their work. Student fails to try to grasp concepts and participate. Little
effort is shown or put forth in the class. Shows no passion. Possibly plagiarizes or cheats. Student
refuses to engage with class and show her learning abilities.
• Pluses and minuses are applicable and help further clarify the level of development observed.
• I will honor all reasonable grade claims supported by the observations and evidence provided in the
   Learning Record.
                                                    Writing Project
Over the course of the semester, everyone in the class will write a long, 5000-ish word essay. We will
discuss specific details of the content in class, but these essays will focus on your experience and
understanding, based on our course readings, inquiry, and discussion rather than a heavy reliance on
library research. You will also serve on an editorial team, both as a managing editor for another
student’s essay and as a reader for others. The course grade will depend on both of these functions, as
author and as editor. In the course of this project, students will learn about the stages of writing and
publishing for a public audience.


                                                 Learning Record
  •     The other major assignment for this class is the Learning Record (see Grading Policy, below),
        submitted two times: at midterm, and at the end of the term. The development of the Learning
        Record will also serve as a resource for the development of each student’s chapter.
  •     Midterm: work samples and observations up to spring break.
  •     Final: Work samples and observations over the course of the semester that
        represent your development and learning, due last day of class.
                                                 Objectives
The course is composed of three main strands:
• Writing, where we will focus on constructing and presenting a finished essay. Topics:
Writing process
Non-argument rhetorical principles
Writing to capture experience
Editing in support of other writers
Documenting, evaluating, and reporting your performance and achievements
• Zen concepts, where we will read and discuss Zen rhetoric, as well as conducting research in
  support of projects. Students will gain an understanding of these topics, and be able to use this
  understanding in their writing :
Zen history
Principles of Zen teachings
Zen in everyday life
Zen, language, and rhetoric
• Collaboration, where we will gain experience and skills working with others. Students will develop
  in this area through:
  Class discussions!
  Inquiry
  Peer editing and draft workshops
                                                 Course texts


Joko Beck, Everyday Zen
Tim Burkett, Zen in the Age of Anxiety
Norman Fischer and Susan moon, What is Zen?
David Gelb, Chef’s Table, Episode 1, Season 3.
Kim Ki-Duk, Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter… Spring
Morgan Neville, Won’t You Be My Neighbor,
Mu Soeng, Trust in Mind
Shunryu Suzuki, Zen Mind, Beginner’s Mind
John Tarrant, Bring be the Rhinoceros
Ziya Tong, The Reality Bubble
Brad Warner, Hardcore Zen: Punk Rock, Monster Movies, & the Truth about Reality
*Dale Wright, Philosophical Meditation on Zen Buddhism
Plus other essays and handouts posted on the learning record, TBD.
                                                   Helpful Resources
• Appamada: http://www.appamada.org
A local contemporary Zen center at 913 East 38th St. Peg Syverson and Flint Sparks are the teachers
and I serve on the council.
• Austin Zen Center: http://www.austinzencenter.org
A more formal Japanese-style Zen Center at 3014 Washington Square, one block west of Wheatsville
Co- op
• The PBS Site on the life of the Buddha is beautifully designed: http://www.pbs.org/thebuddha/
• Buddhanet: http://www.buddhanet.net/
An enormous central resource for information about Buddhism
• Buddhanet's extensive Zen Portal: http://www.buddhanet.net/l_zen.htm
• Tricycle magazine also has an excellent web site: http://www.tricycle.com
                                            Course Schedule
The readings and quizzes and assignments will be announced each day at the end of class. Things will
shift, depending on the nature of our discussions and what seems to ring bells and what doesn’t. If you
miss class, you will not know what the exact next assignment is and it will therefore be on you to talk
to a classmate to find out and to check the wiki for any additional information. Your job is to be in
class and to find out from your peers what happened in each class if you miss one. Your class presence
is therefore utterly essential. Read that again, please.


Know in advance that I lean far on the side of fluidity and change, so if a shifting schedule is
uncomfortable for whatever reason, this class might not be the right fit for you. Other than the main
writing deadlines described above, all readings and future work for the class will be determined as we
go, class by class, and week by week. This is in part why class presence is absolutely essential, and you
can pretty much forget earning a high grade if you miss class and never find out what happened on the
day of your absence.
                                          University Policies
Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity
Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work.
For additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.


