Sarah L. Lopez
Associate Professor
School of Architecture – CRP, Architecture, LLILAS
ARC 386M/ CRP 388/ LAS 388
Graduate Course
Tuesday 2-5pm
e. sll@utexas.edu
t. 512-471-0147
Migratory Urbanism: The Spaces of Transnational Subjects in American Cities and
Migrant Homelands (1890-present)
Migration is an inherently spatial phenomenon; the study of migration is the study of
places, people, processes, and the state. This course addresses the history of 20th century
international migration—with a focus on US-Mexico migration post WWII—through the
lens of the built environment. The aim of this course is to bring migration theories and
histories into the realm of architecture and planning to equip spatial practitioners with
tools for thinking through how contemporary movement interfaces with the production of
space. An interdisciplinary approach to the study of migration will incorporate urban and
architectural histories, political economy, urban theory, ethnographies of individuals,
families, and communities, material culture, and film to explore how U.S. cities and
towns (as well as other countries) and border regions are influenced by the continuous
flow of people, ideas, dollars, and desire. We will engage concepts such as assimilation,
transnationalism, diaspora, spatial practices, ritual infrastructure, spatial hybridity, and
urban design from below. We will investigate international remittance development,
multi-scalar migrant neighborhoods, and housing.
Course Goals:
* reading the city at text / sources for urban narratives
* relating migration patterns to local constructions of place
* linking macro policy and large-scale urban trends to immigrant experience
* unpacking the socio-spatial and place-making
* historicizing contemporary migration
* building a people-centered theory about the production of the built environment
Course Requirements:
1. Class Attendance: Students are expected to attend classes regularly and to participate
in class discussions of the readings. I expect full attendance at every session. Absences
must be explained by email. Unexcused absences will result in a penalty. More than two
will automatically lower your final grade but one whole grade. Arriving more than 5
minutes late to class without a valid excuse will count as ½ of an absence.
2. Readings and Reading Questions
Reading response-question/thought/query (weekly). Please bring your comment/query to
class. I will ask for volunteers to share them and also ask people to share them. Save


                                                          Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
them all and turn them in together at the end of the semester. Throughout the semester,
some students will lead discussion of weekly readings. TBD.
*Canvas course website for syllabus, handouts, and readings, please find everything
under “modules.”
3. Multiple Methods for Understanding North Lamar: In preparation for our walking
tour, students will use a particular method (i.e. Google Maps, Street View, Sanborns,
Census Data, Directories, Historic Newspapers and/or Websites of local businesses and
cultural organizations) to do preliminary analysis of the area. Some students may choose
to do formal analysis of building massing and footprints.
4. Original Paper: Students will conduct a research paper that picks a sending
nation/state/city and studies the historical content of emigration from that place to Austin.
Students will then look for material evidence of that migration stream in Austin. The
paper will contextualize and document specific material changes found in Austin in a
transnational context, and hopefully dive down to the most specific unit possible (a
building, an object, a person). Multiple methods will be used: secondary sources on
migration, history, and national politics; primary sources such as historic newspapers,
City Directories, Google Street View; analysis of the actual built environment; interviews
and observation. Finally, students can search for social media online that represents their
sites in Austin and/or the groups of people that use them.
The paper should be a minimum of 12 pages, double spaced, 12-point font, not
including images and maps, and not exceed 15.
5. Optional presentation: Students that want to discuss their research and get feedback
before they submit their paper will present in class; we will discuss the case study as a
group. While this is optional, I recommend that students who feel that they are involved
in a research process take this opportunity to work their ideas out in spoken form. Also, if
I am concerned about a student’s progress, I will ask the student to take this opportunity.
Grading Structure
Attendance and Participation (weekly questions, discussion): 45%
Short Assignments (North Lamar preparation): 20%
Final paper: 35%
Office Hours: either Thursday 12.30-1.30 or email to set up appt., Sutton 2.118.
sll@utexas.edu
This course is not only about intellectual exploration, but also creativity. I encourage
students to ask open-ended questions about migration, and to pursue their research in an
exploratory manner. I am open to alternative final assignments, but they must be thought
through and exciting.
                                                                                               2


                                                        Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
Final Notes, Do’s and Don’ts
*Do not use IPhones or IPads in class, even to access articles, unless we are conducting
 web searches as a group, or you have discussed this with me in advance.
*Turn off your cell-phone.
*The art of writing notes with pen and paper should never be lost. I encourage students to
bring in pads of paper, come in with open minds, talk and listen.
**I reserve the right to change the syllabus according to group discussion/needs. Please
look out for e-mails I send or updates regarding any changes to the syllabus.
                                                                                             3


                                                         Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
 Week 1: Jan. 21
Theories and Categories: Macro-view of Migration and Space
The contemporary movement of goods, ideas, people, and capital is primarily understood
through globalization and transnational discourses. International migration to the U.S. is
perceived through the lens of ethnicity and the nation-state. Outlining key frameworks
used in globalization literature, urban history, and immigration history reveals the need
for historicized and situated research on migration and place.
        1) Why migration and space/cities, what does migration and urbanization look
            like today (macro immigration/urban processes)?
        2) The current moment: discussion of the Trump era.
        Reading:
        None
        Going Further:
        Pierce, Mary and Benton-Short, Lisa, ed. Migrants to the Metropolis (1-7, 15-22,
        23-47).
        Castells, Stephen and Miller, Mark J. eds., The Age of Migration
Week 2: Jan. 28
Methodological Approach to Migration and Material Evidence
This week we explore migration in its broadest sense, and couple this exploration with an
introduction to cultural landscape and built environment methods. Migration trends
directly influence urban and rural environments; migration makes places. What is the
work that the built environment does to and for us?
        1) Landscapes as evidence, limits to cultural landscape studies, and theorizing
            migration + architecture.
        Reading:
            • Dolores Hayden, The Power of Place: Urban Landscape as Public
                History, Chapter 1, “Claiming Urban Landscape as Public History,” 1-13.
            • Paul Groth and Todd Bressi, “Frameworks for Cultural Landscape
                Studies” in Understanding Ordinary Landscapes (New Haven: Yale
                University) :1-24.
            • Mirjana Lozanovska, ed. “Conclusion,” in Ethno-Architecture and the
                Politics of Migration (217-233).
        Going Further:
        Steve Cairns, ed., Drifting: Architecture and Migrancy.
        Christiane Harzig and Dirk Hoerder, with Donna Gabaccia, “Migration in Human
        History—the Long View,” in What is Migration History (Cambridge, UK: Polity,
        2009): 8-52. (for reference, glance at 8-34, skim 35-50)
                                                                                              4


                                                          Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
        Dell Upton, “The Power of Things: Recent Studies in American Vernacular
        Architecture” American Quarterly, vol. 35, no. 3 (1983): 262-279.
        Arjun Appadari The Social Life of Things
Week 3: Feb. 4
Assimilation and Architecture (late 19th and early 20th century)
How have migrant groups used architecture and building practices to influence social
cohesion and social life? How have they used architecture to project certain public
images and representations of their “ethnicity?” What role does architecture and material
culture play in assimilation, if any?
        Session 1: The Material Culture of Assimilation.
        Reading:
            • Thomas Hubka, “The Worker’s Cottage in Milwaukee’s Polish
                Community: Housing and the Process of Americanization, 1870-1920,”
                Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture, 33-52.
            • Steven Moffson, “Identity and Assimilation in Synagogue Architecture in
                Georgia, 1870-1920,” Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture, 151-165.
            • David Roediger, Working Toward Whiteness: How America’s Immigrants
                Became White (Basic Books, reprint 2018). Part I: Seeing Race in New
                Immigrant History, 3- 34, (35-56 optional).
        Going Further:
        Spickard, “Immigration, Race, Ethnicity, Colonialism,” Almost All Aliens, 2007,
        13-33.
        Edward Chappell, “Acculturation in the Shenandoah Valley: Rhenish Houses of
        the Massanutten Settlement,” in Common Places (University of Georgia Press,
        1986): 27-57.
        Ralph S. Bourne, Trans-national America, The Atlantic, 1916.
        Lizabeth Cohen, “Embellishing a Life of Labor,” in Common Places (261-280)
        Arjun Appadurai, The Social Life of Things
*spend time discussing built environment methods, and “what is in a plan?”
Week 4: Feb. 11
Assimilation and Cities: Mexican migration in Los Angeles and Chicago during the
first half of the 20th century
What did migration look like pre-WWII in America’s industrializing cities? What urban
features shaped and where shaped by migration? This week we approach the question of
migrant assimilation through Mexican immigrants’ incorporation into two of Americas
largest and most Latino cities, Los Angeles and Chicago. We will focus on: 1) economic
and political factors shaping migration, spatial integration into Anglo America, inter-
ethnic conflict, and the “Mexican problem” and 2) railroads, industry, agriculture,
                                                                                               5


                                                          Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
streetcars, and city-building to understand how early migrant neighborhoods relate to city
form. We will also examine “assimilation” as a sociological concept.
        1: Americanizing Mexicans in a once-Mexican town: LA and assimilation
        2: Chicago’s Mexicans, the Chicago School (spatial assimilation as a sociological
        concept)
        Reading:
             • Kelly Lytle Hernandez, Mexican Immigration to the U.S.,” 25-29. (for
                reference)
             • George Sanchez. 1993. Becoming Mexican American, Ethnicity, Culture,
                and Identity in Los Angeles, 1900-1945 (Chapter 3: 63-83).
             • Gabriela Arredondo. Mexican Chicago: Race, Identity, and Nation 1916-
                39. (Chapter 2: 37-79)
             • Louis Wirth, “Urbanism as a Way of Life,” Journal of American
                Sociology, 1-24 (*only half are assigned this reading)
             • George Simmel, The Mental Life and the Metropolis, 23-31 (*only half
                are assigned this reading)
        Going Further:
        George Sanchez, “Economic Development and Immigration, 1890-1920,” Walls
        and Mirrors: Mexican Americans, Mexican Immigrants, and the Politics of
        Ethnicity, 39-68.
        Perea Juan, ed., Immigrants Out! The New Nativism and the Anti-Immigrant
        Impulse in the United States, Intro (1-12), Part 1 (13-43, 44-60 Statue of Liberty)
        Thomas Guglielmo and Cybelle Fox, “Defining America’s Racial Boundaries:
        Blacks, Mexicans, and European Immigrants, 1890-1945” American Journal of
        Sociology, vol. 118, no. 2 (2012): 327-379.
*Assignment: half the class will read Urbanism as a Way of Life, the other half will read
The Mental Life and the Metropolis. Two students from each group will launch a
discussion of the reading to the other group. We will discuss urbanism as a concept, and
how urbanism relates to solidarity at the turn of the century.
Week 5: Feb. 18
Post WWII Urban Decline, Latino Urbanism, and Contested Public Spaces
What have been the dominant narratives that explain Mexicans and Mexican-Americans
roles in U.S. cities and urbanism? How are those narratives changing and why does it
matter? Potential film: Transfusión, a documentary.
        1: Overview of distinct phases of Mexican migration and settlement and related
        sociological categories
        2: A historiography of Latinx Urbanism
                                                                                               6


                                                        Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
       Reading:
           • James Rojas, “Enacted Environment: The Creation of Place by Mexicans
               and Mexican Americans in East Los Angeles,” in Everyday America,
               1999, 275-292.
           • Doug Saunders, Arrival City, “Arriving at the Top of the Pyramid: Los
               Angeles” (76-100).
           • Robert Lemon, “The Spatial Practices of Food Trucks” in From
               Loncheras to Lobsta Love: Food Trucks, Cultural Identity, and Social
               Justice, eds. Agyeman, Matthews, Sobel (MIT Press, 2017): 169-188.
               Intro and Ch. 3 of note (e-book).
           • https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/10/23/nyregion/basements-
               queens-immigrants.html
       Going Further:
       Andrew Sandoval Strausz, “Latino Landscapes: Postwar Cities and the
       Transnational Origins of a New Urban America,” Journal of American History,
       Dec. 2014: 804-831.
       Ramon Gutierrez, “What is in a Name? The History and Politics of Hispanic and
       Latino Panethnicities,” Latino Studies Reader, 2016, 19-20 and 27-49 (skim).
       Mike Davis, Magical Urbanism
       John Chase, Margaret Crawford, Kaliski John, Everyday Urbanism (Monacelli
       Press, 1999).
       Nancy Fraser, “Rethinking the Public Sphere”
*potential USGS on-line map exploration
Week 6: Feb. 25
Transnational Activism and the Remittance Landscapes in Mexico
Migration changes the landscape, the politics, and the cultural worlds of migrant
hometowns. A major material outcome of this is the rise of the remittance house.
Migrants have also collectively initiated community projects. What is the remittance
landscape according to Lopez, and dissimilation according to Fitzgerald? Why do we
need to address other nations to understand the U.S.?
       1: Migrant Hometown Associations and migrant activism. (HTAs)
       Short film: The Sixth Section.
       2: Remittance Landscapes
       Reading:
           • Casa Michoacán declaration of intent (2)
           • David Fitzgerald, “Stranger of Prodigal Son?” in A Nation of Emigrants,
               (125-152)
                                                                                             7


                                                        Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
           •   Lopez, “The Remittance House” (35-70) in The Remittance Landscape:
               Spaces of Migration in Rural Mexico and Urban USA.
       Going Further:
       Websites:
       World Bank
       Inter-American Development Bank
       Architectura de Remesas
       Sam Quinones. 2007. Antonio's Gun And Delfino's Dream: True Tales of Mexican
       Migration.
       NYT- Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala and Dilip Ratha, “To Help Africa: Sell diaspora
       bonds/ Homeward Bond”
       Sanchez, “Where is Home? The Dilemma of Repatriation,” Becoming Mexican-
       American.
       Pierre Bourdieu, “Structures, Habitus, and Practices,” in The Logic of Practice.
       Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction.
       Ellen Pader, “Spatiality and Social Change: Domestic Space in Mexico and the
       U.S.”
Week 7: March 3 (guest visitor: Madeline Hsu)
Transnationalism: Chinese Migration and Place-Making (late 19th and early 20th
century) This week we expand discussions of transnational or remittance landscapes in
Mexico the US by looking at the influence of migration in China. We think carefully
about methods: how is transnational research done and what are the challenges to this
research?
       1: Chinese Migration
       2: Migrant Stories (lead to spatial questions?)
       Readings:
           •   Donna Gabbacia, Foreign Relations: American Immigration in a Global
               Perspective, 2012., Intro 1-23.
           •   Madeline Hsu, Intro (1-15), Ch. 2 (16-54), Ch. 6 (156-175), in Dreaming
               of Gold, Dreaming of Home: Transnationalism and Migration Between
               the United States and South China, 1882-1943.
           •   Review website: http://www.cangdongproject.org
           •   Read a few stories:
               http://immigrants.mndigital.org/exhibits/show/immigrantstories1975/storie
               s
           •   Digital Immigrant Stories: http://ihrca.dash.umn.edu/dil/.
           •   http://immigrants.mndigital.org/exhibits/show/immigrantstories-
               exhibit/classroom
           •   http://www.firstdaysproject.org
                                                                                             8


                                                            Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
        Going Further:
        Paul Kramer, Geopolitics of Mobility: Immigration Policy and American Global
        Power in the Long Twentieth Century,” American Historical Association, 2018:
        393-438.
        Denis Byrne, “The Need for a Transnational Approach to the Material
        Heritage of Migration: The China-Australia Corridor,” Journal of Social
        Archaeology 0 (0), 2016, 1-25.
        Yong Chen, Chinese San Francisco, 1850-1943: A Trans-Pacific Community,
        2000.
Week 8: March 10
Student Guided Movie and Discussion (TBD)
*Undocumented Lives (netflix)
* La Jaula de Oro
* Farmingville
* Maquilapolis
* Maid in LA
* Kingdom of Shadows
* Lost in Detention
* The Infiltrators
* Sleep Dealer
Week 9: March 17 (Spring Break)
Week 10: March 24
Migrant Suburbs: From “Chinatown” to Ethnoburb
From working the land, to ethnic clusters, to fragmented living, migrants have been
remaking U.S. suburbs throughout the second half of the twentieth century. We return to
the idea of assimilation and acculturation but in a new context. How can we compare the
migrant laborer to the migrant resident in the context of suburbanization? First, we
address migrant visibility and invisibility as it relates to their occupation, and their
location in U.S. cities and suburbs. Next we explore how migrants are remaking entire
metropolitan regions by tracing the evolution from “Chinatowns” at the turn of the 20th
century to the emergent “ethno-burbs” in the 21st.
        1: As Labor (networks, informality, invisibility)
        2: As Residents
Readings:
    •   James Duncan and Nancy Duncan. 2004. Landscapes of Privilege: The Politics of
        the Aesthetic in an American Suburb (Chapter 8: 203-250)
                                                                                                 9


                                                         Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
    •   NYT, “Ailing Midwestern Cities Extend a Welcoming Hand to Immigrants”
    •   Becky Nicolades and James Zarsadiaz, Design Assimilation in Suburbia: Asian
        Americans, Built Landscapes, and Suburban Advantage in Los Angeles’s San
        Gabriel Valley since 1970 (332-371)
        Going Further:
        Willow Aman, Trespassers? Asian Americans and the Search for Suburbia.
        Josi Ward, “Dream Oriental Romance: Reinventing Chinatown in 1930s Los
        Angeles”
        Fong, First Suburban Chinatown.
        Michelle, Global Diasporas and Traditional Towns: Chinese Transnational
        Migration and the Development of Vancouver’s Chinatown.
*We will also do Google Earth exploration in class together and discuss North Lamar.
Research some aspect of North Lamar this coming week, TBD)
Week 11: March 31
Spatial Practices: Ritual Infrastructure and Hybridity in Sweden and Chicago
And Urban Design From Below
Today’s immigrant populations may or may not have opportunities to build architectural
monuments. Yet, they are shaping the built environment in important ways. What is the
relationship between spatial practices, built space, and planning? How have migrants
exerted agency over their built environment past and present? How—and do they—
migrant communities build solidarity into place? What is the relationship between
planning from below and above?
        1: Ritual Infrastructure
        2: Urban Design From Below
        Readings:
            • De Certeau, “Spatial Practices: Walking the City,” in Practice of Everyday
                Life, 91-110.
            • Arijit Sen. Transcultural Placemaking: Intertwined Spaces of Sacred and
                Secular on Devon Avenue, Chicago. (31-62)
            • Mack, “Urban Design From Below: Immigration and the Spatial Practice
                of Urbanism” Public Culture 26, no. 1 (2014): 153-85.
            • Domenic Vitielo, Migrant Metropolis and American Planning, (245-255)
        Going Further:
        Simone, “People as Infrastructure”
        Mack, The Construction of Equality: Syriac Migration to the Swedish City
        (Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press, 2017, Intro, Ch. 4 (135-170), Ch. 5
        (171-210)
        Rubén Hernandez-León. Metropolitan Migrants: The Migration of Urban
        Mexicans to the United States. (Chapter 5: 154-183)
                                                                                             10


                                                         Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
        Christian Zlolniski. 2006. Janitors, Street Vendors, and Activists: The Lives of
        Mexican Immigrants in Silicon Valley (Chapters 3: 73-105)
*Time in class to discuss and present about North Lamar Tour
Week 12: April 7
“Mapping North Lamar”: Urban Tour (time and place to meet TBA)
To what extent is this a social landscape? To what extent is this a commercial landscape?
Can we separate the two?
        Readings:
            • Stewart Brand, How Buildings Learn (1-23, mostly photos)
            • Singer, The Rise of 21st Century Gateways, (Intro. 3-25)
            • Fiscal Policy Institute: Bringing Vitality to the Main Street (for reference
                only)
*Come to tour having researched the history of one migrant group represented in the
area, be prepared to informally discuss.
Week 13: April 14
Transnational Migrations in the Global South / U.S. Emigration
Who are the “American” emigrants? How does the discourse around migration change
when U.S. citizens settle abroad? How does transnational migration between non-U.S.
countries reframe the conversation?
        1: Outside the U.S.
        2: U.S. Emigration
        Readings:
            •   Alsayer, Dalal, “Right to the City” in the Landscapes of Servitude and
                Migration, from the Philippines to the Arabian Gulf, and Back” in
                Mapping Identity, Migration, and Space, 283-310.
            •   David Dixon, Julie Murray, Julia Gelatt, “America’s Emigrants: US
                Retirement Migration to Mexico and Panama,” Migration Policy Institute,
                Sept. 1, 2006, 1-8.
            •   Lundstrom, “Climate Change Altering Migration Patterns Regionally and
                Globally,” Center for American Progress, 2019, 1-5.
                                                                                             11


                                                          Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
*discussion about paper topics, digest tour
Week 14: April 21
Designing for Displacement, Deportation, Detention (Economic Migrant, Refugee,
Asylum Seeker)
Migratory urbanism is also about how we think about migrants and their relationship and
right to be in U.S. cities. Despite migrants’ pivotal role in building American (U.S.)
cities, many migrants do not have a “right to the city.” How does the production of
migrant illegality shape their access and right to space? How can we think this through by
addressing the spaces of incarceration and detention that are used to quarantine migrants?
         1: Encountering Ellis Island
         2: Displacement
         3: Immigrant Detention Centers and Immigration Prisons
             Reading:
             • David Harvey, “Right to the City?” (1-15)
             • Should Designers Try to Reform Immigrant Detention? City Lab, 2018, 1-
                 13.
             • Jenna Loyd and Alison Mountz, Intro (1-30), Boats, Borders, and Bases:
                 Race, the Cold War, and the Rise of Migration Detention in the United
                 States (2018).
             • Lopez, “From Penal to Civil: A Legacy of Private Prison Policy in a
                 Landscape of Migrant Detention,” American Quarterly 71, no. 1 (2019).
             • Hannah Arendt, “We Refugees,” 1943: 110-119.
             Going Further:
             Jenna Loyd and Alison Mountz, Intro (1-30), and “Not a Prison,” (87-116),
             Boats, Borders, and Bases: Race, the Cold War, and the Rise of Migration
             Detention in the United States (2018). Note, “Militarizing Migration” (54-86)
             is on Canvas for reference only.
             Lauren Martin and Matthew Mitchelson, “Geographies of Detention and
             Imprisonment: Interrogating Spatial Practices of Confinement, Discipline,
             Law and State Power,” Geography Compass, 459-477.
             Loinel Beehner, “Are Syria’s Do-It-Yourself Refugees Outliers or Examples
             of a New Norm?”
             DeGenova, “The legal production of Mexican/migrant “illegality,” Latino
             Studies, 2 (2), 160-185.
             New York Times Magazine, “Deported”
             Loic Waquant, “Prison as a Surrogate Ghetto”
             Cervcantes-Gautschi, “Wall Street and the Criminalization of Immigrants”
             Feltz and Baksh, “Business of Detention” in Beyond Walls and Cages
             Chak, Architecture of Detention
             Saskia Sassen, Expulsions
                                                                                              12


                                                         Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
            Raphael Sperry, “Is Justice Architecture Just?”
            James Scott, Seeing Like a State
            Wong Wing vs. United States
            Kelly Greenhill, Weapons of Mass Migration: Forced Displacement,
            Coercion, and Foreign Policy (Cornell University Press, 2010)
            Saskia Sassen, Expulsions
            Dan Canon, “A System Designed to Make People Disappear,” Slate, 1-4.
            “Office of Inspector General: Immigration and Customs Information Did not
            follow Federal Procurement Guidelines When Contracting for Detention
            Services”
            Migration Policy Institute, Unauthorized Migrants by Country of Birth, 2015
            Repatriation and Deportation of Mexicans:
            https://teachbocolatinohistory.colorado.edu/primary-source-sets/repatriation-
            and-deportation-of-mexicans-1932-1936/
            Carver, Spaces of Disappearance
*Discuss 1951 UN Convention, 1967 Protocol, 1980 Refugee Act, and paper topics.
Week 15: April 28
Hope, Justice, Futures
Designing for Refugee Urbanism and Sanctuary
What do we learn from this exploration of migrants and city-place building? What roles
should cities play in creating a space for migrants and refugees?
       Readings:
            • Legal Resource Center, “The Rise of Sanctuary: Getting Local Officers
                out of the Business of Deportation in the Trump Era” (reference only)
            • UN Declaration of Human Rights
            • Paul Kramer, “Who Does She Stand For? Reagan’s Statue of Liberty and
                the Sanctuary Movement,” Slate, March 05, 2018.
       Going Further:
       Agamben, Homo Sacer
       Jonathan Darling, “Cities of Sanctuary” (7)
       Nancy Fraser, Scales of Justice: Reimagining Political Space in a Globalizing
       World, 2009 (Intro, 1-11, Ch. 2 12-29) (Ch. 5 Transnationalizing the Public
       Sphere, 76-99)
Week 16:
NO CLASS
Paper Due: May 13.
                                                                                             13


                                                          Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
Source List:
Throughout the course we will read texts that use a myriad of sources. We will also take
an urban tour to situate our study of migration and cities in Austin’s built environment.
This source list is divided into built environment and migration sources. Throughout the
semester we will review some of these sources so that you can develop your writing and
researching toolkit.
Built Environment Sources:
-city maps
-fire insurance maps/ Sanborns
-plat maps
-cognitive maps
-demographic maps
-zoning maps
-architectural plans
-building history
-city directories
-institutions (ethnic associations, schools, churches, labor unions)
-historic newspapers
-city planning and redevelopment municipal documents
-real estate records, deeds
-wandering / drift
-photographs (aerial and grounded)
Migration Sources:
-census data
-immigrant organization archives (ex. Mexican Community Committee of South
Chicago)
-diaries, letters, journals
-oral history
-ethnic associations
-religious institutions
-policy debates
-non for profits
-participant observation and interviews (ethnography)
- Immigration Statistics Yearbook: https://www.dhs.gov/immigration-statistics/yearbook
Immigration Syllabus: http://editions.lib.umn.edu/immigrationsyllabus/
ICE Raid List Locations
Austin Sanctuary Network Members
Texas Department of Criminal Justice, Texas State Archives
AT UTexas Libraries:
https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/c.php?g=629103 (guide to immigration, including
“encyclopedia of American immigration, how the U.S. immigration system works, the
immigrant visa process, U.S. department of State visa glossary)
                                                                                              14


Lopez. Migratory Urbanism. Spring 2020
                                    15
