                                     Mobile Computing (iOS)
                                                 CS 371L
                                             Summer 2019
                           [85605]: MWF 11:30 am - 1:00 pm GDC 1.310
Instructor:               Dr. William C. (Bill) Bulko (bulko@cs.utexas.edu)
                          Office: GDC 4.308
                          Phone: 512-471-7021
                          Office Hours: posted at http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~bulko/
Proctor:                  Zhiting Zhu (zhitingz@cs.utexas.edu)
                          Office Hours: TBD
Course Website: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~bulko/2019summer/371L.html
Course Prerequisites: Upper-division standing; experience with an object-oriented programming
language such as C++ or Java. Credit with a grade of at least C- or registration in Computer Science 439
or 439H.
Course Textbook: None.
University Calendar: Key dates are listed at http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/18-19.
Course Objectives:
      This course is an overview of mobile computing, with an emphasis on developing applications for
      the iOS operating system. Students will complete a major project. Topics will likely include, but are
      not limited to, the Xcode development environment, the Swift language, user interfaces, maps,
      audio, networking, graphics, data storage, and localization. As part of the prerequisite, it is assumed
      that you know an object-oriented programming language such as C++ or Java.
Class Attendance and Participation Policy:
      Your performance in this class will be determined by you! It will require a strong dedication to
      learning the material, and may require a substantial time commitment to complete the semester
      programming project.
      • Class attendance is mandatory. You are expected to show up on time for class, and stay for the
        whole lecture. Since there is no required textbook, the class lectures will often be your primary
        source of information necessary to complete your homework assignments and project.
      • Cell phones must be silenced and put away for the entire lecture unless use is approved by the
        instructor. You may not make or receive calls on your cell phone, or send or receive text messages
        during lectures.
      • You are responsible for all material posted to the web site and sent as email. Ignorance of such
        material is no excuse. You are responsible for all material presented in the lectures.
      • Religious Holy Days: by UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
        fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
        examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give
        you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
      • Your conduct in class should be conducive towards a positive learning environment for your class
        mates as well as yourself.
                                                      1


Grading Procedures:
    Your performance in this class will be evaluated using your scores for 10 programming assignments
    and artifacts associated with a semester programming project. Homework will be graded by the
    TA, and the scores will be entered on Canvas. Check your scores regularly on Canvas to make sure
    that we have entered them correctly. If you wish to dispute a grade, you have one week from the
    date the grade is posted to do so. Send your TA an e-mail and see if you can resolve your
    differences. If you cannot resolve your differences, you may send me an e-mail explaining the
    situation. We will not entertain any grade disputes after one week.
               Component                    Points
     Homework assignments:
        HW1                                   35
        HW2                                   35
        HW3                                   35
        HW4                                   35
        HW5                                   35
        HW6                                   35
        HW7                                   35
        HW8                                   35
        HW9                                   35
        HW10                                  35
     Semester Project:
        Proposal Document                     65
        Design Document                       75
        Alpha Release                         100
        Beta Release                          100
        Final Release                         150
        Project Journal                       160
        (8 entries @ 20 pts each)
     Total                                   1000
    Due dates for each of the items in the above table will be posted on the course website.
    Homework:
    Homework is an individual effort, not a team assignment, and must be worked on individually.
    Turn in your assignments on time. This permits grading to start promptly after the submission
    deadline so that assignments maybe returned promptly. You can turn in homework assignments
    up to 24 hours late for a 10% penalty, or up to 48 hours late for a 20% penalty. After 48
    hours past the deadline, your assignment will not be graded and you will receive a zero.
    For all assignments, a .zip file of the project folder must be submitted using Canvas. Remember to
    keep a copy of your source code somewhere, unedited after you submit it. This will be useful
    in cases where your program gets lost or corrupted, and the timestamp on the file can be used to
    prove you completed the assignment on time.
    Assignment Identification: All assignments must be submitted with the proper file name, in the
    format LastnameFirstname-HW#.zip. (This format will be repeated in the assignment.)
    Assignments which do not match the requirements will have the grade reduced by 5% of the
    maximum grade.
                                                      2


Project:
During the semester, you will work as part of a team to design and develop a mobile application on
the iOS platfrormusing Swift. Over the course of the semester, there will be key checkpoints at
which you will be expected to complete several deliverables:
• Proposal Paper: a paper that describes the application your team intends to design and build.
• Design Paper: a paper the visually illustrates the user interface of the application, along with
  brief descriptions of each screen’s functionality.
• Alpha Release: a preliminary release of your application illustrating the user interface, along with
  partial functionality. A clear “work in progress”.
• Beta Release: the second release of your application, demonstrating most of the application’s
  functionality. An unfinished, unpolished version of your application.
• Final Release: the final version of your project. Your team will create and deliver a Powerpoint
  presentation to the class, along with a demo of the application.
Project deliverables are a team effort, not individual assignments. Late project deliverables will
not be accepted.
Project Journal:
In addition, you will be expected to maintain a Project Journal in which, on a weekly basis, you
document overall progress on your project, your personal contribution, issues or challenges faced,
and personal concerns about the project or team. Late journal entries will not be accepted.
More detail on all deliverables, including requirements and grading criteria, will be provided in
advance of each due date.
Exams:
There are no exams and no final exam for this course.
                                                3


      Final Grades:
      A standard plus/minus system will be used to calculate final grades:
            Percent          Letter Grade             Point Range
              94+                   A                  940 - 1000
            90 - 93                A-                   900 - 939
            87 - 89                B+                   870 - 899
            84 - 86                 B                   840 - 869
            80 - 83                B-                   800 - 839
            77 - 79                C+                   770 - 799
            74 - 76                 C                   740 - 769
            70 - 73                C-                   700 - 739
            60 - 69                 D                   600 - 699
             0 - 59                 F                    0 - 599
Skills & Experience Flags:
     This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
     engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
     opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major.
     You should therefore expect a non-trivial portion of your grade to come from the independent
     investigation and presentation of your own work.
Academic Integrity:
     University of Texas Honor Code: the core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
     learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
     the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
     respect toward peers and community. Each student in this course is expected to abide by this code.
     Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work.
Study Groups
      • Students may not acquire from any source (for example, another student or an internet site) a
        partial or complete solution to a problem or project that has been assigned.
      • This course will require you to collaborate on a semester project with some of your classmates.
        You are free to openly discuss project specifications, interfaces, etc., with your teammates but
        ultimately, your work must be your own.
      • Helping a friend understand the intent of a homework assignment is permitted. Helping a friend
        complete the assignment is not.
      • Students who work together too closely (e.g. design their solution together) should be aware that
        this is a form of cheating called collusion and is subject to academic penalties. Cooperation
        should never involve one student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by
        someone else, in the form of an e-mail, an e-mail attachment file, a diskette, or a hard copy.
                                                      4


     • If you are unsure about how to work together with your friend in a legal, helpful manner, do come
       and talk with us. Remember, it is always okay to "work together" with your professor or TA!
     • You are responsible for turning in your own work on all individual assignments. Unauthorized
       collusion is not allowed and constitutes a violation of the university's policies on academic
       integrity.
     • You are responsible for protecting your work from being copied by others. Should copying occur,
       both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave material to be
       copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this
       Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
     • Do not post solutions to any problems on Piazza.
     The homework, programs, and exams must be the work of students turning them in. University
     policy (see Dean of Students' policies on academic integrity) will be followed strictly. We will be
     running a sophisticated program on all submitted assignments to detect plagiarism. If we do detect
     any cases of academic dishonesty, we will assign a grade of F to all students involved and refer the
     cases to the Dean of Students.
     Acts that exceed the bounds defined by the approved collaboration practices will be considered
     cheating. Such acts include:
     • Copying solutions, code, or programs from someone else or giving someone else your solutions,
       code, or programs
     • Participation in a discussion group that develops a solution that everyone copies
     • Posting your code to homework problems on Piazza or Facebook.
     • Copying code from the internet (e.g. from Piazza or Facebook or other internet sites)
     • Employing someone to write the solutions for you on homework assignment problems.
    I urge everyone in the class to take appropriate measures for protecting your work. You should
    protect your files, homework solution sheets, etc. as deemed reasonable.
General University Notices and Policies
    Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students: All students should become familiar
    with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to
    keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to
    check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
    communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended
    that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and
    instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/
    utmail/1564 .
    Documented Disability Statement: Any student with a documented disability who requires
    academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512)
    471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
    accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
     ▪ Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
       (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative
       text conversion, etc.).
     ▪ Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field
       trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given
       day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
                                                        5


 ▪ Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
   phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information: http://
   www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
       “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
       permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course
       a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
       shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy: Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to
evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please
be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
 • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
   nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
 • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
 • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                  6
