                          sM305G - Summer 2019
                    Preparation for Calculus-WB
                                                 86434
                   Instructor: Kathryn Dabbs
                   Office: RLM 13.140
                   Online Office Hours: MWF 4:30 - 5:30 pm, or by appointment
                   E-mail: kdabbs@math.utexas.edu
                   Web: www.math.utexas.edu/~kdabbs
Course Outline and Learning Objectives
The primary objective of this course is to prepare you for one of the calculus courses offered at UT.
To this end, we will practice some basic algebra, but the course will mostly be devoted to functions:
graphs, uses, special families of functions (trigonometric, exponential, logarithmic, rational), and
limits. You will be able to:
    • Solve equations and inequalities involving polynomial, rational, exponential, logarithmic, and
      trigonometric functions.
    • Recognize the graphs and summarize the properties of polynomial, rational, exponential, loga-
      rithmic, and trigonometric functions.
    • Analyze the behavior of a function using graphs, equations, and limits, including determining
      domain, range, intercepts, end behavior, and intervals of increasing and decreasing.
    • Solve trigonometric problems using right triangle trigonometry and unit circle trigonometry.
    • Communicate solutions effectively using correct mathematical terminology and notation.
    • Construct and interpret functions as models and translate ideas among various representations
      of functions.
This course may be used to fulfill the mathematics component of the university core curriculum and
addresses the following three core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, and empirical and quantitative skills.
Required Materials
Textbook
Excerpts from Algebra and Trigonometry by Abramson and Precalculus by Abramson. Download for
free at
http://cnx.org/content/col11758/latest and
http://cnx.org/content/col11667/latest
Quest
We will be using Quest for assignments and learning modules. Quest requires a $30 charge per student
per class, with no student being charged more than $60 per semester. Please go to
http://quest.cns.utexas.edu to log in to the Quest system.
                                                   1


Course Organization
This course is divided into 13 modules, each containing several Quest learning modules, one Quest
homework assignment, and one written homework assignment.
Exams
There is one midterm and one final exam for this course. Exams are to be taken at a proctored testing
center in your area. Testing fees are not included in the cost of the course and vary by testing center.
The exams are scheduled as follows:
    • Midterm Exam: Wednesday, July 31, 2019.
    • Final Exam: Monday, August 19, 2019.
Grades
All scores are recorded in Canvas, and grades are computed as follows:
                            Event                              Percentage
                            Quest homework assignments         10%
                            Quest learning modules             5%
                            Written homework assignments       15%
                            Midterm Exam                       35%
                            Final Exam                         35%
                            Total                              100%
Three Quest learning module grades, two Quest homework grades, and two written homework grades
will be dropped. No makeups or extensions will be given for any assignments.
Your percentage grade will be rounded to the nearest whole number, and your letter grade will be
assigned according to a scale no stricter than the following:
                                  Percent    Grade   Percent    Grade
                                     93      A          73      C
                                     90      A-         70      C-
                                     87      B+         67      D+
                                     83      B          63      D
                                     80      B-         60      D-
                                     77      C+
Homework Help
There are several resources available to you to help you succeed in this course, including:
Office Hours
Online office hours will be available through Canvas conferences.
Piazza
A discussion board has been set up on Piazza for this course. Please use it to help each other with
homework problems. For math help questions, I prefer a post on Piazza rather than an email.
                                                   2


                                  General Policies and Info
Notes on the Calendar
The last day of the official add/drop period for second-term classes is July 16, and the last day to
drop with dean’s approval is August 16.
Makeups/Religious Holidays
Per university policy, the only excused absences are for official university business and for religious
holy days. These absences require documentation and advance notice. Absences for illness are not
officially excused. No make up work will be permitted for undocumented, unexcused absences for
illness or any other reason.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or
a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Calculators
A scientific calculator (such as a TI 30) can be handy in this course but will be unnecessary. You
may also use a scientific calculator app on a smartphone or tablet if you wish. Calculators will not be
allowed on exams.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a disability requiring accommodations may make a request from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, at 471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd
Academic Integrity
Academic dishonesty and plagiarism will not be tolerated in this course. Please refer to the Honor
Code and Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities, which may be
found at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint student.php.
Counseling and Mental Health Center CMHC is located in the Student Services Building (SSD)
on the fifth floor. They are open M-F 8-5, and their website is www.cmhc.utexas.edu.
                                                   3
