                                 Devotional Literature of India
ANS 340/ R S 341                                                                Prof. Dalpat Rajpurohit
The University of Texas at Austin                                         Department of Asian Studies
Spring 2019                                                                                WCH 4.104B
Class meets: TTH 12:30-2:00 at MEZ 1.122                                                 512-471-1219
Office hours: 2:30 to 3:30 TTH                                         drajpurohit@austin.utexas.edu
                                                                                   T.A. Justin Ben-Hain
                                                                               Jbenhain23@gmail.com
Course description:
In this course we will discuss the songs of major saints and their role in shaping the religious
communities of India. Bhakti (or Devotion)–which is passionate love towards god–is very much
a part of the religious lives of Indians and their popular culture. Bhakti is often thought to be a
movement against restrictive social and scriptural norms. Looking critically at the idea of this so
called “Bhakti movement”–that is understood as a force binding the south to the north, together
with other parts of India–we will read and compare devotional songs from different geographical
and linguistic regions of India from the 9th to 18th century. These include: Kabīr, Tulsīdās and
Sūrdās (from the northern side of India), Mīrā (Rajasthan), Guru Nānak (Punjab), Narsinha
Mehtā (Gujarat), Tukārām (Maharashtra), Rāmprasād (Bengal) and Āṇṭāl from Tamil Nadu. The
list is not exhaustive, but these selections will give us a good introduction to how holy men and
women expressed their religiosity through the medium of songs and poetry over the centuries.
All these works will be studied in translations.
Goals:
        To get acquainted with major devotional singers and songs from different regions of
         India.
        To discuss the religious, mythological and cultural aspects of the poetic
         compositions.
        To improve critical thinking and academic writing skills by reading and discussing
         varied secondary sources.
Required course material:
1. Hawley, J. S. & Juergensmeyer, M. (2008). Songs of the Saints of India. Oxford University
Press.
2. Course packet available for purchase at https://squareup.com/store/paradigmbooks/


Assessment:
Attendance and class participation:                                 20%
Reading homework (total 25 @ 1 point each):                         25%
Two Response papers (On any two poet-saints covered):               30%
Final paper                                                         25%
Attendance and class participation: Full attendance is required. Absences will negatively
impact your grade for attendance and class participation.
Reading homework: You are required to complete the assigned reading and write a
summary/discuss the main argument(s) or poetic theme(s) in 1-2 pages and post them on
Canvas before any given class.
Two response papers: The papers should be submitted before class on February 28th and
March 28th. Response papers should be limited to at least 1500 words per assignment, typed
in Times new roman, doubled spaced, with a 12.0 font.
Final paper: A 2500 words paper on a poet-saint other than the topic of your response
papers. Students can also choose a poet-saint of their choice beyond the syllabus by
discussing with professor. Students are required to read additional texts and secondary
sources on their topic. Bring your ideas to office hours at least three weeks before the final
paper submission date.
Grades: Over all grades can be tracked by discussing with your professor during office
hours. Grades are not posted/updated on Canvas.
Grading Scale:
A 93-100,     A- 89-92,
B+ 86-88,     B 82-85,        B- 79-81,
C+ 76-78,     C 72-75,        C- 69-71,
D+ 66-68,     D 62-65,        D- 59-61,
F 0-58
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Honor Code: The core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to
uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.


Scholastic Dishonesty and Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this
course for academic credit will be the student's own work. Students who violate University
rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. “Scholastic dishonesty”
includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records,
and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not
limited to, submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
the prior permission of the instructor, providing false or misleading information in an effort
to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment), or the
attempt to commit such an act. For further information please visit the Student Judicial
Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Documented Disability Statement: UT Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Observance Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of religious observance. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious day, I
will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
