ECO 328 COURSE SYLLABUS
INDUSTRIAL ORGANIZATION (80425)
Instructor
Prof. Shalah M. Mostashari
Office: BRB 2.130
Office hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays 11:45-12:45 or by appointment
Email: smostashari@utexas.edu
Lecture: M-F 10:00am-11:30pm, CBA 4.344
Overview
This course covers the basics of Industrial Organization (IO). IO is concerned with the workings of
markets and industries, in particular the way firms compete with each other. While Microeconomics
covers market structure, it typically focuses on the extreme cases of Perfect Competition and Monopoly.
Instead, IO is concerned primarily with the intermediate case of oligopoly, when there are a few firms
which compete but not enough to result in perfect competition. The main feature that distinguishes the
study of oligopoly from perfect competition and monopoly is that an oligopolist must consider rivals’
reactions in deciding the best strategy to employ. This never comes up in either perfect competition or
monopoly; in perfect competition, each firm just takes the market price as given and sets a quantity so
that marginal cost equals that market price. The monopolist, by definition, has no rivals to worry about.
In this course, we will be looking at the in-between cases, where each firm faces competition, but not
perfect competition. In the oligopoly framework, it is possible to study a lot of very relevant topics that
don’t arise in perfect competition. In each case, after presenting the material in a mathematical
framework, I will show how the models explain important facts in the economy or inform about
corporate strategy.
Course Objectives
1. Survey many representative topics in the field of IO, including the fundamental causes of market
power, basic theories of monopoly and oligopoly, price fixing, collusion, horizontal mergers, and vertical
mergers (time permitting), static and dynamic game theory, price discrimination, bundling, product
differentiation, predatory behavior and other strategic behavior.
2. Acquire and master basic theoretical tools to analyze the welfare consequences of strategic behavior
by firms.
3. Understand the connection of the theoretical models of IO to public policy and the real world through
a series of empirical examples.
Prerequisite: Economics 420K with a grade of at least C-. The course will be fairly mathematical and a
working knowledge of multivariate calculus is assumed.
Required Textbook and Additional Reading
The required textbook for this course is Modern Industrial Organization, by Dennis W. Carlton and
Jeffrey M. Perloff, 4th edition. I may also post links to additional reading, primarily from current news
publications or economics journals, on Canvas.
                                                                                                          1/6


ECO328 Summer 2019, Prof. Shalah M. Mostashari                                                 Course Syllabus
Grading
Your overall course score will be a weighted average of the percentage scores you receive on each of the
graded components of work, with the following weights:
    •    Exam 1                                                                                  25%
    •    Exam 2                                                                                  25%
    •    Exam 3                                                                                  25%
    •    Problem Sets                                                                            25%
Problem Sets: There will be a series of individual homework assignments throughout the course. I have
a strict homework policy. No late homework will be accepted, no matter what the excuse. Problem
sets are due within the first ten minutes of class. I will then have the TA pick up the problem sets. If
you try to turn in your problem set after that, we will not accept it, and you will receive a zero. In
fairness to the rest of the class, there will be no exceptions to this rule. However, to accommodate a
potential emergency, I will drop your lowest two problem set grades before computing your final grade.
Do not email me your problem set. If you cannot make it to class, then you may turn in a physical
time-stamped copy at the front desk in BRB prior to the deadline.
Exams: All exams are closed-book, closed-notes. You may use a calculator. You may not use any device
that can store text, equations, or graphs, or that has wireless capability (no phones, iPads, notebook
computers, etc.). Your exams must represent your own work. Any evidence of collaboration on an exam
or violation of the exam-taking conditions will be pursued with Student Judicial Services.
The format of the exams will be similar to the homework problems and consist of working out examples
of theoretical models presented in class applying them to specific case studies discussed in class or in
homework problems. If there is a curve on the exam, the curve will be applied to each exam separately.
Exams will emphasize the material covered since the last exam. However, some concepts are used
throughout the course and you will need to maintain a working understanding of that material to be
successful on the second and third exams.
Only serious and substantiated medical and personal emergencies will be accepted as valid reasons for a
missed exam. Otherwise, a missed exam generally will be given a zero. If you miss an exam for a valid
reason, you will be given a makeup exam.
Letter Grade: After your weighted average score is calculated for the semester, the following
conversion table will be used to give you a letter grade.
                                                                                                           2/6


ECO328 Summer 2019, Prof. Shalah M. Mostashari                                                  Course Syllabus
               Percent          letter grade
                93 –              A
             90 to < 93           A–
             87 to < 90           B+
             83 to < 87           B
             80 to < 83           B–
             77 to < 80           C+
             73 to < 77           C
             70 to < 73           C–
             60 to < 70           D
                < 60              F
Exam Dates
         Exam 1: Friday July 26
         Exam 2: Friday August 9
         Exam 3: Friday August 16
Course website and communication
The official website of the course will be on Canvas. Please refer to that website for announcements,
daily schedules with specific reading assignments, homework assignments, exam solutions, reading that
is not in the textbook, and other course content: https://canvas.utexas.edu/.
Make sure that your email address on Canvas is correct. Check your email at least once a day. Your
email address on Canvas is the email address that UT has on file for official communication with you,
and you are responsible for any communication with you using that email address, as well as any other
email address that you have used to contact me.
You are responsible for all information communicated in lecture. I will make every effort to post
important announcements on Canvas, but once information has been given in lecture, you are
responsible for that information. If you miss a lecture, it is your responsibility to get the notes from
another student.
Teaching Assistant
This course will have a teaching assistant (TA). The TA will hold office hours by appointment, handle
questions about grades, and assist with logistical and administrative tasks. For questions of course
content or help with the problems sets, students should visit the professor during office hours or by
appointment.
TA contact information:
Name: Anthony Maxam
Email: anthony.maxam@utexas.edu
Office: BRB 3.146
Office Hours by appointment only
                                                                                                            3/6


ECO328 Summer 2019, Prof. Shalah M. Mostashari                                                  Course Syllabus
Student conduct during lecture
Lecture is not a place where you collect information that you study later – lectures are structured so that
important learning occurs during lecture. The rules concerning student conduct are intended to ensure
an environment that is conducive to learning. It is expected that you will be quiet and ready for lecture
to start promptly, and that you will stay quiet (no chatting, no packing up) until lecture ends. You must
be on time and do not depart early. If for some exceptional reason, you must arrive late or leave
early, you should notify me by email or inform me at the start of class. Background noise is distracting
and disruptive to your fellow students and to the instructor; do your part to maintain a quiet
environment during lecture by not talking. During lecture, you should not use a laptop, tablet or
any other electronic device. Lectures move rapidly and you will take a lot of notes.
Additional policies
Students with disabilities: Any student with a disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities in the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259
(voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for users who are hearing-impaired) to request an official letter for your
professor that lists your authorized accommodations. UT policy requires students requesting
accommodations to notify their professors in advance, and we will adhere to the policies of SSD
concerning advance notification. I’d appreciate notification as soon as possible (even if you don’t yet
have the official letter, you can email me that it’s on the way). Early notification helps me schedule
appropriate accommodations.
Religious holy days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify your professor of your pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss an exam or
one of the attendance bonus quizzes in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you become worried about someone’s behavior, you may
call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050 to discuss your concerns. This service is
provided by the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal for more information.
Emergencies: Occupants of buildings on the UT- Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building or room. In the event
of an evacuation, follow the instructions of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, the UT-Austin Police Department, or the
Fire Prevention Services office. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor
in writing during the first week of class.
Policy on scholastic dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Because such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please
                                                                                                            4/6


ECO328 Summer 2019, Prof. Shalah M. Mostashari                                                                      Course Syllabus
visit the Student Judicial Services web site at www.deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/. The University’s
expectations for student conduct are grounded in the University Honor Code:
           The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
           individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
           these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect towards peers and community.
University students are expected to abide by all city, state, and federal laws and statutes and all
regulations of the University and The University of Texas System. However, as a community of scholars,
the University expects from its students a higher standard of conduct than that required simply to avoid
discipline. The principles of the University Honor Code both govern and direct student conduct, to
promote a safe environment that is conducive to academic success and to ensure that each University
student graduates ready to contribute to society as an ethical citizen.
“Academic dishonesty” or “scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying
academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but
not limited to, submission of essentially the same written assignment for two classes without the prior permission of the
instructor), or the attempt to commit such an act.
“Cheating” includes (but is not limited to)
(1) copying from another student’s test paper, project, or other assignment;
(2) failing to comply with instructions given by the person administering a test, project, or other assignment, or given in
conjunction with the completion of course requirements;
(3) use or possession of materials that are not authorized by the person giving the test, project, or other assignment, including
but not limited to class notes, calculators, electronic devices, and specifically designed “crib notes”; the presence of textbooks
constitutes a violation only if they have been specifically prohibited by the person administering the test;
(4) providing aid or assistance to or receiving aid or assistance from another student or individual, without authority, in
conjunction with a test, project, or other assignment;
(5) discussing the contents of a test with another student who will take the test;
(6) divulging the contents of a test, for the purpose of preserving questions for future use, when the instructor has designated
that the test is not to be removed from the examination room or is not to be returned to or kept by the student;
(7) substituting for another person or permitting another person to substitute for oneself to take a class, a test, or any class-
related assignment;
(8) using, buying, stealing, transporting, soliciting, or coercing another person to obtain answers to or information about an un-
administered test, project, or other assignment;
(9) falsifying research data, laboratory reports, other academic work offered for credit, or work done in conjunction with the
completion of course requirements;
(10) taking, keeping, misplacing, or damaging the property of the University, or of another, if the student knows or reasonably
should know that an unfair academic advantage would be gained by such conduct; (11) altering a test paper, project, or other
assignment to gain an academic advantage.
                                                                                                                                  5/6


ECO328 Summer 2019, Prof. Shalah M. Mostashari                                    Course Syllabus
Tentative Schedule of Topics
                                                                                 Text
  Class  Day     Date      Topic                                                 Reading
  1      Mon.    7/15      Introduction: What is Industrial Organization?        Ch 1
  2      Tue.    7/16      Technology and Cost                                   Ch 2
  3      Wed.    7/17      Technology and Cost                                   Ch 2
  4      Thur.   7/18      Competition and Welfare Analysis                      Ch 3
  5      Fri.    7/19      Monopoly                                              Ch 4
  6      Mon.    7/22      Oligopoly: Cartels                                    Ch 5
  7      Tue.    7/23      Oligopoly: Game Theory                                Ch 6
  8      Wed.    7/24      Oligopoly: Cournot                                    Ch 6
  9      Thur.   7/25      Oligopoly: Bertrand and Stackelberg                   Ch 6
  10     Fri.    7/26      Exam 1
  11     Mon.    7/29      Oligopoly: Equilibria in Multiperiod Games            Ch 6
  12     Tue.    7/30      Oligopoly: Equilibria in Multiperiod Games cont’d     Ch 6
  13     Wed.    7/31      Monopolistic Competition and Product Variety          Ch 7
  14     Thur.   8/1       Monopolistic Competition and Product Variety cont’d   Ch 7
  15     Fri.    8/2       Price Discrimination: Linear Pricing                  Ch 9
  16     Mon.    8/5       Price Discrimination: Linear Pricing cont’d           Ch 9
  17     Tue.    8/6       Price Discrimination: Nonlinear Pricing               Ch 10
  18     Wed.    8/7       Bundling                                              Ch 10
  19     Thur.   8/8       Bundling                                              Ch 10
  20     Fri.    8/9       Exam 2
  21     Mon.    8/12      Noncooperative Strategic Behavior                     Ch 11
  22     Tue.    8/13      Noncooperative Strategic Behavior                     Ch 11
  23     Wed.    8/14      Vertical Integration and Vertical Restrictions        Ch 12
  24     Thur.   8/15      Vertical Integration and Vertical Restrictions cont’d Ch 12
  25     Fri.    8/16      Exam 3
                                                                                              6/6
