            RTF 301N/AAS 310/AMS 315 – Asian American Film History
                                                  Fall 2019
                                           T/TH 11am-12:30pm
                                                  RLP 1.102
Professor: Curran Nault
Office Hours: Tuesdays, 3:30-6:30pm (by appointment), CMA 6.128C
Email: cnault@utexas.edu
Course Overview
This course will consider Asian American film from a historical perspective, from the pioneers of the silent
era, to the Crazy Rich Asian blockbuster of today. Students will explore Asian American films from a
number of cinematic genres (romance, action, comedy) and forms (Hollywood, independent,
documentary, experimental), as well as their attendant constraints and freedoms. Foundational to this
course is the belief that film history can only be understood in relation to dominant social structures and
the workings of the film industries and, as such, textual, reception and industrial analysis will all be
employed. Key issues discussed will include: Hollywood and hegemonic representation; the rise of Asian
American independents; oppositional practices of Asian American creation and spectatorship;
intersections of race, class, gender and sexuality; the exhibition and distribution strategies of Asian
American film festivals; and transnational Asian (American) cinema. While this course will focus primarily
on cinema, students will also have the opportunity to examine related forms of Asian American
mediamaking, including the contemporary turn to web series and TV shows like Fresh off the Boat.
Course Goals
By the end of the semester, students should:
     •   Have a greater understanding of the breadth and complexity of AA film and film history
     •   Be able to critically analyze cinematic representations of AAs and apply theoretical insights to
         their analyses
     •   Possess further knowledge about AA spectatorship and industrial practices and how to research
         these practices
     •   Appreciate the intersections of AA film and identities of class, gender, sexuality and nation
Course Materials
All readings will be posted on Canvas. Students are responsible for retrieving and printing them.
                                                       1


Evaluation
Midterm...30%
Final...40%
Journals…15%
Attendance/Participation…15%
Grading Scale: This class will use the standard +/- grading scale.
Midterm and Final Examinations will be a combination of multiple choice and short essay questions.
The final exam will require students to recall key theories and concepts from earlier in the course.
PLAN AHEAD. Do not make plans that will cause you to miss any exam. If you must miss an exam for a
documented reason (illness, family emergency or school-sanctioned event), I may allow you to take a
make-up exam. The format of a make-up exam may differ substantially from the regular exam. Be aware
that fabricating a reason for missing or delaying an examination is a form of academic misconduct.
Journals: Students will keep weekly journals via the discussion board on Canvas. In these journals,
students will record reactions to class screenings and readings. Your journal should be thoughtful,
specific and contain clear critical insights. Often you will be given a specific question(s) to address.
However, at times you will be at liberty to write about what most interests you most. Unless otherwise
stated, your journal entries will be due by Noon on Mondays. Entries will be reviewed throughout the
semester. Students are encouraged to read and engage each other’s work.
Class Participation is a grade that must be earned; it requires more than being a warm body in class.
For a high grade, you must be an active participant. This means asking and answering questions, and
listening attentively and respectfully to me and your classmates. Students who are repeatedly disruptive
will receive a poor class participation grade. This includes but is not limited to: talking/whispering to your
neighbor, talking/text-messaging on a phone, checking email/playing computer games, sleeping, and
noisily packing your books before class has ended.
**NOTE: Pop Quizzes may be given as a component of your participation grade.**
Attendance: Students are permitted two absences for any reason without penalty. Further absences (for
any reason) will require students to write a 500-word summary of the reading for that day or be
penalized ten points from their attendance/participation grade.
About the Course
“Will This Be On The Test?” Your best bet is to assume that the answer is “yes.” Everything, including
but not limited to: lectures, discussions, readings, clips, screenings and online material, is ‘fair game.’
Reading assignments should be done prior to the class period for which they are listed. Students who
fall behind in the readings will find it difficult to succeed in this course.
Cultural Diversity Flag: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of U.S. cultural groups that have experienced persistent marginalization.
Difficult Course Content: At times this semester we will be discussing and viewing material that may
be upsetting to some students. In a class dedicated to a minority cinema, the engagement, discussion
and critique of significant, but sometimes difficult, issues related to race, gender, sexuality, etc., is to be
                                                          2


expected. If you ever feel the need to step outside during one of these discussions or viewings, you may
do so without academic penalty. You will, however, be responsible for any material you miss.
Services for students with disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Academic misconduct: Cheating will not be tolerated. Expect me to pursue every instance of
suspected academic misconduct in this course. Two kinds of academic misconduct are cheating on
quizzes and exams, and plagiarism (such as turning in someone else’s work, downloading a paper from
the Web in part or in whole, or paraphrasing or quoting sources without citation). Penalties range from a
zero on the assignment to expulsion from school.
The work that you turn in should honestly and accurately demonstrate your own academic efforts. Your
assignments should also reflect work done for this course. Do not turn in assignments done for another
course or attempt to pass off as “research” readings or screenings from another course.
I expect all of you to know the University’s full definition of academic misconduct and its possible
penalties. Information on academic integrity and disciplinary action is available online at
<http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html>. Please see me if you have questions.
Course Schedule
Note: Readings should be read prior to the class period under which they are listed.
INTRODUCTION
Week 1: Introduction
8/29              Course Introduction
PART 1: HOLLYWOOD HISTORIES / REPRESENTATIONAL REGIMES
Week 2: Orientalism
9/3               Read: Excerpt from Said, Orientalism
9/5               In-class screening: The Mask of Fu-Manchu (Brabin, 1932)
Week 3: From Yellow Peril To Model Minority
9/10              Read: Ono and Pham, “The Persistence of Yellow Peril Discourse”
                  In-class excerpts from “yellow peril” texts
9/12              Read: Ono and Pham, “Threatening Model Minorities”
                  In class excerpts from “model minority” texts
Week 4: Warring Images
9/17              Read: Renov, “Warring Images”
                                                       3


              In-class screening: Days of Waiting (Okazaki, 1988)
9/19          Read: Powell, “Framing Islam”
              In-class screening: Pilgrimage (Nakamura, 2003) and/or excerpt from The Feeling of
              Being Watched (Boundaoui, 2019)
Week 5: Style Over Substance (or Asian American Films without Asian Americans)
9/24          Read: Nguyen, “The Cultural Economy of Asian Chic”
              In-class excerpts from music videos and other pop culture phenomenon
9/26          Read: Park, “Style, Visibility, Future”
              In class excerpts: Karate Kid, Blade Runner, Mr. Robot and/or Battlestar Galactica
Week 6: Comedy Conundrums
10/1          Read: Howells, “Is it Because I Is Black?”
              In-class excerpts from Ali G. and others
10/3          Read: Gillota, “Peoples of Color: Multiethic Humor in Harold and Kumar”
              In class-screening: Harold and Kumar Go to White Castle (Leiner, 2004)
Week 7: Midterm
10/8          Film Discussion and Midterm Review
10/10         MIDTERM
PART 2: INDEPENDENT INSURGENCE
Week 8: Orientalism Artivism
10/15         Read: Louie, “When We Wanted it Done, We Did it Ourselves”
              In-class screening: Fall of the I-Hotel (Choy, 1983)
10/17         Read: Xing, “A Cinema in the Making”
              In-class excerpts from Marion Wong, Wayne Wang and others
Week 9: Yellow Peril Power: The Hollywood Hero
10/22         Begin: Enter the Dragon (Clouse, 1973)
              Read: Chan, “Bruce Lee’s Fictional Modes of Masculinity”
10/24         Finish: Enter the Dragon*
              Read: Nishime, “Reviving Bruce: Negotiating Asian Masculinity Through Bruce Lee
              Paratexts” and online coverage of Quentin Tarantino/Bruce Lee controversy
Week 10: Malcontent Model Minority: Queer & Feminist Frameworks
10/29         Read: Xing, “Hybrid Cinema by Asian American Women”
              In class excerpts of From Hollywood to Hanoi (Nga), Surname Viet, Given Name Nam
              (Trinh) and others
                                                     4


10/31          Read: Oishi, “Bad Asians”
               In-class excerpts from Hoang Tan Nguyen, Tina Takemoto, Ming Wong and others
Week 11: Malcontent Model Minority: Other “Bad” Asians
11/5           Screen: Better Luck Tomorrow (Lin, 2003)
               Read: Hillenbrand, “Of Myths and Men: Better Luck Tomorrow and the Mainstreaming of
               Asian American Cinema”
11/7           Screen: Gook (Chon, 2017)*
               Read: Sung: “Koreans Gone Bad: The LA Riots, Comparative Racialization and Branding a
               Politics of Deviance”
Week 12: Haunting Warring Images: Afterlife of Atrocity
11/12          Discussion of Better Luck Tomorrow and Gook
11/14          Read: Nault: “The Specter of Filipinx Femmepire”
               In-class excerpts: Call Her Ganda (Raval, 2018)
Week 13: Comedy Conundrums Clapbacks
11/19          Read: Davé, “Racial Accents, Hollywood Casting and Asian American Studies”
               In class screening: Master of None
11/21          Screen: The Problem with Apu (Kondabolou, 2017)
Week 14: Filmic Futures
11/26          Screen: Crazy Rich Asians (Chu, 2018) and/or The Farewell (Wang, 2019)
               Read: Ito, “Why Did it Take So Long to See a Cast Like This?” and Ho, “How Crazy Rich
               Asians is Going to Change Hollywood.”
11/28          THANKSGIVING (No class)
Week 15: Filmic Futures Cont’d
12/3           Discussion of Crazy Rich Asians/The Farwell and review for final exam
12/5           Final Exam
Note: With advanced warning, this syllabus is subject to revision.
                                                    5
