                                Cultural Anthropology, Fall 2018
                        ANT 302 (31220+), MW, 9:00-10:00am, (BEL 328)
                        Dr. John Hartigan, https://twitter.com/aesopsanthro
                       Tel.232-9201; E-mail: johnhartigan@austin.utexas.edu
            Office Hours (SAC 4.158): Mon. & Wed. 2:00-3:00pm (& by appointment)
   Teaching Assistants: Danielle Good, Daniel Ng, Samuel Law (office hours by appointment)
Objectives: This class has two objectives. The first is to present students with an overview of the
idea of culture and a general survey of the anthropological perspective on the realms of human
meaning. The second is to engage students in a more detailed glimpse of one broad cultural
order: modern industrialism and capitalist society. This course progresses from a basic
groundwork for cultural analysis to a more developed examination of the cultural forms that
structure our daily lives. We will conclude this course by considering how the emergence of the
postindustrial economy and the diffuse process of globalization are changing cultural identities.
Dynamics: The lectures and readings will present various aspects of cultural phenomenon, using
examples drawn from around the globe and our everyday lives. You must read the required texts
and attend class daily if you want to understand and benefit from the lectures. Section
discussions will be geared towards clarifying texts and grappling with the insights and issues
raised in lectures, readings, and films.
Grading and Course Requirements: Evaluations in this course will be based on two exams and
one ethnographic project. The first exam will cover roughly the first eight weeks of the course,
and the second one will cover the remainder; each will represent 30% of your grade. The
ethnographic project will also account for 30% of your overall grade. Class participation (i.e.
active involvement in discussions, attendance, etc.) will count for 10% of the final grade.
Attendance Policy: Attendance for lectures is expected and is mandatory for discussion
sections. Students with three or more unexcused absences from discussions will have their final
evaluation reduced by at least one letter grade.
Books:
The Tapestry of Culture: An Introduction to Cultural Anthropology, by Rosman and Rubel.
Culture Builders: A Historical Anthropology of Middle-Class life, by Frykman and Lofgren.
Driving After Class: Anxious Times in an American Suburb, Rachel Heiman.
Additional readings will be posted on Canvas.
Class Schedule:
Week 1
August 29: Introduction.
Week 2
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 1.
September 5: Culture


Week 3
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 2.
September 10: Ethnography
September 12: Social Organization
Week 4
Readings: Tapestry, pgs 210-219; Foley, “Great American Football Ritual”; “Body Ritual
Among the Nacirema,” Miner; “Restaurants, Ideal Postmodern Institutions” and “Tipping: An
Anthropological Meditation,” in Restaurants Book.
September 17: Ritual
September 19: Ritual
Week 5
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 3 & 4.
September 24: Language & Culture
September 26: Learning Culture
Week 6
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 5.
October 1: Symbols
October 3: Symbols
Week 7
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 11.
October 8: Myth
October 10: Race
Week 8
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 6 & 10.
October 15: Kinship
October 17: Religion
Week 9 [ethnographic research topics due in disc. sections]
October 22: 1ST EXAM
October 24: Economics; Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 8
Week 10
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 9; Culture Builders, Chapters 1-2.
October 29: Power
October 31: Industrial Society
Week 11
Readings: Culture Builders, Chapters 3-6.
November 5: Industrial Society
November 7: Industrial Society


Week 12
Readings: Driving, Chapters 1-4.
November 12: Class Culture in the U.S.
November 14: Class Culture in the U.S.
Week 13
Readings: Driving, Chapters 5-6.
November 19: Class Culture in the U.S.
Week 14
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 13-14.
November 26: Nations and Transnational Identity
November 28: Nations and Transnational Identity
Week 15
Readings: Tapestry, Chapter 12.
December 3: Artistic Dimensions
December 6: Concluding reflections.
Last Class
December 10: 2ND EXAM.


Ethnographic project: (7 pgs, due December 14th) Based on interviews and additional
observations, you will write an ethnographic analysis of a cultural setting or dynamic in Austin.
The goals are 1) to apply what you have learned about culture in this course; 2) to develop some
facility with ethnographic observation and description. You will be presented with numerous
examples of such projects over the course of the semester. As well, these projects will be the
subject of extensive consideration in the weekly discussion sections. These projects will be your
opportunity to try out this approach to social science research. Your project may be comparative,
by trying to compare one or more settings, or you could singularly focus on just one location.
Ethnographic research is assembled from an array of preliminary tasks, which will be covered
and assessed in discussion sections over the last few weeks of the term. Such preliminary tasks
include:
= Identify your cultural assumptions and orientations.
= Formulating a cultural question or frame of analysis.
= Practicing techniques of observation and interviewing.
= Identifying relevant units of analysis.
= Analyzing portions of interviews.
A detailed rubric for this assignment will be presented and discussed during a lecture session.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
UT Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html) Familiarize
yourself with University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of plagiarizing:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Penalties for violation of this Code can include failure of the course and University disciplinary
action.
