                                      Part of the “Lupe & Sirena” by Alma Lopez
  MAS 374 (40045) (AFR 372C, AMS 370, WGS 335)                           LATINX SEXUALITIES
  Syllabus                                                               Spring 2020
Instructor: Dr. Lilia Raquel Rosas                             Email: lrosas@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION
The publishing of Compañeras: Latina Lesbians in 1987 represents a pathbreaking disruption, which works
to humanize, demystify, and complicate the narratives of Latina sexualities at the height of the AIDS
pandemic. Told from multiple perspectives by intermingling the voices of scholars, writers, poets, and
truth-tellers, this text is still a testament to the stories we must continue to research and analyze to
underscore the nuances of Latin@/x racialized sexual formations. In this course, students will chart and
examine Latinx Sexualities from a historical perspective to comprehend the social, cultural, political, and
economic factors, which have shaped these experiences. We also will challenge the simplistic and
monolithic notions of sexualities that have plagued dominant discourses about Latinx sexuality. Finally,
we will evaluate and reflect upon how Latin@/x communities (across sexualities, queerness, and
heteronormativity) have defined themselves, resisted repression(s), and participated in their own
emancipation of identities, expressions, and desires from their perspectives as indigenous, Afrolatin@/x,
and (me)Xican@/x peoples.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will improve their analytical abilities through reading, writing, researching and discussing class
materials. As a course within the curriculum of MALS, students will learn about the subtilties within Latinx
Sexualities, and, specifically the experiences of indigenous, Afrolatin@/x, and (me)Xican@/x, Latin@/x
peoples. Ultimately, they will learn to think critically about the emerging field of Latinx sexual history and
defend original arguments, investigate topics within of the scope of history, ethnic studies, queer studies,
and other burgeoning arenas, and they will be able to:


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                          Spring 2020                                                    2
1. Be familiar and analyze the significant forces, events, groups, and individuals relevant to historical
    struggles and freedoms in the meanings, regulations, and politics of Latinx sexual expressions,
    identities, and desires.
2. Use and prioritize the analytical lenses of sexuality and race, along with gender and class (among other
    lenses) to understand the identity formations, subjectivities, and the multiple oppressions confronted
    by Latinx people through their sexualities.
3. Recognize the importance of sociocultural movements, political mobilizations, legal contestations, and
    transnational/labor migrations in shaping the erotics, reproduction, identities, and kinships of Latinx
    sexualities.
This course carries 3-flags:
Cultural Diversity in the United States: Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect
a substantia portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
Writing: Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic
discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. Students should
therefore expect a substantial portion of his/her grade to come from your written work.
Independent Inquiry: This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent investigation
and presentation of your own work.
COMMUNICATION & CLASSROOM SUCCESS
Please feel free to email me since this is the best and most effective way to contact me. I check it frequently,
so email me whenever you have questions or concerns. I also strongly encourage you to talk to me during
office hours, before or after class, or make an appointment with me if you have any questions, comments,
or other issues.
In my experience, students who stop by to talk, email, or communicate frequently, attend class regularly,
complete the assigned readings, participate in the classroom discussion, and all assignments tend to be
more successful in the class. Similarly, I will email you regularly with reminders, instructions, and late
breaking information. Last, if I ever cancel class, email and/or Canvas is how you will know it, so please
check both daily.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Assigned books and course materials (available at University Coop Bookstore or the bookstore of your
choice) to purchase or rent OR available to digitally via UT libraries:
                       Findlay, Eileen J. Suárez.                          Glave, Thomas, ed. Our Caribbean:
                                Imposing Decency: The                              A Gathering of Lesbian and
                                Politics of Sexuality and                          Gay Writing from the Antilles.
                                Race in Puerto Rico,                               Durham: Duke University
                                1870-1920. Durham:                                 Press, 2008
                                Duke University
                                Press, 1999.


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                         Spring 2020                                                    3
                       Lara, Ana-Maurine. Erzulie’s                         Mitchell, Pablo. West of Sex: Making
                               Skirt. Washington:                                   Mexican America, 1900-
                               RedBone Press, 2006.                                 1930. Chicago: Univ. of
                                                                                    Chicago Press, 2012.
                       Reyes-Boitel, Jo. Michael +
                               Josephine: a novel in verse.
                               McAllen, TX:
                               FlowerSong Books,
                               2019.
Additional articles and chapter excerpts will be made available on CANVAS and/or via an online link.
Readings and handouts distributed in class and/or via Canvas during the course of the semester will
become also part of your required readings.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Attendance: Attendance is required and repeated absences will be noted by detrimentally impacting your
participation grade. When missing class, you must provide a valid reason for your absence with appropriate
documentation. This policy does not include absences due to university-related activities (sports,
conferences), or to serious medical issues (severe illness or death in the immediate family), which are
excused and not deducted (with documentation). Three (3) or more unexcused or “no contact “absences
will result in the overall grade reduction of full letter grade (10%).
Class Participation: Come prepared and on time to class. This includes that you bring the appropriate
reading(s) and course materials, and complete the assigned reading. Make sure when you read, you
read actively. Consider questions such as the following while you read, which may also help with your
regular journaling assignment: What is the argument or purpose of this work or chapter? What kind of
issue(s) are the authors addressing? Why is this reading significant? How can I highlight a significant
point(s) in the class discussion through a specific example(s)? What questions or issues does the reading
cause me to reflect about in my own understanding?
Assignments will include:
Participation: Be ready to discuss and engage in class actively. This is explained more fully under
“Attendance” and “Class Participation,” in the syllabus (see above).
Reading Journal: You also will be responsible for maintaining a reading journal throughout the semester
that you will create and keep up on Canvas. This will be a place to reflect on select assigned reading for
that class day/week and offer your thoughts to share with class colleagues to consider as well. The purpose
of the journal is to cultivate a practice of active, critical, and evaluative reading, which ultimately will be
beneficial in your development as a researcher and writer.
Research Proposal and Annotated Bibliography: In the 3-4 page proposal, you will identify and discuss
your proposed topic and argument for your semester-long final research paper, which will allow you to
delve more deeply into a topic addressed in class or tackle an arena, which needs closer consideration or
intrigues your interest. Additionally, you will provide a detailed annotated bibliography with 10-12 sources.


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                        Spring 2020                                                     4
Reflection Essay: Through a reflection, students will evaluate the critical significance and practice of
imagining a history of Latinx sexualities through distinctive sources and materials identified in the course.
Rough Draft of Final Paper: In this 8-10 page preliminary paper, you will provide a draft of your final
research paper. This paper will be an opportunity to unearth/reclaim an area of the Latinx Sexualities,
which needs further investigation.
Oral Presentation: Your in-class presentation will be an opportunity for you to highlight the most salient
elements of your research conducted for the final paper. You also will have an opportunity to create a
social media site to further illustrate your research.
Final Paper: In this final 10-12 page original paper, you will pursue a semester-long rigorous inquiry on a
previously identified topic where you develop and write an analytical research paper to elucidate ideas and
stories, which have informed the Latinx Sexualities experience
The grade distribution for each requirement/assignment will be as follows and none are negotiable:
     •   Attendance & Participation         15%                   •    Reflection Essay                10%
     •   Reading Journal                    10%                   •    Rough Draft of Final Paper      10%
     •   Research Proposal. & Bibliography                        •    Oral Presentation               20%
                                            5%                    •    Final Paper                     30
Class Expectations: Learning Principle: This course uses the principle of collaborative learning or seminar
format. In other words, I believe the classroom is a place of mutual respect and shared learning. In
addition, it is a place where everyone’s informed or well-thought comments will be valued. This means we
are here to learn from each other. I expect you to participate by listening, making comments, responding
to your classmates, and asking questions. In turn, I will facilitate, direct, summarize, and clarify the
discussion. Participation means more than just coming to class and hoping that you can get the answers
from the instructor or the students who talk a lot. Collaborative learning means that it is your responsibility
to share your own considered perspective on the assigned reading, assignment, or topic. In turn, the class
will be structured to make sure that your views will enhance our understanding of the purpose of each
class discussion.
Common Courtesy: Overall, you are also expected to conduct yourself appropriately by turning off your
cell phones and other electronic devices or safely securing them in a pocket, purse, backpack, or book bag
with the ringer/tones turned off. Texting or “secret surfing/chatting” on computers (other devices) in our
classroom (Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest, Instagram, Snapchat, WhatsApp, Hulu, Netflix, etc.) is
also not allowed. While these may seem like minor infractions, they contribute to a disrespectful and
unprofessional classroom environment that interferes with the work all of us are trying to accomplish
together.
COURSE POLICIES
Statement on Learning Success: Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations
because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we will develop strategies to meet both your needs
and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
through UT Austin. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or
Center if you would like.


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                       Spring 2020                                                         5
Grading: The final course grade will be assigned based on the completion of the course requirements
within the semester and will adhere the following grading scale:
            Grade           Cutoff
            A               94%
            A-              90%
            B+              87%
            B               84%
            B-              80%
            C+              77%
            C               74%
            C-              70%
            D               65%
            F               <65%
Assignment Guidelines and Late Work: I will distribute detailed guidelines as we approach certain assignments
such as the proposal, essays, paper, and presentations. All assigned work is due on the due date, and is
submitted via Canvas.
Please do not count on uploading/submitting your assignments via Canvas right before the class meeting
time. Inevitably, the computer labs are crowded or servers fail when you are in such a rush, and these are
not valid excuses for late assignments.
Late assignments will be penalized one-half grade (5 points) if turned in within 48 hours of the due date,
and one full grade (10 points) if turned in within one calendar week of the due date. After that, they will
be penalized 15 points every day. I also reserve the right to grade these papers until the end of the semester.
Late papers will only be accepted without penalty if you negotiate an alternative due date with me at
least 48 hours prior to the due date and turn in the paper within a week of the original deadline. Likewise,
it is up to my discretion to decide which circumstances constitute the need for an alternative due date.
Otherwise, late papers will be penalized according to the aforementioned guidelines.
Student Rights & Responsibilities:
      • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
      • You have a right to respect.
      • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
      • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
      • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
      • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
          learning environment.
      • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
          isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
         teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
     • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and
         your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
         excluded.


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                         Spring 2020                                                   6
     •    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
          standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals
and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender
variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will
gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity: Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words
or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor
Code          which        can       be       found       at      the       following       web       address:
https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students: Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes
students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if
you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss
your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If
appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
(video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating
well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle.
You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the
college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often
helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety       or      depression,       we      strongly     encourage       you      to     seek    support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                          Spring 2020                                                     7
The Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more t3han one-third of UT undergraduate students use
the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome
to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Other resources include:
Undergraduate Writing Center:                                ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
http://uwc.utexas.edu/                                       Student Emergency Services:
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/                        http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
          involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Emergency Evacuation: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ state:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
          that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
          of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter
          a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
          Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
          at: www.utexas.edu/emergency


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                        Spring 2020                                                     8
                                              COURSE SCHEDULE
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
http://utexas.instructure.com/. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
schedule. Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive
the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
 Date                          Topics/Items Due
                             WEEK ONE: REFASHIONING LATINX SEXUALITIES
 Monday, 20 January            Martin Luther King Jr. Day Holiday: No Class
 Wednesday, 22 January         Introductions and Course Syllabus
                             WEEK TWO: REFASHIONING LATINX SEXUALITIES
 Monday, 27 January            • Reading: Pablo Mitchell, “Making Sex Matter: Histories of Latina/o
                               Sexualities, 1898 to 1965,” in Latina/o Sexualities: Probing Powers, Passions,
                               Practices, and Policies, pp. 38-47 (Canvas)
                               Gayle S. Rubin, “Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the Politics
                               of Sexuality,” in Deviations: A Gayle Rubin Reader, pp. 137-181 (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 29 January         • Reading: Emma Pérez, “Queering the Borderlands: The Challenges of
                               Excavating the Invisible and Unheard,” Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies,
                               24.2/3: Gender on the Borderlands (2003), pp. 122-131: https://www-
                               jstor-org.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu:2444/stable/3347351 (Canvas)
                               Nayan Shah, “Race-ing Sex,” Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies 35:1
                               (2014), pp. 26-36: https://www-jstor-
                               org.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu:2444/stable/10.5250/fronjwomestud.35.1.0026
                               (Canvas)
                               Cynthia M. Blair, “African American Women’s Sexuality,” Frontiers: A
                               Journal of Women Studies 35.1 (2014): pp. 4-10: https://www-jstor-
                               org.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu:2444/stable/10.5250/fronjwomestud.35.1.0004
                                (Canvas)
                               Gloria González-López, “Heterosexuality Exposed: Some Feminist
                               Sociological Reflections on Heterosexual Sex and Romance in U.S.
                               Latina/o Communities,” in Latina/o Sexualities, pp. 103-116 (Canvas)
                               Reading Journal Due
                        WEEK THREE: INDIGENOUS MODALITIES OF LIFE & LAND
 Monday, 3 February            • Reading: Gabriel S. Estrada, “Two-spirit Histories in Southwestern
                               and Mesoamerican Literatures,” in Gender and Sexuality in Indigenous North
                               America, 1400-1850, pp. 165-184:
                               https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/12n4s7g/pq_eb
                               ook_centralEBC2054803
                                (Canvas)
                               Patrisia Gonzales, Red Medicine: Traditional Indigenous Rites of Birthing and
                               Healing (Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2012),
                               Chapter 1: “Anatomy of Learning: Yauhtli, Peyotzin, Tobacco, and
                               Maguey” (Canvas)
                               Chapter 2: “Birth Ceremony: Storying Sacred Knowledge” (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 5 February         • Reading: Gonzales, Red Medicine, Chapters 5: “Ceremony of the Land
                               ¿Y dónde está tu ombligo?” (Canvas)
                               Chapter 7: “Dreaming Ceremony: Medicine Dreams” (Canvas)
                               Research Proposal & Bibliography Due Friday, 7 February


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                Spring 2020                                                   9
             WEEK FOUR: EMPIRE-BUILDING UPON COLONIAL BODIES & RESISTANCE
 Monday, 10 February     • Reading: Suárez Findlay, Imposing Decency, Chapter 1: “Respectable Ponce:
                         Deciphering the Codes of Power, 1855-1898”
                         Chapter 2: “Motherhood, Marriage, and Morality: Male Liberals and
                         Bourgeois Feminists, 1873-1898”:
                         https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/171befj/alma99
                         1057930372306011
 Wednesday, 12 February • Reading: Suárez Findlay, Imposing Decency, Chapter 3: “Decent Men and
                         Unruly Women: Prostitution in Ponce, 1890-1900”
                         Reading Journal Due
             WEEK FIVE: EMPIRE-BUILDING UPON COLONIAL BODIES & RESISTANCE
 Monday, 17 February     • Reading: Suárez Findlay, Imposing Decency, Chapter 4: “Marriage and
                         Divorce in the Formation of the New Colonial Order, 1898–1910”
                         Chapter 5: “Slavery, Sexuality, and the Early Labor Movement, 1900-1917”
 Wednesday, 19 February Library Visit
                         Reading Journal Due
            WEEK SIX: RIGHTS & REGULATIONS IN THE BORDERLANDS OF RE-VISIONS
 Monday, 24 February     • Reading: Suárez Findlay, Imposing Decency, Chapter 6: “Saving Democracy:
                         Debating Prostitution during World War I”
 Wednesday, 26 February • Reading: Mitchell, West of Sex, Chapter 1: “Introduction”
                         Chapter 2: “Colonial Convictions”:
                         https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/171befj/alma99
                         1057978627806011
                         Reflection Essay Due Friday, 28 February
          WEEK SEVEN: RIGHTS & REGULATIONS IN THE BORDERLANDS OF RE-VISIONS
 Monday, 2 March         • Reading: Mitchell, West of Sex, Chapter 3: “Home Fires and Domesticity”
                         Chapter 4: “Uncommon Women and Prostitution”
 Wednesday, 4 March      • Reading: Mitchell, West of Sex, Chapter 5: “Sexual Borderlands”
                         Reading Journal Due
         WEEK EIGHT: RIGHTS & REGULATIONS IN THE BORDERLANDS OF RE-VISIONS/
                   ARTICULATIONS FROM THE TRANSATLANTIC ARCHIPELAGO
 Monday, 9 March         • Reading: Mitchell, West of Sex, Chapter 6: “Courtship and the Courts”
                          Conclusion: “From the Outskirts of Citizenship”
 Wednesday, 11 March     • Reading: Achy Obejas, “We Came All the Way from Cuba So You Could
                         Dress Like This?” (Cuba), in Our Caribbean, pp. 268-ff
                         Ochy Curiel, “Autonomy in Lesbian-Feminist Politics” (Domican
                         Republic), in Our Caribbean, pp. 142-ff
                         Reading Journal Due
                        WEEK NINE: SPRING BREAK: 16-21 MARCH 2020


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                Spring 2020                                                         10
                 WEEK TEN: MIGRATIONS, RUPTURES & COMMUNITY-BUILDING
 Monday, 23 March       • Reading: Lawrence La Fountain-Stokes, “De un pájaro las dos alas:
                        Travel Notes of a Queer Puerto Rican in Havana” (Puerto Rico) in Our
                        Caribbean, pp. 202-ff
                        Juanita Ramos, “Bayamón, Brooklyn y yo” (Puerto Rico) in Our Caribbean,
                        pp. 308-ff
 Wednesday, 25 March    • Reading: Eithne Luibhéid, “Queer/Migration: An Unruly Body of
                        Scholarship,” GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 14.2 (2008),
                        pp. 169-190: https://muse-jhu-edu.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/article/241318
                        (Canvas)
                        Alisa Solomon, “Trans/Migrant Christina Madrazo’s All-American Story,”
                        in Queer Migrations: Sexuality, U.S. Citizenship, and Border Crossings, pp. 3-29:
                        https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/1ilchdf/alma99
                        1006774379706011
                        (Canvas)
                        Lionel Cantú Jr. with Eithne Luibhéid & Alexandra Minna Stern, “Well-
                        Founded Fear Political Asylum and the Boundaries of Sexual Identity in
                        the U.S.-Mexico Borderlands,” in Queer Migrations, pp. 61-74:
                        https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/1ilchdf/alma99
                        1006774379706011 (Canvas)
                        Reading Journal Due
                  WEEK ELEVEN: QUEERING MIGRATIONS, QUEERING ACTIVISM
 Monday, 30 March       • Reading: Susana Peña, “Visibility and Silence Muriel and Cuban
                        American Gay Male Experience and Representation,” in Queer Migrations,
                        pp. 125-145:
                        https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/1ilchdf/alma99
                        1006774379706011 (Canvas)
                        Horacio N. Roque Ramírez, “Claiming Queer Cultural Citizenship
                        Gay Latino (Im)Migrant Acts in San Francisco,” in Queer Migrations, pp.
                        161-188:
                        https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/1ilchdf/alma99
                        1006774379706011 (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 1 April     • Reading: Dennis Medina, “We Are a Part of the History of Texas
                        That You Must Not Exclude!” in Uriel Quesada, Letitia Gomez &
                        Salvador Vidal-Ortiz, eds. Queer Brown Voices: Personal Narratives of Latina/o
                        LGBT Activism (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2015), pp. 47-63
                        (Canvas)
                        Laura M. Esquivel, “An East L.A. Warrior Who Bridged
                        the Latina/o and the Gay Worlds” in Queer Brown Voices, pp. 78-96
                        (Canvas)
                        Letitia Gomez, “No te rajes—Don’t Back Down! Daring to Be Out and
                        Visible,” in Queer Brown Voices, pp. 121-138 (Canvas)
                        Reading Journal Due
 WEEK TWELVE: QUEERING ACTIVISM PARA REVOLUCIÓN/NOTES ON INTERCELESTIAL ON LOVE
                                           & FREEDOM
 Monday, 6 April        • Reading: Moisés Agosto-Rosario, “Latinas/os and the AIDS Treatment
                        Advocacy Movement,” in Queer Brown Voices, pp. 171-182
                        Adela Vázquez, “Finding a Home in Transgender Activism in San
                        Francisco,” in Queer Brown Voices, pp. 212-220


MAS 374 (40045): ROSAS                   Spring 2020                                        11
 Wednesday, 8 April        • Reading: Reyes-Boitel, Michael + Josephine
                           Reading Journal Due
              WEEK THIRTEEN: NOTES ON INTERCELESTIAL ON LOVE & FREEDOM
 Monday, 13 April          • Reading: Reyes-Boitel, Michael + Josephine
                           Rough Draft Peer Review
 Wednesday, 15 April       Writing Day
                            Rough Draft of Final Paper Due Friday, 17 April
            WEEK FOURTEEN: NOTES ON INTERGENERATIONAL ON LOVE & FREEDOM
 Monday, 20 April          • Reading: Lara, Erzulie’s Skirt, Introduction and Chapters 1-2:
                           https://search.lib.utexas.edu/permalink/01UTAU_INST/12n4s7g/asp_su
                           mmonLGBTThoughtAndCultureASP2056649_gltc
 Wednesday, 22 April       • Reading: Lara, Erzulie’s Skirt, Chapters 3-4
                           Reading Journal Due
             WEEK FIFTEEN: NOTES ON INTERGENERATIONAL ON LOVE & FREEDOM
 Monday, 27 April          • Reading: Lara, Erzulie’s Skirt, Chapters 5-6
 Wednesday, 29 May         • Reading: Lara, Erzulie’s Skirt, Chapters 7-8
                                            WEEK SIXTEEN
 Monday, 4 May             Rough Draft Feedback
 Wednesday, 6 May          Rough Draft Feedback
  Final Exam Date: __________________is when Oral Presentations will occur.
              Final Paper Due the Final Exam Day
