                                   ACC 366P/384 – Accounting Practicum
               Federal Taxation of Low Income Filers: Socio-Economic Forces
                           Spring 2020 Syllabus Part I - UPDATED Jan. 16th
                     Wednesday 3:30-5:20 - UTC 4.102 - Unique #02405/ACC366 #026715/ACC384
                      Thursday 3:30-5:20 - UTC 4.102 - Unique #02410/ACC366 #02620/ACC384
Instructor:            J. William Kamas
E-mail:                J.Kamas@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office:                GSB 5.126H                            Office Hours: After class in room UTC 4.102
TA:                    Alyssa Suddhi                          TA E-mail:        Asuddhi@utexas.edu
Volunteer service period: January 20 – April 15, 2020
Volunteer sites and operating hours are self-selected and may vary. Sites are on major bus routes and students
may wish to coordinate carpooling. See https://foundcom.org/prosper-centers/austin-tax-help for locations.
                                                     Practicum Description
Students at all levels are eligible—BBA students, MPA students, and MBA students. No accounting or tax background is
necessary. The course integrates community service and academic learning as follows:
Community service involves at least 55 volunteer hours
     - You will work with the Tax Help Program; a Foundation Communities’ program (www.foundcom.org) that partners
         with the IRS to implement the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) program for low income filers.
Last year, the Tax Help Program helped over 20,000 people and brought over $35,000,000 into the Austin economy in the form
of tax refunds and credits. This year we hope to increase those totals! This effort will require over 600 volunteers from UT and
the greater Austin area.
                                                      PLEASE RECALL
     IN THE COMMUNITY YOU’RE THE FACE OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                                     DO US ALL PROUD!
Academic learning comprises a multi-disciplinary curriculum addressing socio-economic issues facing members of the low-
income community.
     - Topics will be presented by experts in fields such as low-income housing, the use of data analytics, public policy,
         economic development, a day in the life of an IRS Special Agent, and volunteering in the community. In addition,
         training and certification to perform this community service activity will be provided.
                                                     Classroom Procedures
Teams and team leaders. The instructor will divide ACC 366P/384 students into teams. Each team will be led by two or three
graduate students. Team leaders will play a primary role in your in-class involvement and in your evaluation. Team leaders act as a
job manager and carry substantial responsibility. In addition to orchestrating your team meetings and activities and evaluating you,
they are your first source for inquiries and for feedback concerning in-class activities.
Guest speakers. The in-class segment of the practicum is primarily guest speakers or special presentations. Ample accounting
content arises in the volunteer component. Hence the academic segment strives to put your experience in a broader context by
discussing issues associated with the low-income community in the U.S. Distinguished guest speakers place an extra
responsibility on us and also introduce some special considerations, including the following.
• Courtesy and attentiveness toward our guests are essential. We are representing the University of Texas by our
     professionalism, involvement, politeness, punctuality, and all other aspects of our comportment!


•   Speaker characteristics may vary, including differing styles, abilities to engage, length of talks, depth of content, and the like.
    This is just one aspect of the pervasive diversity you will experience in this practicum and one over which there is limited
    control. In the end, it is everyone’s responsibility to make this practicum a meaningful experience.
•   There is a no laptop/smartphone policy during guest speakers, unless they ask you to use them.
•   Classroom protocol. The in-class model is as follows:
    • The first 45 minutes of class-time we will have team meetings
    • The remainder of our class-time will be with guest speakers or class activity
Communications and e-mail on Canvas: The use of e-mail and Canvas is required for this course. When sending class-wide
e-mails, I will use the e-mail addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas. However, any individual e-mails I send to you will
be done via Outlook and those e-mail addresses are all McCombs addresses.
Any outside-of-class announcements that I make (e.g., syllabus changes, assignment changes, speaker date changes, etc.) will
be sent to you via e-mail or on Canvas. It is possible that substantial content will be posted on Canvas or sent via e-mail. It is
your responsibility to regularly check your e-mail (both your McCombs account and any other accounts that you might have set
up for forwarding) and the class Canvas site.
Course Completion Requirements Summarized (detailed descriptions follow):
    1. IRS Training and Certification
                   IRS training at UT
                   Basic, Advanced, and HSA IRS certification done online
    2. Community Service Requirements
                   55 volunteer hours at outside sites on a scheduled basis
    3. Class Preparation and Participation
                   Mandatory attendance
                   Speaker write up due when class begins
                   Participation in class discussions
    4. Significant Impressions Paper
                   Submitted essay
                   In class presentation (brief)
                                                       Student Evaluation
                                                     Undergraduate           Graduate
      1. IRS Training and Certification                    10%                  10%
      2. Community Service Requirements                    30%                  30%
      3. Class Preparation and                             20%                  NA
           Participation
      4. Significant Impressions Paper and                 10%                  10%
           Discussion
      5. Instructor’s Discretionary                        15%                  15%
           Evaluation
      6. Thesis Paper **                                   15%                  NA
      7. Administration/Leadership plus                    NA                   35%
           thesis paper OR additional 8 hours
  Total                                                   100%                 100%
**Undergraduate students not wishing to earn a grade higher than a B can opt out of writing the thesis paper. There is no extra-
credit work, make-up or other mechanisms for evaluating course performance beyond the activities described in this syllabus.


Course Completion Requirements in Detail
1. IRS Training and Certification (without which there is nothing) (10%) requirements:
      a.   Complete an 8-hour basic training session (outside class time, on January 24th or 25th) and 6 hours of advanced
           training (during class time In February) offered through the Tax Help Program that covers tax law principles
           and how to use TaxSlayer software (also referred to as IRS training). You will also be required to take HSA
           (health savings account training) online. The training is required even if you have participated in the program
            and passed the tests in the past.
      b. Become certified as a tax preparer by passing both the Basic and Advanced IRS certification tests and also
           completing the HSA training. The website address to complete the tests will be given during our IRS Training
           sessions. There are mandatory due dates to complete each of these certifications (see below).
           Your username to take the tests needs to be “last-name.first-name”. Please use your last and first name as they
           appear on my official class roster. A grade of F will be assigned if not certified by 2 weeks following each
            certificate deadline (Course schedule).
      c. Keep a digital copy of each certificate and E-mail a copy to UTTraining@Foundcom.org as follows:
                     Basic/HSA Certificate by 11:59pm on January 31st
                     Advanced Certificate by 11:59pm on February 17th.
                     Take a signed paper copy of Form 13615 (volunteer agreement), which is proof of your
                     certification to every site where you volunteer. Bring it with you to your first shift at each tax
                     site. Whenever you complete a new level of certification, bring an updated copy of your
                     agreement. (This should happen twice – once after you certify for Basic & HSA, and the second
                     time after you certify to the advanced level).
2. Community Service Requirements (30%)
      a. Register with the Tax Help Program as a volunteer by the first day of the semester
      b. Self-select volunteer hours on the Tax Help Program web-based scheduler.
      Perform at least 55 hours of volunteer work as a tax preparer plus any required penalty hours (discussed later in this
      syllabus). Graduate student requirements are discussed later in this syllabus.
      c.   Tax Help Program (THP) site manager evaluations and completing volunteering hours
           THP Evaluations
           Site managers will provide input to the instructor regarding each student’s:
      •    Quality of work, attitude, professionalism, and punctuality. Unless instructed otherwise, talking or texting on
           cell phones is NOT permitted at ANY time when in the tax centers, even when you are not with a client. If
           you need to take or send an emergency call or text, please step outside briefly to do so.
      •    Effectiveness of THP client interface and comportment, including adhering to the dress code below
      •    Quality of interaction with site colleagues, and did you bring the proper materials with you
      •    Proper dress – When you are at the Tax Help sites, you are not only representing the University of Texas and
           Foundation Communities, you will also be providing a customer service. Please dress appropriately when you
           show up to volunteer.
           Acceptable dress consists of business casual, jeans, and UT t-shirts. Please note that the only t-shirts allowed
           are UT t-shirts. All other t-shirts are NOT allowed. Fraternity and sorority t-shirts are NOT considered UT t-
           shirts per this syllabus and are thus NOT allowed.
           Unacceptable dress: Non-UT t-shirts, fraternity or sorority t-shirts, shorts, yoga pants, leggings as pants,
           workout clothes, hats, pajamas and flip-flops. This is not necessarily a complete list.
      •    Downtime in between clients or when client volume is slow should be spent asking your site manager which
           administrative tasks can be helped with or done. Downtime or idle time should NOT be spent studying for
           other classes, texting, using social media or viewing the internet on your phone or computer, etc.
3. Class Preparation and Participation (20% Undergraduates)
   Your team leaders will evaluate you every class (Daily Grade) based on the following scale: (Do not use half points)
      2 = excellent
      1 = satisfactory
      0 = unsatisfactory, absent, partially absent, or unprofessional


       In order to earn all 20% for this component of your grade, your Daily Grade average for all classes must be 1.0 or higher.
       Your evaluation will be based on the following criteria, which by their nature, contain elements of subjectivity.
       (A)   Daily Grades / Class day without a speaker
       •    The quality and quantity of your contributions in class.
       •    Your attendance in and punctuality to class.
       •    Other subjective criteria the group leaders determine
       •    Your general behavior with me and other students.
       (B)   Daily Grades / Class with a speaker
       •    Speaker write-up (see below for details)
       •    The quality and quantity of your contributions in class.
       •    Your willingness and effectiveness to articulate questions during the speakers’ sessions.
       •    Your attendance in and punctuality to class, whether it begins with your group meeting and/or the speaker’s
            presentation.
       •    Other subjective criteria the group leaders determine
       Speaker Write-Ups
       For days with a speaker: by 3:00 on the day of class, you are to submit a 250-word minimum write-up of the current
       week’s speaker’s topic. Your write-up will be graded by your team leaders. To earn the highest grade of “2” for the
       class, in addition to the other class criteria, your speaker write-up must be of high quality and at least 500 words. Factors
       that might play into the rating of each speaker write-up might include, but are not limited to, the following:
         • Topicality/Interest/Clarity of Expression
         • Relevance to the topic, and
         • The quality and quantity of relevant underlying research (include reference sources)
         All speaker write-ups MUST be e-mailed to your group leaders in a Word document. (Group leaders – Word
         counts the number of words in the document for you, thus there is no need to manually count yourself.) Speaker write-
         ups in any other form (ex. hand-written) will not be accepted.
         Please note that copying material from a website without attribution for your speaker write-up constitutes cheating
         under The Code of Conduct for the McCombs School of Business. Further, even with full attribution, a cut/paste job
         does not constitute your work for this purpose.
GRADUATE STUDENTS. All team leaders of the group must meet and assign one grade for the day for each undergraduate
team member. Each undergraduate’s daily grade is due to the course TA, Alyssa Suddhi, via e-mail by 11:59 PM the day of
class (one email per group). I highly recommend that you meet right after class, determine the grades, and send them to Alyssa
Suddhi before you leave the classroom. Students that are caught sleeping, laying their head down, texting, talking, not paying
attention, or acting unprofessional during a speaker should receive a zero for that day. Graduate students will be graded based
on attendance only for this category. Please list your attendance on your daily email to Alyssa Suddhi, the course TA.
    4. Significant Impressions Paper and Discussion (10%)
You are to complete a two-page paper which documents the three most meaningful aspects of your volunteer experience. See
the daily schedule for due date. Group leaders will facilitate a team discussion during our last class session. Following the
team meetings, team members will make a brief presentation to the entire class summarizing the top two-to-four experiences
among your team members.
At the conclusion of this class session you will hand-in your Significant Impressions paper to the team leaders for evaluation.
The instructor will also evaluate this paper. This is your take-away from the volunteer experience so there are no right or wrong
answers. At the same time, meaningful thought and effort should be put into your ideas. The evaluation you receive on this
paper will be based on factors such as, but not limited to, the following:
    • Thoroughness of your ideas. They may tie to cited research or our guest speaker’s comments, but this is not necessary.
    • Quality of grammatical expression, spelling and organization (use headings if useful).
    • Your attendance in class that day and your participation in the group and class presentations
The Significant Impressions paper should:
    • Be no longer than two pages (8.5” x 11”), double-spaced,
    • Have one inch margins, and
    • Use Times Roman 12 font.


Your Significant Impressions paper will be rated by your team leaders. The same 0-3 scale that was applied to your Speaker
Write Ups will be used : (Do not use half points)
                   2 = excellent
                   1 = satisfactory
                   0 = unsatisfactory, not turned in or turned in late
In order to earn the full 10% for this component of your grade, your Significant Impressions paper grade must be 1 or higher.
However, do not take this to mean there is no advantage to writing a paper that earns a grade of 2. At the end of the semester if
you are on the borderline of a grade cutoff (ex. A and A-, A- and B+, etc.) a score of 2 on your Significant Impressions paper
could very well be the deciding factor in your final grade.
GRADUATE STUDENTS. The leadership role you are being asked to play in this activity is the following (you must write a
Significant Impressions paper too):
1. Group leaders will facilitate a discussion within your team addressing the team’s experiences. Following this team
     meeting, designated member(s) from your team will take a few minutes to share with the entire class key experiences among
     your team members.
2. At the conclusion of class, undergraduate students will submit their Significant Impressions paper to the team leaders for
     evaluation by you on a numeric scale of 0-2 (use the grading standards as stated above.) Each team leader will evaluate
     the papers independently. Please clearly mark all team leader grades on the front page (if 2 leaders, there should be 2
     grades etc.). Each team leader should also use a different color pen to write comments throughout the paper. I anticipate
     the vast majority to be scores of 1, with only obvious outliers being 0’s and 2’s. Evaluations should be made based on the
     quality of insight and impression.
3. Your evaluation of the students’ Significant Impressions papers will be turned into the course TA, Alyssa Suddhi by noon on
     Monday, April 27 for evaluation. You need to keep these grades in your own semester gradebook.
At the conclusion of class (April 15th or 16th), graduate students will submit your Significant Impressions paper to Alyssa Suddhi
for grading.
     5. Instructor’s discretionary evaluation (15%)
The instructor will rely upon all assessment inputs from team leaders and independent evaluations as indicated above and
below. In the event the instructor has additional information, or assesses a student’s performance differently than others, she
maintains the right to exercise discretionary decision making when assigning final grades. Absent additional or contradictory
insights, the instructor will allocate these discretionary points in a manner consistent with the overall evaluation for all
activities. This grade category will be heavily influenced by your volunteering performance and what occurs in the tax centers
(including how you represent the University of Texas).
     6. Thesis paper (15% Undergraduates)
To earn a course grade of “B+”, “A-“, or “A” you must write a rigorous thesis paper pertaining to a speaker related topic,
whether proposed formally or informally by the speaker, your team leaders, the instructor, or you. This paper is not required for
a grade of “B” or below, but it is required for a grade above a “B.” The topic must be approved by your team leaders by
Tuesday April 7th. The thesis paper is due at noon on Friday, May 1st in 4M.202. Thesis papers must also be uploaded to
Canvas by noon on Friday, May 1st. The thesis paper should:
     • Be no longer than 10 pages (8.5” x 11”), double-spaced, (not including exhibits and works cited)
     • Be no shorter than 8 pages (8.5” x 11”), double-spaced,
     • Have one inch margins,
     • Use Times Roman 12 font type,
     • Your thesis statement must be clearly stated at the end of your first paragraph.
     • Use MLA citation format
Papers will be evaluated by your team leaders and by the instructor based on, but not limited to, the following:
     • Thoroughness and credibility of research, authority, and citations,
     • Relationship to guest speaker topics,
     • Quality of arguments and conclusions,
     • Quality of organization, and
     • Quality of grammatical expression.
GRADUATE STUDENTS. Your role with the thesis papers is to:
a. Approve topics.


b. Serve as a sounding board, advisor, and potential recommender of topics to your team members.
c. Provide the following evaluation:
    1. Rank each thesis paper. The best thesis paper should be ranked #1.
    2. Assign a letter grade (A-F; +/- may be used if you desire) to each thesis paper.
d. All team leaders will read all team members’ papers and clearly indicate their grade on the first page. Please use different
    color pens when making comments.
e. All graded papers must be submitted to class TA, Alyssa Suddhi, by noon on Friday May 8th.
    7. Administration and Leadership (35% Graduates)
This will include, but is not limited to:
- Accurately and timely sending me the daily grades by the deadline stated above
- Grading speaker write-ups appropriately and the quality of your evaluation of undergraduate thesis papers
- At the end of every class that has a group meeting you and your co-leader will turn in to me your lesson plan for that day.
  Lesson plans should be no longer than one page, double-spaced, have one inch margins, and use Times Roman 12 font.
  Handwritten lesson plans will not be accepted.
- Your completion of a rigorous thesis paper as described above OR completing an extra 8 hours of volunteer time.
- The quality of your role, if requested in students’ feedback on their thesis paper.


                                                        Important Notifications
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that students’ learning
needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a
resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.
Religious Holy Days
Per the UT Austin General Information Catalog, you must notify me “as far in advance as possible” (I expect at least 14 days
advance written notice) of your pending absence due to the observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss an examination
or other assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, and you notify me appropriately, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-
policies-and-procedures/attendance/.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
In the Assignments section above, you can find specific guidance regarding individual and group work for each of the evaluation
elements in this course.
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and
faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty
at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty
responsibilities described in that document. By remaining in this class, you agree to observe all student responsibilities
described in that document. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is
unclear to you in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, which could include failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: copying work on tests or assignments, representing (copying) the work of
another person as your own or allowing another person to represent your work as their own, collaborating without authorization
with another student during an exam or in preparing academic work, using or having on your desk unauthorized material or aids
to complete a quiz, group exercise, or exam (e.g., cheat sheets, solutions, programmable calculators, cell phones, etc.). You
should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct to access the
official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty and more on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Dishonesty harms other students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, so policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. All acts of academic dishonesty receive significant penalties and are reported to Student
Judicial Services and attach to your record. This record is consulted as part of application processes at UT (e.g., study abroad
applications) and after (e.g., law school and MBA applications, which generally require you to provide access to this record).
IT’S NOT WORTH IT!
Campus Safety
BCAL: For concerns about individual behavior, call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050.
BE SAFE: See campus safety information at http://besafe.utexas.edu/safety-tips-apps.
      • Up-to-date information regarding university operation and emergency procedures can be found at:
          http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
      • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when an
          official announcement is made.
      • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember, the nearest exit
          door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      • Students requiring evacuation help should inform the instructor in writing the first week of class.
      • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
          at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                          Privacy in Canvas
 Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that if I teach multiple sections of this course I will use
   a merged Canvas site for all sections. This will allow students in other sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and
  send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your email address and no other personal data will be
  revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 for help removing your
                                                 name from the view of other students.


                                   ACC 366P/384 – Accounting Practicum
               Federal Taxation of Low Income Filers: Socio-Economic Forces
              Spring 2020 Syllabus Part II – Volunteering. – UPDATED JAN 16th
                        Tuesday 3:30-5:20 - UTC 4.102 - Unique #02400/ACC366 #02610/ACC384
                      Wednesday 3:30-5:20 - UTC 4.102 - Unique #02405/ACC366 #02615/ACC384
                      Thursday 3:30-5:20 - UTC 4.102 - Unique #02410/ACC366 #02620/ACC384
 Volunteering with the Tax Help Program
 If you have not already done so, please register as a volunteer with the Tax Help Program (THP). It’s a simple
 process, but important.
 (i) You can’t schedule your volunteer hours unless you register with the THP
 (ii) You are in the information flow for relevant volunteer updates if you register with THP.
 Please follow these instructions in order so you will be registered for the required volunteer component of the
 class:
1. Register as a Tax Help Volunteer volunteer by clicking on the following link:
    https://web.volunteer2.com/Public/Signup/SignupDecide.aspx?OrganizationGUID=7ec98974-f6e1-41ac-
    87bb-a96ea60eb893
        • In your application please indicate that you are with the UT practicum.
        • You will receive an automated message when you register, but you should ignore the instructions in
            the email, which are written for volunteers from the community not associated with this class. Instead
            continue to #2.
2. Sign up for Basic training by emailing your preferred date to THP staff at UTtraining@foundcom.org:
    The Basic training session options are:
                                       Friday, January 24th (8:00am-6pm) UTC 2.102A
                                   Saturday, January 25th (9:00am-5:30pm) UTC 2.102A
      •   You’ll be given a 45-minute break for lunch on Saturday and 2-hour break on Friday.
      •   Training is conducted online, you will need to bring your laptop (FULLY CHARGED) to the session.
      •   You will earn one penalty hour for every fifteen minutes you are late starting at ten minutes after the
          official start time. For example, if the start time is 9am, at 9:25 you will have earned one penalty hour.
          On-time means in your seat, logged in, and ready to go.
 3. Pass IRS Certifications (see Syllabus Part I for full discussion on training requirements).
      •   Become certified as a tax preparer by passing both the Basic and Advanced IRS certification tests and also
          completing the HSA training. The website address to complete the tests will be given during our IRS Training sessions.
          There are mandatory due dates to complete each of these certifications (see below).
      •   Keep a digital copy of each certificate and E-mail a copy to UTTraining@Foundcom.org as follows:
              Basic/HSA Certificate by 11:59pm on January 31st
               Advanced Certificate by 11:59pm on February 17th
      •   Take a signed paper copy of Form 13615 (volunteer agreement), which is proof of your certification to every site where
          you volunteer. Bring it with you to your first shift at each tax site. Whenever you complete a new level of certification,
          bring an updated copy of your agreement. (This should happen twice – once after you certify for Basic & HSA, and the
          second time after you certify to the advanced level).


Scheduling Your Volunteer Hours
As soon as you attend basic IRS training and pass the basic test, you can start volunteering!
Before you begin:
   •   Plan your schedule by reviewing the THP locations and hours and writing down your preferred
       shifts. Please also determine alternative choices, as the specific timeframes of shifts may not fit your
       availability, and shifts close after the requisite number of volunteers sign up.
   •   Consider your availability closely and select your shifts carefully. The fewer schedule corrections
       we have to make, the better!
You will use MyVolunteerPage - the website on which you filled out your volunteer application – to create your
schedule after you’ve attended training. You cannot access the schedule before training.
Step-by-step instructions on how to sign up for your desired shift:
   1. Log in to your account at www.myvolunteerpage.com. If you do not remember your username and
       password, email Danielle at Danielle.girard@foundcom.org.
   2. Select the "Opportunities" tab.
   3. Select the location and the volunteer role in which you would like to work.
       There are 3 volunteer roles listed:
           o Tax Preparer - Tax Preparer volunteers prepare tax returns for clients.
           o Client Liaison - Client Liaison volunteers welcome clients, screen for eligibility and preparedness,
               collect documents, and assemble the information necessary for the Tax Preparer to complete the
               tax return in an efficient manner.
           o Translator - Translators provide Spanish/English translation for clients who need it.
           o Select the “sign up” button next to the time slot you would like.
                 *** Only “Tax Preparer” shifts will count towards your practicum hours.***
           Be VERY careful when you are signing up to make sure you have selected Tax Preparer.
   4. Select the “sign up” button next to the time slot you would like.
   5. To remove yourself from a shift, go to the “schedule” tab and click “remove” next to your chosen shift.
       Be sure to click “remove” again in the window that pops up.
Important notes:
   • Once you have clicked “sign up,” you are on the volunteer schedule.
   • When the shift is less than 48 hours away, you cannot cancel using the online system. If you must
       cancel, contact Danielle Girard so that she can try to fill your spot on the schedule.
   • Our staff uses the schedule to make on-site decisions. Please sign up a week in advance if possible.
   • Shifts are on a first-come, first-served basis.
   • If you have special circumstances that require different times than listed, please contact Danielle
       Girard. We will attempt to make special arrangements for your schedule, when possible.
   • The “schedule” tab will show all the shifts you have signed up for. Remember, these are times that staff
       expect you to be on-site.


At the Site
On your first day, you’ll need:
• your printed Form 13615 (Volunteer Agreement). You’ll need to bring a signed printed to copy to every tax
site where you choose to volunteer.
• photo I.D.
• volunteer name badge (provided)
When you arrive on-site, the first steps are to find the volunteer sign-in binder and the Site Manager to
introduce yourself. They will go through a first-day checklist with you or ask an experienced volunteer to help
you.
Important Notes from the instructor about volunteering
The minimum service requirement for this class is 55 hours which must be broken out as follows:
- January 21 – February 29 – you must complete a minimum of 25 hours. At least 10 of these hours must
   be completed by February 15.
- March 1 – March 31 – you must complete a minimum of 20 hours. At least 10 of your March hours
   must be completed between March 1 – March 16.
- April 1 – April 15 – you must complete a minimum of 10 hours.
- 50% or less of your volunteer hours can be from “drop-off” services.
- There are no “rollover” hours month to month!!
- Penalty hours are assigned for shortages (see below).
- You may NOT work more than two shifts in a day. Anything over two shifts will not be counted for the
  course.
    •   If your site manager tells you that you can leave your shift early (ex. there is nobody in line for help),
        you will get credit for the entire amount of the shift you signed up for.
    •   If you stay late (past your scheduled shift) you will of course get credit for that extra time.
    •   You are not required to keep a regular schedule – but if you have regular availability, you may find it
        helpful to pick a regular, recurring shift (e.g., every Tuesday from 3pm to 6pm at Foundation
        Communities).
    •   You may sign up for different shifts at different locations. You are not required to do all of your
        volunteer time at a specific location. Please select only shifts that you can commit to!
    •   Each volunteer Tax Preparer will need to have completed the necessary training and certification prior to
        their volunteer service. You will need to bring your completed and signed Volunteer Agreement with
        you to EACH location you volunteer.
    •   Please keep a record of what you signed up for by marking your calendar! By signing up for a shift
        your site managers, Danielle, and other volunteers will be relying on you to fulfill your commitment.
        Also, make sure you track your actual hours worked on a calendar, on your phone, etc.


Penalty Hours
If you cancel a shift without giving 48 hours notice or fail to show up for a shift, you will be required not only
to make up that shift but also another shift of the same time length. (Please note – failure to show up for a shift
will definitely affect your 15% of instructor’s discretionary evaluation).
For example – Bob Smith cancels a 3-hour shift 36 hours before the shift starts. Bob must obviously make up
that 3-hour shift. However, he must now also volunteer for ANOTHER 3-hour shift. In this example, Bob’s
total volunteer time for the course has increased from 55 to 58 hours. (Note – these extra (penalty) hours can be
made up in any month.)
There are several ways to get penalty hours:
- cancelling a shift within 48 hours
- not showing up for a shift
- using a spot as a client liaison or translator instead of tax preparer
- arriving late for training
- not reaching your monthly (or inner-monthly) required hours
Professionalism is very important and there are some things that could affect your grade should we see repeat
instances.
Notes on professionalism in the Tax Help Centers:
         - Unless instructed otherwise, cell phones must be in hand bags or backpacks while assisting clients.
            Any use of your phone is unacceptable.
         - It is extremely important to follow the dress code while volunteering.
         - Signing in and signing out: Mark down the actual times you arrive and leave.
         - Scheduling shifts: Use the volunteer website to sign up IN ADVANCE for shifts you can commit to.
            Do NOT sign up for a shift only to hold a space. The center relies on the volunteers to be available
            during shift times.
         - Dropping in to work a shift is not acceptable, and you will not receive credit for it.
Danielle’s contact information is:
Danielle Girard, Volunteer Coordinator, Tax Help Program
Foundation Communities (www.foundcom.org)
Danielle.girard@foundcom.org
phone: 512-610-7967
