                                      CULTURE AND COMMUNICATION, Fall 2018
                                         ANTHROPOLOGY 307, LINGUISTICS 312C
                                ANT 307, unique #31622, 31625, 31626, 31627, 31628, 31629;
                                LIN 312C, unique #40237, 40240, 40241, 40242, 40243, 40244
                        Monday and Wednesday 2-3 pm, plus additional discussion section as assigned
                                                   Class location: GSB 2.124
Professor:                 Elizabeth Keating, PhD
Office:                    SAC 4.156, Phone: 471-8518, email: Elizabeth.keating@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours:              Monday/Wednesday 3:15-4:15 pm and by appointment
TAs:                       Kari Andreev, MA, k.andreev@utexas.edu (office hours TBA)
                           Krishantha Fedricks, MA, kfedricks@hotmail.com (office hours Wednesday 3:30 pm-4:30pm)
                           Kelsie Gillig, MA, gilligk@utexas.edu (office hours TBA)
                                                                                                                     v. 8 27 18
Table of Contents
   I. Rationale…………..………….1                VI. Course Requirements……….4              • University Resources
   II. Course Aims and Objectives….1           • Attendance and participation        • Sanger Learning Center
        • Aims                                 • Religious Holy Days                 • Services for Students with
        • Specific Learning Objectives         • Readings/Materials                     Disabilities
   III. Format and Procedures……….2             • Assignments/Assessments             • Q-drop Policy
   IV. Tentative Course Schedule.......2       • Use of Canvas
         • Feedback Statement              VII. Grading Procedures…………5
   V. Professor’s Assumptions………4          VIII. University Policies…….…...6
                                                • Academic Integrity
This course may be used to fulfill the social and behavioral sciences component of the university core curriculum and
addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board:
communication skills, critical thinking skills, empirical and quantitative skills, and social responsibility. This course is
included in the First-year Interest Group (FIG) program. This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United
States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase students’ familiarity with the variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. This course also carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase students’ familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States.
I. Rationale
The goal of this course is to introduce students to the fascinating world of human communication as it emerges within
particular cultures and shapes habits, attitudes, and emotions. Students will be able to sharpen their skills and develop
new skills in meta-level analysis, particularly about how people use language and other symbolic forms to maintain
power or to express identity, including poetic forms. Students will learn about anthropological approaches to human
behavior. Understanding how the everyday language people use is interpreted is an essential part of successful cross-
cultural communication. We look at both the principles of everyday language interaction and the many creative ways
people use these principles in different cultures. Language shapes unique ways of thinking about the world and of
interpreting the world.
II. Course Aims and Objectives
Aims: This course builds new knowledge about the relationships between culture and communication practices. The
textbook Culture and Communication: An Introduction, by James Wilce, shows how to use language theories to
understand cultural phenomena, and provides explanations of linguistic theories and theories in anthropology that address
                                                                 1


aspects of being human and sharing the lives of others. Words Matter: Communicating Effectively in the New Global
Office, by Elizabeth Keating and Sirkka Jarvenpaa, discusses communication in global office settings, and covers general
processes and concepts students can apply in their daily lives. Students will also read the book Veiled Sentiments by Lila
Abu-Lughod, about poetry in a Bedouin society and the importance of studying verbal art in order to understand critical
aspects of a society’s cultural ideas. Students will learn how to analyze communication in several written analytical
exercises.
Specific Learning Objectives: By the end of this course, students will:
         •    Through comparing and contrasting language practices in different world areas, gain new knowledge about
              the power of language to shape and spread ideas. Through reading about communication in different cultures,
              students will gain new appreciation for culture and for the range of communication forms cross culturally.
         •    Through studying and applying general principles of communication to cross cultural settings, students will
              learn what is general about human communication behavior and what is specific to culture.
         •    Through studying key principles underlying human symbolic behavior as it pertains to language, students
              will acquire knowledge about the role of symbolic behavior in creating and transmitting culture.
         •    Through studying the role of language attitudes and the role of societal rules about language use, for
              example, how children are socialized into patterns through language, students will be able to understand how
              these language attitudes and ideologies shape behavior and judgments about behavior.
         •    By synthesizing from case studies, examples in lectures, and assignments, students will learn to apply their
              knowledge of communication to new situations.
         •    Through linking class materials with their own experiences, students will gain skills in shifting and sharing
              perspectives.
         •    Through class exercises, students will learn to collect language forms and analyze them.
III. Format and Procedures: The course is structured around lectures based both on the readings and on other materials
the professor uses for illustration and teaching purposes. The course also has smaller discussion sections with teaching
assistants (TAs) to allow for greater student participation with the materials and ideas.
IV. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents current plans and objectives. As we go through the
semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes, communicated
clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
 Date          Main Topic(s)                              Work to do at home                           Evaluation
                                      Readings – to be completed before the first class of the week
 8/29     Introduction, including   Preparation for each week involves reading the week’s assigned
          course/syllabus/assign-   readings before Monday’s class (there will be pop quizzes on the
          ments/requirements        readings)
 9/03                               LABOR DAY HOLIDAY
  9/5     An introduction to the    Wilce, Culture and Communication, Chapter 1, Society, Culture
          ideas and concepts that   and Communication
          will be elaborated in the
          textbook and other
          readings
 9/10-    Methods: how              Abu-Lughod, Lila, Veiled Sentiments, Preface, A Note on
 9/12     anthropologists work,     Transcription, and Chapter 1, Guest & Daughter
          ethnography,
          observation, what         Keating & Jarvenpaa, Words Matter, Introduction
          counts as data,
          reflexivity               Bohannan, Laura, “Shakespeare in the Bush,” Natural History
                                    (Canvas)
                                                                 2


 9/17- Mutual attunement,       Wilce, Culture and Communication, Chapter 2, What is             Assignment 1
 9/19  communication as a       Communication? And p. 80-93 (Meaning: Semantic and               handed out 9/17
       system of signs,         Pragmatic; Textuality, Poetic Structure, and Parallelism)
       semantic vs. pragmatic
       meaning, interaction and Keating & Jarvenpaa, Words Matter, Chapter 3, The Hearer: The
       meaning                  Hearer is the Most Important Player
 9/24- Communication, signs,    Wilce, Culture and Communication, Chapter 3, Semiotics and
  26   actions                  Sign-Types
                                Keating & Jarvenpaa, Words Matter, Chapter 2, Language as
                                Action
10/01- Language Evolution       Wilce, Culture and Communication, Chapter 5, Culture, Society,
10/03                           Communication, and Language Evolving
                                Is This How Our Ancestors Sounded? Linguist Recreates
                                Proto-Indo-European Language
                                https://www.archaeology.org/exclusives/articles/1302-proto-indo-
                                european-schleichers-fable
10/08- Everyday Interaction     Heritage, John (1984). Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology, Chapter   Assignment 1 due
10/10  and Conversation         8, “Conversation Analysis,” Cambridge: Polity Press (Canvas)     10/10
       Analysis
10/15  Conversation Analysis    Gregory M. Matoesiana. (1995). Language, Law, and Society:
       and Language-in-         Policy Implications of the Kennedy Smith Rape Trial. Law &
       Interaction, continued,  Society Review, Vol. 29, No. 4, pp. 669-702. (UT Libraries
       some implications for    Online)
       policy and equality
10/17  Theory of Mind,          Wilce, Culture and Communication, Chapter 6, Diverse             Exam review
       thought and culture, the Languages and Perpectives: Communication, Expression, and        questions handed
       relation of language to  Mind                                                             out (questions
       learned to patterns of                                                                    which will guide
       thinking                 Abu-Lughod, Lila, Veiled Sentiments, Chapter 2, Identity in      studying)
                                Relationship
10/22  Linguistic Relativity    Pierre, Kendra (2017). The language you speak changes your
                                perception of time. Popsci.com.
                                https://www.popsci.com/language-time-perception#page-3
                                Boroditsky, Lera; Schmidt, Lauren; Phillips, Webb, "Sex, syntax,
                                and semantics,” Language in Mind: Advances in the Study of
                                Language and Thought, pp. 61–79
                                http://lera.ucsd.edu/papers/gender.pdf
10/24  Midterm Exam                                                                              Exam 1
10/29- Socialization,           Wilce, Culture and Communication, Chapter 8, Human Social
10/31  indexicality             Semiotics
                                Wilce, Culture and Communication, Chapter 9, Communicative
                                Enactment and Transmission of Society and Culture
 11/5- Identity, identity as    Keating & Jarvenpaa, Words Matter, Chapter 5, Language is        Assignment 2
 11/7  shaped by others,        Social (and Cultural)                                            handed out
       identities in conflict
                                Young, Vershawn. (2009). "Nah, We Straight": An Argument
                                Against Code Switching. JAC, 29(1/2), 49-76 (UT Libraries
                                Online)
                                Appiah, Kwame Anthony. 2018. Go Ahead Speak for Yourself,
                                https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/10/opinion/sunday/speak-for-
                                yourself.html
                                                              3


11/12-   Personhood:               Abu-Lughod, Lila, Veiled Sentiments, Chapter 3, Honor and the
 11/14   Socialization, gender,    Virtues of Autonomy
         sexuality
                                   Abu-Lughod, Lila, Veiled Sentiments, Chapter 4, Modesty,
                                   Gender, and Sexuality
11/19-   Poetics, metaphor         Abu-Lughod, Lila, Veiled Sentiments, Chapter 5, the Poetry
 11/21                             Personal Life
                                   Abu-Lughod, Lila, Veiled Sentiments, Chapter 6, Honor and
                                   Poetic Vulnerability
                                   Abu-Lughod, Lila, Veiled Sentiments, Chapter 7, Modesty and the
                                   Poetry of Love
11/26-   Narrative                 Raj, Pateek. (2017).The Role of Narratives in Economics.            Exam Review
  28                               Promarket, the blog of the Stigler Center at the University of      Questions handed
                                   Chicago Booth School of Business                                    out 11/26
                                   https://promarket.org/role-narratives-economics/
                                   Two articles related to each other:
                                   1) The day the Pintupi Nine entered the modern world, BBC news
                                   story written in 2014 about an event in 1984
                                   https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-30500591
                                   2) Myers, F. (1988). Locating Ethnographic Practice: Romance,
                                   Reality, and Politics in the Outback. American Ethnologist, 15(4),
                                   609-624. (UT Libraries Online)
                                   Keating & Jarvenpaa, Words Matter, Chapter 4, How to Make
                                   Their Jokes Funny (Hint: It’s the Common Ground)
                                   Bateson, Mary Catherine (1993). “Composing a Life,” Chapter 3
                                   in Sacred Stories: a celebration of the power of story to transform
                                   and heal,” Charles and Anne Simpkinson, eds. (Canvas)
 12/03   Exam Review
 12/05   Second Midterm Exam                                                                           Exam 2
 12/10   Last class day                                                                                Assignment 2 due
                                                                                                       12/10
V. Professor’s Assumptions:
In language and in anthropological research the assumption is that all languages and cultures are equally rich and
complex symbolic worlds and that there are no “primitive” cultures or languages. At the same time it is very common for
people to disparagingly view other people’s practices as primitive, peculiar or immoral, a situation that deserves our
attention and reflection in a time of enhanced connection and collaboration between cultures due to technology and
globalization.
VI. Course Requirements:
Attendance and participation policy: Class participation counts 10% of the final grade. The class participation grade is
made up of participating in discussions in your assigned section and attendance at lectures. A sign-in attendance sheet
will be passed around at lectures. If you have to miss lecture, it is recommended that you get notes from another student
or talk with your TA.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the professor of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
                                                                  4


observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
COURSE READINGS/MATERIALS
 Required Books:
        Abu-Lughod, L. Veiled Sentiments, University of California Press
        Keating, E. and S. Jarvenpaa. Words Matter: Communicating Effectively in the New Global Office, Univ. of
                 California Press
        Wilce, J. Culture and Communication. Cambridge University Press.
        Also required reading: articles and chapters listed on the syllabus that are available either on the Canvas site, at
                 the URL listed on the syllabus, or to be found online at UT Libraries https://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
        (a) Two midterm exams count 40% of the grade (20% each)
        (b) Two written assignments count 40% of the final grade (20% each).
        (d) Pop quizzes on reading count 10%
        (e) Class participation (attendance at lecture and participation in discussion section) counts 10%
        Assignments:
                  (a) Late homework assignments will be downgraded one letter grade
                  (b) Assignments must be turned in on Canvas
                  (c) Assignments are graded primarily on content and not on style of writing. Grade is
                        based on amount of details included (rather than overgeneralizations) and depth of analysis (not
                        just a cursory job). More information will be given at time of assignment.
                  (d) Assignments and dates are subject to change – check the Canvas site.
        Exams:
                  (a) Make up exams are only allowed with a note from the doctor (after the exam), or pending a formal
                        written appeal to the professor and TA (before the exam). Makeup exams are different exams.
                  (b) There is no final exam, rather there are two midterm exams.
                  (c) Pop quizzes will be given on the assigned readings.
                 note: review questions will handed out prior to exams in order to guide review
Use of Canvas: Canvas http://courses.utexas.edu is used to distribute course materials, to communicate, to post grades,
to submit assignments. Rely on this site for the most up-to-date information about the course (not the printed syllabus).
You can find support using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400.
VII. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on the following scale:
          Grade            Cutoff
          A                94%
          A-               90%
          B+               87%
          B                84%
          B-               80%
          C+               77%
          C                74%
          C-               70%
          D                65%
          F                <65%
                                                               5


VIII. University Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Each student in this course is expected to abide by the
University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's
own work, except in assignments that are specifically labelled as teamwork.
         You are encouraged to study together and to discuss readings and what is covered in lecture with other students.
You can give "consulting" help to or receive "consulting" help from such students. However, this permissible
cooperation should never involve one student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by another student,
except on team assignments. Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the
student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of
this Code can also be extended to include a failing grade for the course and University disciplinary action. During exams,
you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the examinations, nor may you compare
papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during the examinations will result in
failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-
232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline, which
typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in
college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there
are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let us know as soon as possible. Together
we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources
on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that
make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with the
professor or TAs, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let us know. We
are committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but can only do so if you discuss your needs
with us as early as possible. We promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to
ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any
academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
                                                                6


The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15
different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES
A332). Other helpful sites:
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1.       Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2.       Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
         involved in a Title IX investigation.
3.       Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which
means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. Professors as Responsible
Employees must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before
talking with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or
contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm
is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
              nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
     •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
              unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
              Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
              www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                               7
