         The University of Texas at Austin Department of Radio-Television-Film
             RTF 306: INTRODUCTION TO WORLD CINEMA HISTORY
                                 Web Based (Whole Session)
                               Unique # 73160 / Summer 2020
Course Instructor: Ash Kinney d’Harcourt, PhD
Office hours (online): Wednesday 12pm-2pm & by appointment
Email:
Teaching Assistant: Nathan Rossi
Office hours (online): Tuesday, 1pm-3pm & by appointment
Email:
Course Description: In this course, we will explore how the movies developed from a
circus amusement to multinational industry, as well as how film can be understood as a
socio-cultural, technological, aesthetic and economic artifact. This course is global in scope
and will sample a variety of “national cinemas” in order to compare and contrast how
moviemaking developed uniquely in different parts of the world. We will also address how
decades of popular and critical attention to the glamour and gossip surrounding Hollywood
movies has affected our understanding of “American” cinema. Designed for students who
have not taken previous coursework in film or media studies.
Course Learning Objectives:
  1.   Explain general cinematic trends in key regions around the globe at selected moments
       of time
  2.   Identify how the inception and evolution of the film industries relate to today’s
       entertainment conglomerates
  3.   Analyze primary and secondary sources to interpret cinema as artistic product and
       historical artifact
  4.   Actively construct and interpret history by analyzing primary sources and formulating
       arguments
                                                1


Accessing the Course - Required Technology and Materials:
  •     The Canvas Module page will serve as your “home base” for the course: For
        assignment content, you'll need to access Canvas via a computer (NOT a cell phone or
        tablet).
  •     Required Textbook: Gomery, Douglas and Clara Pafort-Overduin. Movie History: A
        Survey (2nd Ed.) New York: Routledge, 2011. Available at the UT Co-Op, online
        retailers or for rent via Amazon.
  •     Additional Readings: will be made available in the “Files” page on Canvas.
  •     Branchtrack Simulations for Modules 2 and 3: Links will be provided on Canvas.
  •     Films: Almost all of the assigned feature films for this course can be accessed for free
        via the UT Library. Each “Unit Summary” page will provide a link with important
        contextual information about each screening and where to obtain it. There are two
        films you will need to find in a library or rent via Amazon, iTunes, or a local video
        store.
Email Policy: I am available by email Monday through Friday, from 9 AM to 5 PM. I will
answer emails sent on the weekends on a case by case basis. Your TA may have their own
email policy. Because summer courses move at an advanced pace, we will attempt to reply to
all student emails within 48 hours of their being sent.
Blanket Content Warning: Cinema both reflects and influences social politics. Some of the
content in this course will engage with questions of representation and discrimination which
may be emotionally triggering and/or intellectually challenging. There are content warnings
throughout course lectures and for specific course screenings, including tags for sexual and
racial violence, racist language, and blackface.
Course Design: This course contains 15 individual units. Each unit has its own reading
material, online lecture, 1 or 2 screenings, and contains a graded short quiz. After the Course
Introduction, units are grouped into 4 modules that each contain 3-4 units. The first three
modules also contain 1 assignment. There is a hard deadline for each module’s content
(see chart below).
Navigating Canvas: The Modules page will be your home base on Canvas. Click on the
“Module Checklist” and the individual “Unit Summary” pages to see what you should be
working at any given point during the semester and when graded content is due. All course
reading, screening, and lecture material will be available to you starting June 4th. Module 1
                                                 2


and 2 quizzes and assignments will be available to you June 4th, and Module 3 and 4 quizzes
and assignments for will be made available to you starting on July 11th. The midterm and
final exam will be made available on July 6th and August 10th, respectively.
 Course Introduction:                           Due June 12 at midnight
 Module 1 (units 1-3):                          Due June 19 at midnight
 Module 2 (units 4-7):                          Due July 3 at midnight
 Midterm (covering units 1-6):                  Due July 10 at midnight
 Module 3 (units 8-11):                         Due July 24 at midnight
 Module 4 (units 12-14):                        Due Aug 7 at midnight
 Final Exam (covering units 7-14):              Due Aug 14 at midnight
This means that you have flexibility as to when you work on a specific unit, but it also means
that you are responsible for scheduling your time and making sure all quizzes and
assignments get completed by the appropriate module deadline. The course schedule in this
syllabus has a complete breakdown of the course including suggested unit completion dates.
It is highly recommended that you keep up with the suggested completion dates listed
for each unit.
Late Work Policy: This course is designed to provide busy students with maximum
flexibility. In order to provide that flexibility and also give your course instructor and TA
enough time to grade your assignments and give you helpful feedback, we have to have some
hard deadlines. That said, we know understand that emergencies happen. The late work
policy has been crafted to provide you with some cushion in case of an emergency:
   •    Unit Quizzes: We will give you full credit for ONE unit quiz of your choosing, no
        questions asked. I highly suggest you save this option in case of an emergency.
   •    Module Assignments: Minus 5 points for every 24-hour period after the deadline.
   •    Midterm: Minus 10 points for every 24-hour period after the deadline.
   •    Final: There will be no late submissions accepted for the final exam. If you have an
        emergency and are unable to complete your final exam on time, please contact your
        instructor with appropriate documentation and we can discuss your options.
Grading and Assignment Breakdown: There is no "grading curve" for this course. Grades
are based on the standard scale: 100 - 90 = A, 89 - 80 = B, 79 - 70 = C, 69 - 60 = D, 59 and
below = F. Below are brief descriptions, point values, and the weight that each assignment
                                                   3


will carry in calculating the final grade.
                                                                                    % of
                                                                           Points
    Assignment                      Assignment Description                          Final
                                                                          Possible
                                                                                   Grade
                        Quizzes are open book and will include multiple
                        choice, true/false, and occasionally short answer
 15 Unit Quizzes       questions covering readings, screenings, and unit    100     20%
                       lectures. They range from 6 to 8 points. You may
                                       only take them once.
     Module 1                       Primary Source Analysis
                                                                            50      10%
   Assignment                 (See Canvas for Assignment details)
     Module 2                   Production Code Simulation Quiz
                                                                            50      10%
  Assignment                  (See Canvas for Assignment details)
     Module 3                   Bonnie & Clyde Simulation Quiz
                                                                            50      10%
    Assignment                (See Canvas for Assignment details)
                          Take-home short answer and essay questions.
                       Students will submit electronic copies on Canvas.
     Midterm                                                                125     25%
                                        Covers Units 1-6.
                         Posted July 6th, DUE July 10th at midnight.
                          Take-home short answer and essay questions.
                        Students ill submit electronic copies on Canvas.
    Final Exam                                                              125     25%
                                       Covers Units 7-14.
                        Posted Aug 10th, DUE Aug 14th at midnight.
                                                  4


                      RTF 306: Summer 2020 Course Schedule
                              Modules and Course Deadlines
————————————————————————————————————
COURSE INTRODUCTION                              DUE JUNE 5th AT MIDNIGHT
Complete the entire Course Introduction Module and take the Course Introduction and
Syllabus Quiz (worth 10 points). Access via Canvas.
Suggested Completion Date: June 5, 2020
————————————————————————————————————
MODULE 1: UNITS 1-3                              DUE JUNE 19th AT MIDNIGHT
Unit 1: The Origins and Inventions of Cinema
Reading: Preface and Chapter 1 of the Gomery Textbook
Lecture: The Origins and Inventions of Cinema
Screenings: Be sure to watch the videos embedded in the online lecture! Some of them are
silent but muscle through. We'll get to sound cinema soon!
Unit 1 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: June 11, 2020
Unit 2: The Movies Become Big Business and the Birth of Hollywood
Reading: Gomery Textbook Ch. 2, Gomery Textbook Ch. 3
Canvas Lectures: The Movies Become Big Business, The Birth of Hollywood
Screenings: Selected Clips from the Treasures from the Archives Series. One Week (1920),
Easy Street (1917), Get Out and Get Under (1920). These films are already embedded in the
lectures.
Unit 2 Quiz (8 points)
Suggested Completion Date: June 15, 2020
Unit 3: Silent German Cinema
Reading: Gomery Textbook Ch. 4
Canvas Lecture: Silent German Cinema
Screening: The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920)
Unit 3 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: June 18, 2020
Module 1 Assignment
Primary Source Analysis. See Canvas for Assignment Details.
————————————————————————————————————
                                               5


MODULE 2: UNITS 4-7                             DUE JULY 3rd AT MIDNIGHT
Unit 4: Soviet Cinema
Reading: Gomery Textbook Ch. 5
Canvas Lecture: Soviet Cinema
Screening: Man With A Movie Camera (1929, USSR)
Unit 4 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: June 22, 2020
Unit 5: Race and Racist Cinema – Griffith, Micheaux and More
Readings: Cifor, Marika, et. al. “Tracing a Community of Practice: A Database of Early
African American Race Film”, Caddoo, Cara. “’Put Together to Please a Colored Audience’:
Black Churches, Motion Pictures, and Migration at the Turn of the Twentieth Century”,
Caddoo, Cara. "The Birth of a Nation, Police Brutality, and Black Protest."
Canvas Lecture: Race and Racist Cinema, Griffith, Micheaux and More
Screening: Within Our Gates (1920) (CW: l*nching and attempted r*pe) OR The Bronze
Buckaroo (1938)
(available via Netflix or YouTube. See Canvas for links).
Unit 5 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: June 25, 2020
Unit 6: The Coming of Sound AND The Studio System
Reading: Gomery Textbook, Ch. 6, “The Motion Picture Production Code of 1930” —
Stetcher, Raquel. "Lonesome (1928)"
Canvas Lecture: The Coming of Sound, The Hollywood Studio System
Screening: Lonesome (1928) AND Baby Face (1933)
Unit 6 Quiz (8 points)
Suggested Completion Date: June 29, 2020
Unit 7: WWII: Entertainment and Propaganda
Reading: Gomery, Ch. 7, Schatz, “WWII and the Hollywood War Film.”
Canvas Lecture: WWII – Entertainment and Propaganda
Screening: Casablanca (1942)
Unit 7 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: July 2, 2020
Module 2 Assignment
Production Code Simulation and Quiz (See Canvas for Assignment Details)
                                              6


 MIDTERM: Covers Units 1-6.                      Posted July 6; Due July 10 at midnight.
 ** NOTE: The Midterm has a different due date than the course modules.
————————————————————————————————————
MODULE 3: UNITS 8-11                             DUE JULY 24th AT MIDNIGHT
Unit 8: Italian Neorealism
Reading: Gomery Textbook, Ch. 8
Canvas Lecture: Italian Neorealism
Screening: Ladri di Biciclette / Bicycle Thieves (1948)
Unit 8 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: July 13, 2020
Unit 9: 1950s Hollywood AND The French New Wave
Reading: Gomery Textbook Ch. 9, Gomery Textbook Ch.11
Lectures: 1950s Hollywood, The French New Wave
Screenings: Singing in the Rain (1952) AND EITHER: The 400 Blows (1959) OR Le
Bonheur (1965)
Unit 9 Quiz (8 points)
Suggested Completion Date: July 16, 2020
Unit 10: New American Cinema
Reading: Gomery Textbook Ch. 10, “Introduction: Knockin’ on Heaven’s Door”
Lecture: New American Cinema
Screening: Bonnie and Clyde (1967)
Unit 10 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: July 20, 2020
Unit 11: Cuban Cinema
Reading: “Interview with Humberto Solas”, “Cuban Cinema Forty Years On (Introduction)”
Lecture: Cuban Cinema
Screening: Retrato de Teresa / Portrait of Teresa (1972)
Unit 11 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: July 23, 2020
Module 3 Assignment
Bonnie & Clyde Simulation and Quiz. See Canvas for Assignment Details.
————————————————————————————————————
MODULE 4: UNITS 12-14                            DUE AUGUST 7th AT MIDNIGHT
Unit 12: Japanese Cinema
                                              7


Reading: Textbook, Ch. 12, “Gender and the Art of Benshi”
Lecture: Japanese Cinema
Screening: High and Low (1963)
Unit 12 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: July 27, 2020
Unit 13: Blockbusters and Indies
Reading: Textbook Ch. 14, “A Big Fat Indie Success Story”
Canvas Lecture: Conglomerate Hollywood and the “Indies”
Screening: EITHER: The Matrix (1999) OR But I’m a Cheerleader (2000)
Unit 13 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: July 30, 2020
Unit 14: Indian Cinema
Reading: Textbook Ch. 13 (skim, but focus on section on India), “Bollywood”
Canvas Lecture: Indian Cinema
Screening: Main Hoon Na (2004) OR Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge (1995) Both Available
to Rent
Unit 14 Quiz (6 points)
Suggested Completion Date: August 3, 2020 (to allow plenty of time to prepare for your
final or just take a week to breathe after completing your last module for this course!)
 FINAL EXAM: Covers Units 7-14.                   Posted Aug 10; Due Aug 14 at midnight.
 ** NOTE: The Final Exam has a different due date than the course modules.
————————————————————————————————————
A Note about TurnItIn: All written assignments in this course may be processed by
TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an archived database of published work
to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to determine if a paper is
the student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty
member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
Name and Personal Pronouns: Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the
student’s legal name, unless they have added a "preferred name" with the Gender and
Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-
resources/). Please let me know if you would like me to address you by a name that is
different from what appears on the official roster, and by your corrected pronouns (she/he/
they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate updates to my records.
                                                8


University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we
all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or
exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to
meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources
on campus:
Basic Needs: It can be challenging to do your best in class if you have trouble meeting basic
needs like safe shelter, sleep, and nutrition. If you have difficulty affording groceries or
accessing sufficient food to eat every day, or lack a safe and stable place to live, I encourage
you to contact The Dean of Students. Additionally, The UT Outpost provides students with a
food pantry as well as access to professional clothes for job and internship interviews.
University Writing Center: The University Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone
471- 6222, http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc/ offers individualized assistance to
students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students may come
in on a drop-in or appointment basis.
Accessible, Inclusive, and Compliant Statement: The university is committed to creating
an accessible and inclusive learning environment consistent with university policy and
federal and state law. Please let me know if you experience any barriers to learning so I can
work with you to ensure you have equal opportunity to participate fully in this course. If you
are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need accommodations
please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Please refer to SSD’s website
for contact and more information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already
registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in
the semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations and needs in this course.
Counseling and Mental Health Center: There are many helpful resources available on
campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help.
Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know
experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/
individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate
students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance?
All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops,
private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than
70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://
www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
                                                   9


UT Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Religious Holidays: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination
schedules. If you miss a work assignment or other project due to the observance of a
religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that
you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled
on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy: All students should become familiar with
the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to
keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University- related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html
Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism,
unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not
limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this
syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonest
damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student
Judicial services Web site at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow
students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line):
                                                10


512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic
violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to
fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When
sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
     have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to
the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX
related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking
with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                 11
