                            PRIMATE SOCIAL BEHAVIOR
               ANTHROPOLOGY 346L [31724], WGS 323 [45539]
                                            SPRING 2019
INSTRUCTOR:              Becca Lewis
                         Department of Anthropology
                         Office: SAC 5.152
                         Phone: 232-5386
                         e-mail: rjlewis@austin.utexas.edu
                         Office hours: Wednesdays 9:30 – 11 am
TEXTBOOKS:               Required (2):
                         Alcock Animal Behavior, 10th edition print or etext
                         Mitani et al. (2012) The Evolution of Primate
                         Societies
                         Additional readings will be available on Canvas.
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVE:
        This course focuses on the study of primate behavior and why primates do what they do. It
        is essentially a course on animal behavior with a focus on primates. Thus, this class will
        explore the basic theoretical principles that guide primatologists and other zoologists. As
        we examine some of the models used to explain primate behavior, we will explore the
        behavior of the four radiations of primates in detail. The objective of this course is for
        students to understand the major theoretical concepts of primate behavior.
COURSE FORMAT AND REQUIREMENTS:
        Prerequisite: ANT 301
        This class will generally follow a lecture format. There will be projects assigned for outside
        of the classroom to be “presented” either on Canvas or in the classroom. Project
        assignments presented/posted after the deadline will not be accepted. Discussion will be
        encouraged during lectures and we will be discussing the outside projects in class. It is
        difficult to participate if you are not present in class and so attendance is highly
        recommended. Plus, the majority (but not all) of the test questions will come from lectures.
        Grades will also be based upon 3 in-class exams (no comprehensive final exam). Exams
        may include multiple-choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer questions.
        Assignments                             %Grade                  Date
        Exam I                                  30%                     Mar 4
        Exam II                                 30%                     Apr 12
        Exam III                                30%                     May 8
        4 Assignments                           10%                     TBA
        (3 projects during the semester: 2 pts each; final assignment due in class May 10: 4 pts)
Final grade calculation = (Exam I *0.3) + (Exam II *0.3) + (Exam III *0.3) + Total # project points
                                                                                                     1


RE-GRADING POLICY:
      Grade disputes must be turned in to the instructor in writing within 1 week of when the
      exam is returned. The student must include a 1 page explanation per question of why (s)he
      thinks that his/her answer is correct. Simple errors in addition can be corrected
      immediately. Students wishing to appeal a grade for one of the writing assignments have
      1 week to appeal their grade with the professor by turning in a 1 page explanation of why
      (s)he thinks that his/her paper should be re-graded.
CREDIT/NO-CREDIT:
      For those of you enrolled on a Pass/Fail basis, a requirement for receiving a passing grade
      in this course is to show up and take the exams. You may choose not to study and fail the
      exams, but you must physically turn in the exams and pass to receive credit.
      The following guidelines are used to assign final grades:
      A        90-100
      B        80-89
      C        70-79
      D        60-69
      F        59 or less
      Plus and minus will be assigned, for example:
      B+       86.5-89.4
      B        83.5-86.4
      B-       79.5-83.4
CHEATING POLICY:
      During exams, students will not be permitted to wear hats or use electronic devices of any
      kind (including, but not limited to, cell phones, smart watches).
      Be advised that on exam days, students will only be allowed to take a pen/pencil to their
      seat. All backpacks, book bags, purses, phones, etc. must be left at the front of the
      classroom.
      Students are welcome to participate in online forums for discussion and study (e.g., a
      Facebook page for this course). However, Dr. Lewis must be invited and permitted to
      join any such forum in order to monitor content. Please note that sharing information
      about an exam with a student who has not yet taken an exam will be considered cheating,
      regardless of the means by which the information is shared (e.g., verbally, on a web page,
      via email, via text message, etc.). Students who observe cheating via electronic media are
      encouraged to inform Dr. Lewis.
      Without exception, any student found cheating on an exam will receive a grade of zero
      for the exam and will be referred to the dean's office for further disciplinary action. Note
                                                                                                   2


      that any attempt to alter a graded, returned exam in order to improve the score will be
      considered cheating and will result in a grade of zero for the exam.
 ETC.
                While I cannot legally ban concealed guns from my classroom, I can exercise my
      first amendment right to let you know that I would strongly prefer that you NOT bring
      them into my classroom. I CAN legally ban concealed guns from my faculty office. Thus,
      this (and my reading of this statement aloud in class) is my official notification that
      you may not bring any concealed guns into my faculty office.
      After you turn in a project assignment, I have the right to use that information in future
      classes or publications unless you submit in writing a request otherwise.
      Be sure to regularly check Canvas for class materials and information. Power Point slides
      will not be made available on Canvas. Class handouts will be available on Canvas. If
      class is missed with an excused absence, it is up to the student to secure the notes from
      other students.
      Please turn your cell phones off while in class. No cell phone use during class will be
      tolerated – this includes texting.
      Feel free to take notes on a computer. However, no one is permitted to make audio or video
      recordings of lectures under any circumstances.
      Please do not take pictures of my slides with your cell phones or tablets.
      I do not give assignments for extra credit, so please be sure to pay close attention to dates
      of exams and assignments.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
      If you are caught plagiarizing, I will be following the university guidelines for disciplinary
      actions:        (deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html),         see       also
      (www.academicintegrity.org/).
      Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University Code of Academic
      Integrity (see attached). Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit
      will be the student’s own work. You are encouraged to study together and discuss
      information and concepts covered in lecture. You can give “consulting” help to or receive
      “consulting” help from such students. However, this permissible cooperation should never
      involve one student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by someone
      else, in the form of email, email attachment file, disk, or hard copy. Should copying occur,
      both the student who copied from another student and the student who gave material to be
      copied will both be automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation
      of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
      disciplinary action.
                                                                                                   3


       During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted
       during the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in
       any way. Any collaborative behavior during the exams will result in failure of the exam,
       and may result in failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:
       In compliance with the UT Austin policy and equal access laws, I am available to discuss
       appropriate academic accommodations that may be required for students with disabilities.
       Requests for academic accommodations are to be made during the 1st 3 weeks of the
       semester, except for unusual circumstances, so arrangements can be made. Students are
       encouraged to register with Student Disability Services to verify their eligibility for
       appropriate accommodations (see attached).
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE (subject to change – please check Canvas):
     Dates               Topic                              Work to do at home
                                                   Readings to be completed before class
 Jan 25-Feb 1    Intro to Primate         Part 1 in The Evolution of Primate Societies
                 Behavior & Primate (pp.5-142)
                 Diversity
 Feb 4-6         Evolutionary Theory Alcock Ch 1, 10
                                          Strier Ch 4 (p.80-98)
                                          Strier KB (2011) Primate Behavioral Ecology, 4th edition.
                                          Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
                                          Lewis (2017) Sociobiology. International Encyclopedia of
                                          Primatology.
                                          Lindshield (2017) Behavioral Flexibility. International
                                          Encyclopedia of Primatology.
                                          Sinha & Rizvi (2017) Phenotypic Plasticity. International
                                          Encyclopedia of Primatology.
 Feb 8           Methods                  Lewis (2017) Behavioral Sampling. International
                                          Encyclopedia of Primatology.
 Feb 11          Group Living             Dunbar Ch 7
                                          Dunbar RIM (1988) Primate Social Systems. Ithaca, NY:
                                          Cornell University.
 Feb 13-18       Social & Mating          Alcock Ch 8
                 Systems
                                          Fuentes 2007 Primates in Perspective
                                          Schultz 2017 Phylogeny and Social Organization.
                                          International Encyclopedia of Primatology.
                                                                                                    4


Feb 20-27    Sexual Selection   Lewis 2017 Sexual Selection. International Encyclopedia of
                                Primatology.
                                Lewis 2017 Mate Choice. International Encyclopedia of
                                Primatology.
                                Alcock Ch 7
                                Palombit 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                Meredith 2017 Gender. International Encyclopedia of
                                Primatology.
                                Vasey 2017 Homosexual Behavior. International
                                Encyclopedia of Primatology.
Mar 1        Ethograms &
             Review for Exam
Mar 4        Exam I
Mar 6-11     Sex & Reproduction Alcock Ch 13 (pp.411-420)
                                Dixson Ch 4
                                Anestis 2010 Hormones and Social Behavior in Primates
                                Evolutionary Anthropology 19(2):66-78
Mar 13-15    Development, &     Alcock Ch 9
             Life History
                                van Schaik & Isler 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies  
Mar 18-22    No Class           Spring Break
Mar 25-Apr 1 Cooperation        Alcock Ch 2-3
                                Gilby 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                Langergraber 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
Apr 3-8      Competition        Schülke & Ostner 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                                Lewis RJ (2002) Beyond dominance: the importance of
                                leverage. Quarterly Review of Biology 77:149-164.
                                Loundon 2017 Social System. International Encyclopedia
                                of Primatology.
                                Scarry 2017 Intergroup Encounters. International
                                Encyclopedia of Primatology.
Apr 10       Review for Exam
Apr 12       Exam II
                                                                                         5


Apr 15-22 Intelligence       Call & Santos 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                             Seyfarth & Cheney 2012 The Evolution of Primate
                             Societies
Apr 24-29 Communication,     Alcock Ch 4
          Language & Culture
                             Zuberbuler 2012 The Evolution of Primate Societies
                             Cheney DL & Seyfarth RM (2010) Primate
                             Communication and Human Language: Continuities and
                             Discontinuities. Kappeler PM & Silk JB (eds) Mind the
                             Gap: Tracing the Origins of Human Universals. Berlin:
                             Springer pp283-298.
                             Schuppli et al. 2017 Cultural Behavior. International
                             Encyclopedia of Primatology.  
May 1-6   Human Behavior     Alcock Ch 14
                             Hermann & Tomasello 2012 The Evolution of Primate
                             Societies
May 8     Exam III
May 10    In class Assignment
                                                                                   6


                                 THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
                               NOTICE ABOUT STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information contact the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities at (512) 471-6259. Students who require
special accommodations need to get a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6529; 471-4641 TTY. This letter
should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an exam the student should remind the
instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed. For more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php.
                      NOTICE ABOUT MISSED WORK DUE TO RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the
policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious
holy days.
                                     USE OF BLACKBOARD IN CLASSES
This course uses Blackboard, a web-based course management system in which a password-protected site
is created for each course. Blackboard will be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys. You
will be responsible for checking the Blackboard course site regularly for class work and announcements.
As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated
disruptions. Notification of these disruptions will be posted on the Blackboard login page. Scheduled
downtimes are NOT an excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a
significant period of time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date. Blackboard is
available at http://courses.utexas.edu.
                               UNIVERSITY E-MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible
for checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of
the University, your e-mail address in Blackboard is your employee address.
                                                                                                            7
