 INTRODUCTION
TO ADVERTISING
      CREATIVITY
               ADV 325, FALL 2018
                     T/TH 5-6:15PM
                        CHAD REA
   4.310 BMC, T/TH 9-12 & BY APPT
       ADRIANNA SAN ROMAN, TA


PREAMBLE
We do not want things to stay the same. We like new. We push to come up with new inventions.
New products. New ideas. New music. New art. When something has been done before we call
it out. When a friend posts a link from last week we make fun of them. New is good. Unique is
good. How do we get to new and unique? We get creative. And good advertising is nothing if not
creative.
We’ll address creative advertising in this class, but more importantly we’ll seek to understand
creativity in general and how it doesn’t like to be pigeonholed. This isn’t a read-and-regurgitate
class. You’re going to be involved in an ongoing conversation. You’re going to DO as well as
study.
Want to know something? Ask. We’ll figure it out together.
You’ll get a lot out of this class if you put yourself into it.
For those of you thinking about becoming advertising creatives, this is step one…and it’s a
doozy.
Cue epic music.
HOW
Think smart. Think weird. Invent. Explore. Share. You’ll attend two lectures a week and submit
lab assignments online. (You do not attend lab hours, despite what the course description says.)
Online video viewing and readings will be on Canvas. Expect to be graded on thought-provoking
(and fun) individual and group projects, an idea journal, and in-class exercises. In addition, be
prepared to live the creative life you’re studying...starting now.
So you have no desire to go into advertising? It doesn’t matter. All the theories and techniques
you will learn are applicable to anything and everything that you do. We’ll...
• Talk about creative theories
• Learn about creative advertising people and perspectives from the old school
• Discuss general and advertising-specific ideation processes, tools, and products
• See industry movers and shakers
• Listen to strange and wonderful speakers who aren’t me.
Project guidelines sheets will be posted to Canvas prior to the discussion of each project.


MUSTS
TEXTS
HEY, WHIPPLE, SQUEEZE THIS: THE CLASSIC GUIDE TO CREATING GREAT ADS (5
                                                                                              th
Edition) by Luke Sullivan and Edward Boches
Additional readings are posted to Canvas prior to discussion of that material.
SUPPLIES
A SKETCH BOOK TO JOURNAL IDEAS
Example: Moleskin, hardbound, 5 x 8.25 (Nothing smaller. No spiral bound.)
The Department of Advertising at The University of Texas at Austin is home to a world-class
program for aspiring copywriters and art directors. Texas Creative graduates can be found
working across the nation and around the globe. The program is rigorous, fun, challenging,
portfolio-building sequence of classes that will make you think in ways you might never have
thought to produce smart, funny, engaging, relevant, jaw-dropping advertising. Near the end of
the semester, you’ll be given information on how to apply. Your idea journal entries are taken into
consideration as part of the application process.
REQUIREMENTS
DO NOT ___________:
• Skip class, be late, or leave early. The information you miss will ultimately be in the exam.
• Cheat and get caught. I take this university policy very seriously.
• Disrupt your classmates or me with things like talking, texting, emailing, surfing the web, etc.
You will be called out.
• Turn in assignments late. NO EXCEPTIONS. No really. Late = an automatic “0”. Make
arrangements with your teaching assistant to turn in assignments EARLY if you know you won’t
make it to class. If you are required to email or post online, the digital time stamp when you post
the work will be considered the time you handed it in. That item must be complete. Errors in
uploading, corrupted files, or missing emails are not excused. Technology can be challenging, so
plan ahead, i.e. DO NOT WAIT until the last minute or even hour. The work cannot be made up.
DO ________.
• Your best. I expect your work to be of the highest professional grade. Proofread, etc.
• Put your name and EID on everything you hand in. Or it will be incomplete.
• Participate in the discussion. The class will be better for it.
Student Responsibilities:
1. Students are responsible for all material covered in class and all assigned readings and
viewings.
2. Students must complete readings and assignments by the times specified.
3. Check Canvas frequently, and make sure your e-mail address is current with the University so
that you can receive emails sent through Canvas. It is the student’s responsibility to maintain this
email address and ensure that it is correct and able to receive messages. Check your junk mail
too.
4. Any questions about grades must be submitted in writing within 5 days of when the grade is
posted to Canvas.


5. This course upholds the values of the University Policy of Scholastic Dishonesty. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information,
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php.
6. Technology can be a pain. So plan accordingly. Work posted or handed in late is late,
regardless of technology errors, computer crashes, corrupt files, or lack of internet access. I
honor the Canvas or email timestamps, depending on the specified submission format. Forgetting
to attach files, or email bounce-backs, are not excuses. Plan ahead. Don’t wait until the last
minute, or even last hour, to submit assignments.
RECCOS
BOOKS
FLOW: THE PSYCHOLOGY OF OPTIMAL EXPERIENCE by Csikszentmihalyi
THE CREATIVE PROCESS ILLUSTRATED by Griffin & Morrison
THE CREATIVE HABIT by Tharp, Twyla
THE TIPPING POINT by Malcolm Gladwell
SUBSCRIBE/ FOLLOW/BOOKMARK
MODERNCOPYWRITER.COM
ADWEEK
ADVERTISING AGE
CREATIVITY-ONLINE.COM
COMMUNICATION ARTS
LURZER’S ARCHIVE
GRAPHIS
HOW
THE ONE SHOW
D&AD
THEFWA.COM
ADSOFTHEWORLD.COM
ADLAND.TV
HEYWHIPPLE.COM
LIVE LIFE
Be a sponge. Get out there, observe, study, deconstruct, document, and then produce. And
repeat.


GRADES
In-class Quizzes/Lab Assignments/Participation
Mind Map
                                                      10%
                                                      15%
Branding Project                                      15%
Documenting Creativity Project                        15%
Idea Journal                                          15%
Exam 1                                                15%
Exam 2                                                15%
Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum
grade of C in all communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major. If
you earn less than a C you will not be allowed to continue to be in the advertising program. A
grade of B- or higher is required in order to be eligible for acceptance into Texas Creative.
Final letter grades are calculated as follows:
A 93.5 to 100 A- 89.5 to 93.4 B+ 86.5 to 89.5 B 83.5 to 86.4 B- 79.5 to 83.4 C+ 76.5 to 79.4
C 73.5 to 76.4 C- 69.5 to 73.4 D+ 66.5 to 69.4 D 63.5 to 66.4 D- 59.5 to 63.4 F 0 to 59.4
You have one week from the date a grade is announced/returned to you to contest it. No grade
changes will be made at any point after this period. A week is seven days. Not 10 days. Not 7
business days. No time off for holidays. This is one place where creativity doesn’t work. Keep in
mind, that I reserve the right to adjust your grade EITHER WAY if you contest it. You’re asking
me to take another look. Sometimes I don’t like what I see the second time. Pick your battles.
I curve, I drop the occasional quiz, and I round up final grades. Why? Because I’m a nice guy.
That’s all the help you get. There are no extra points given because you’re “SO CLOSE” to an A,
or to passing, or to the Dean of the department. So, don’t ask.
INFO
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.


University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Scholastic Dishonesty Statement
The Department of Advertising has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the College of Communication. By
enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is
unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Policy on Scholastic
Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course an/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Campus Policy on Holy Days:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support
for your learning.
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
email address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily—to
stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can
find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Emergency evacuation recommendations:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.


Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Policy on Campus Carry:
In the development of the policies adopted by President Fenves to comply with the law in a way
that prioritizes the safety of everyone on the campus, the concealed carry of handguns is strictly
prohibited in my office.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
| 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-     CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
-     M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
-     Brief assessments and referral services
-     Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-     MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-     Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


WHEN
While I will make every effort to maintain this schedule, it is subject to change, depending on
class progress, unforeseen amazing opportunities, and other surprises.
TUESDAYS                                                     THURSDAYS
                                                             30 AUG Introduction
04 SEPT Defining Creativity                                  06 SEPT The Creative Process
11 SEPT The Creative Process                                 13 SEPT The Creative Process
         Lab Assignment 1                                    16 SEPT LAB ASSIGNMENT 1 DUE
18 SEPT The Creative Process                                 20 SEPT GUEST SPEAKER
        Mind Map Assignment
25 SEPT The Agency Process                                   27 SEPT Creative Problem-Solving
         MIND MAPS DUE
02 OCT Copywriting                                           04 OCT Art Direction & Branding
        Lab Assignment 2                                     07 OCT LAB ASSIGNMENT 2 DUE
09 OCT Ingredients and Evaluation                            11 OCT Ingredients and Evaluation
16 OCT Exam Review                                           18 OCT EXAM 1
        Doc Creativity Assignment
23 OCT GUEST SPEAKER                                         25 OCT Approaches and Opportunities
        Lab Assignment 3                                     28 OCT LAB ASSIGNMENT 3 DUE
30 OCT Approaches and Opportunities                          01 NOV Approaches and Opportunities
                                                                      DOC. CREATIVITY DUE
                                                                     Branding Assignment
06 NOV Originality                                           08 NOV Creative Presentations
13 NOV GUEST SPEAKER                                         15 NOV Ethics
                                                                     BRANDING PROJECT DUE
20 NOV Creative Careers                                      22 NOV THANKSGIVING
        Lab Assignment 4
27 NOV Creative Panel Discussion,                            29 NOV TBD
        IDEA JOURNAL DUE                                     02 DEC LAB ASSIGNMENT 4 DUE
04 DEC Exam Review                                           06 DEC EXAM 2


WHO
CHAD REA
chadjrea@utexas.edu
BMC 4.310
Teaching Experience:
        Lecturer, The University of Texas at Austin, 2014-Present
        ADV 343K Portfolio 1
        ADV 468K Portfolio 2
        ADV 475K Portfolio 4
        ADV 378 Copywriting
        ADV 376/PR 377 Integrated Campaigns
        ADV 325 Intro to Creativity
        Stan Richards Faculty Fellow in Advertising Creativity 2016 - 2017
        Teacher, Art Center College of Design, 2002-2006
        Integrated Brand Communications, (Great Teacher Award 2002)
Degrees:
        Bachelor of Arts, Advertising, May 1993
        Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas
Professional Industry Experience:
        Full-Time:
        ecopop (Austin), Founder/Creative Director, 2008-Present
        Wieden+Kennedy (Portland), Creative Director, 2008-2009
        86 the onions (LA), Founder/Creative Director, 2002-2007
        KesselsKramer (Amsterdam), Senior Creative, 2000-2002
        Mother (London), Senior Creative, 1998-2000
        The Richards Group/Pyro (Dallas), Copywriter, 1994-1998
        Freelance:
        Mullen, Crispin Porter + Bogusky, JDK, Creature, mono, nemo, enso, attik, david &
        goliath, Butler Shine Stern, Strawberry Frog, TBWA/Chiat Day, Factory Labs, dw+h,
        Saatchi & Saatchi, MEplusYOU, mkg, Sedgwick Rd., sandymontana, Climate Reality
        Project (in-house), Curious Beast, The Butler Bros., Preacher, etc.
Client Experience (150+ brands):
        Nike, Google, Target, Starbucks, Mountain Dew, ESPN X Games, Crackle, adidas,
        Diesel, Coca-Cola, Bacardi, Climate Reality Project, MTV, FUEL TV, Activision,
        HUMMER, Motel 6, Oakley, Samsung, Roland, Toyota, etc.
Professional recognition:
        Accolades: Effie, The One Club, D&AD, NY Art Directors, National Addys, The
        Creative Circle, British Television, Graphis, Communication Arts, Lurzer’s
        International Archive, Creativity, Print, ZOO, Creative Review, Shots, Eye, Campaign
        Screen


Book Features: Advertising Today, Punk Marketing: Get Off Your Ass And Join The
Revolution, I Like It. What Is It?, Advertising Graphics With Impact, Consumer Behavior:
Buyer, Having, Being (7th Edition), A Hundred And One Things To Do, 200% Cotton:
New T-Shirt Graphics, Touch This: Graphic Design That Feels Good, Dos Logos,
Introducing: Designs For Making A First Impression, 2 Kilo Of KesselsKramer, World
Business Cards Today, Letterhead & Logo Design 9, All Access: The Making Of Thirty
Extraordinary Graphic Designers, Sustainable Graphic Design: Tools, Systems And
Strategies For Innovative Print Design, Shovel It: Kick-Ass Advice To Turn Life’s Crap
Into The Peace And Happiness You Deserve
