                 Apparel Design Internship Program TXA 352D
Instructor: Eve Nicols                                    email: karuna@mail.utexas.edu
Office: GEA 239                                           Phone: 512 - 471-3230
Prerequisites: Admission to the Apparel Design Internship Program, and Textiles and Apparel
164(Topic 1 Flat Pattern) and 246L(Topic 1 Flat pattern) with a grade of at least C- in each.
Introduction
The internship experience facilitates learning through the blending of theory and practice.
The purpose of the program is to provide students with a realistic view of the apparel design
industry. Through actual work experience in a professional environment, students develop skills
and abilities that provide an opportunity for both cognitive and effective learning, as well as
fundamental changes in attitude, work habits and maturity level.
The program is a cooperative effort involving three major participants: the student, the
sponsoring firm of the site supervisor, and the faculty course leader.
Two basic conditions are vital to a relevant internship program:
     1. Insuring that the activities provided for the students allow them to analyze events and
         synthesize their experiences.
     2. Insuring that the students are involved in meaningful activities that relate to the goals of
         both the educational program and the sponsoring firm.
Objectives
Students develop an understanding of the techniques, principles, and procedure employed in
the apparel design or related area of the industry.
Students build satisfactory occupational proficiencies and a professional attitude.
Students gain knowledge of the structure, activities, and competencies required for apparel
design or related area careers.
Course requirements
Field experience at an internship site evaluated and accepted by the faculty course leader.
Ten reports outlining the student’s activities, observations and progress. Quality of writing skill
will be evaluated. Learning outcomes included in the reports identifying skills and techniques
experienced.
Power Point on the company you are interning with and your learning experiences.
Term paper (ten page substantial written paper – several drafts may be required)
Required Assignments
Ten written reports include learning outcomes and photographs of experience.
Power Point on the company and your learning experiences (15 slides minimum).
Term paper (ten page substantial written paper – several drafts may be required).
Peer review.
Design Internship Feature
2 Pages (8x11) to show company name/logo and photographs of your experience
Internship supervisor evaluation.
Student evaluation of the internship site.


Grade Determination all items printed and submitted in spiral bound file
Ten written reports include learning outcomes and visual imagery.                    200
Power Point on the company and your learning experiences (15 slides minimum)         150
2 Pages (8x11) to show company name/logo and photographs of your experience          100
Term Paper (10-12 pages)                                                             200
Peer review of Term Paper                                                            100
Design Internship Feature                                                             50
Internship site supervisor evaluation                                                200
                                                               Total         1,000 points
All assignment deadline dates are posted on canvas, with assignment prompts.
Term Paper deadline July 21st
Ten written reports all completed by August 2nd
Supervisor evaluation completed by August 2nd.
Grade Distribution
A = 950 – 1000 points                   C+= 700 – 749 points
A- = 900 -- 949 points                  C = 650 – 699 points
B+ = 850 -- 899 points                  C- = 600 - 649 points
B = 800 - 849 points                    D+ = 550 -599 points
B- = 750 - 799 points                   D = 500 -549 points
• PROFESSIONALISM: You are responsible to check your UT email and canvas to
communicate with instructor
Academic honesty is expected at all times. All these aspects of the UT policy apply:
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the General Information Catalog to access the
official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further
elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
This course follows UT’s guidelines for accommodating students with
disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Students may also contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (DDCE),
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability.
Accommodations for religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of
your pending absence at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or
a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Please be advised that the syllabus may change at any time based on the instructor's
discretion.
