ADV 391K Fall 2019 Love                                                          (8/30/19 Class Post)
                         ADV 391K CONSUMER BEHAVIOR
                                  (Unique No. 06310)
                         Tues 3:30-5:00pm          BMC 3.204
Brad Love                                                  Office: BMC 4.342
Email: lovebrad@utexas.edu                                 Office Hours: Tuesday, 1.30-2:20;
                                                           Wednesday 1.30-2:30; and By appt;
COURSE OBJECTIVES AND MATERIALS
         This course acquaints graduate students with the fundamental concepts of consumer
behavior to better understand why individuals, families and groups acquire, consume, and
dispose of goods, services, ideas and experiences. Consumer behavior is a broad field that
draws upon psychological, sociological, anthropological and economic perspectives and
theories. A working knowledge of consumer behavior is central to strategic decision making and
planning for advertising, public relations and persuasive communication.
         In this course we learn the major theories, ideas and processes that characterize the
consumer behavior field. Central ideas of the course will be conveyed through reading, viewing
and discussion of a blend of the classic studies and current ideas relevant to the study of
consumer behavior and its centrality to persuasion.
Required books for the course include:
         Halpern, David. Inside the Nudge Unit (digital version $9.99 on Amazon)
There may be an additional book or two required once we hone in on class interests. If so, they
should be readily available via Amazon, etc. Most course materials are available on Canvas;
other materials include current articles from advertising trade press publications (e.g., AdAge,
Adweek, etc.) and online video viewings (e.g., TED.com, PBS Frontline, etc.).
Course Method
         The course consists of lectures, discussions, assignments, exercises, presentations and
some group work. Course materials provide context for class work and should be completed
prior to the assigned time. Students must be prepared to actively participate in class discussions.
As well, an important aspect of this course is the hands-on experience to be gained from
applying theory to the practice of persuasive communication.
COURSE ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING
Assignment                                         Weight
Concept Paper & Presentation (Group)               25%
Personal Project (Individual)                      40%
Class Participation                                15%
Short Responses                                    15%
Peer Evaluation                                    5%
                                                  1


ADV 391K Fall 2019 Love                                                           (8/30/19 Class Post)
Assignments and Evaluation
         Your grade in the course will be determined by your performance in the areas described
above. Written assignments are graded on content, as well as on grammar, spelling, and
punctuation. Late assignments will be penalized. I will not assign a grade of "incomplete" for
the course except in extraordinary circumstances. Your grade in the course will be dependent,
in part, on the evolution and intellectual refinement of your thinking over the semester. Letter
grades will be assigned using the plus/minus system.
         Should we have a mix of master’s and doctoral students in the seminar, the bar is set
higher (i.e., expectations are greater) for doctoral students than for master’s students.
Assignments will clarify those expectations in more detail.
Attendance: Regular attendance at all class meetings is expected. Requests for excused
absences must be documented and should not unnecessarily compromise the course experience
of your classmates. Students who miss classes or other required activities for the observance of
a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so
that arrangements can be made.
Class Participation and Short Responses: All assigned readings and exercises should be
completed prior to class. The goal is to relate theory and practice and be able to apply concepts
to everyday issues concerning the influence of consumer behavior on advertising, public
relations and other domains of persuasive communication. You are expected to formulate
questions and ideas in advance of each class.
Everyone is expected to participate thoughtfully during each class session. If you do not
participate fully, you cannot receive a grade of “A” for the course. Class absences will also
lower your final participation grade. Your participation grade will also include oral presentations
of class exercises, questions posted on Canvas for you to answer outside of class, and other in-
and out-of-class tasks. Assessment will include effort and accuracy demonstrated. Participation
will also include assigned contributions of examples of current persuasive communication to
illustrate lecture topics for class discussion.
Concept Explication Paper & Presentation: You will work in small groups to explicate a specific
concept relevant to human behavior. Your work and presentation will serve to inform the class
about the concept as well as identify specific areas where the concept may be particularly
relevant for problem solving and research. More information will be forthcoming on this
assignment. Student groups and topics will be determined in class and dates assigned for
discussing the specific content.
Personal Project: You will work individually to prepare a proposal to address a personally
relevant issue related to human behavior. This paper should grow out of and/or build upon the
work done in class and be relevant to your interests. Progress reports will come up via in class
presentations of your work to date. More information will be forthcoming on this assignment.
The completed project is due the final week of classes.
                                                  2


ADV 391K Fall 2019 Love                                                         (8/30/19 Class Post)
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
Week Date                Class Topic
1        5 Sept          Introduction (order book)
2        12 Sept         Foundations of Consumer Behavior
3        19 Sept         Managing Information I
4        26 Sept         Managing Information II
5        3 Oct7          Consumer Decisions I
6        10 Oct          Consumer Decisions II
7        17 Oct          Persuasion and Attitudes I
8        24 Oct8         Persuasion and Attitudes II
9        31 Oct          Audience Considerations
10       7 Nov           Concept Application Reports
11       14 Nov          Concept Application Reports
12       21 Nov          Final Project Consults
13       28 Nov          Final Project Consults
14       5 Dec           Final Project Consults
                                  *******
UT Class Related Policies
Use of E-Mail and Canvas for Official Correspondence to Students
       E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-
mail address. We will use Canvas extensively for communication and delivery of course
materials. You should check your email and Canvas regularly and frequently.
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy
         The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a
student from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
                                                 3


ADV 391K Fall 2019 Love                                                           (8/30/19 Class Post)
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is
excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to
take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a
reasonable time after the absence.
          A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the
absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
Documented Disability Statement
          If you have a documented disability that requires academic accommodations, please
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or (512)-410-6644
(video phone) or contact : http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/ Faculty are not required to
provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
        The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly
in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false
or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other
assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning
experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information
visit: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
University of Texas Honor Code
          The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
          If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior.
This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The
University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
                                                  4


ADV 391K Fall 2019 Love                                                            (8/30/19 Class Post)
Campus Safety and Emergency Evacuation:
          The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation are from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, http://www.utexas.edu/campus-life/safety-and-security
Emergency Information: 512-232-9999;
http://emergency.utexas.edu
 - Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
 - Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 - Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
 - In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
 - Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
- More information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: http://emergency.utexas.edu/preparedness
                                                   5
