                            ANT s301: Introduction to Biological Anthropology
                                  Unique Number: 79345 · Summer II 2019
COURSE INSTRUCTOR:                Angelina Locker
                                  Office: SAC 5.136
                                  Email: angelina.sweeney@utexas.edu
                                  Office Hours: Lecture Days 2:30 PM – 3:30 PM or by appointment
TEACHING ASSISTANT:               Chris Davis
                                  Office: SAC 5.172
                                  Email: davischris1981@gmail.com
                                  Office Hours: Lab Days 12 PM – 1PM or by appointment
LECTURES and LABS:                Monday – Friday, 1:00 PM - 2:30 PM, SAC 4.174
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Biological anthropology (also known as physical or evolutionary anthropology) is the study of primates
(including humans) from a biological perspective. This course will provide you with an introduction to
the field, overview of its sub-disciplines, and the topics of primate diversity, behavior, adaptation, and
evolution. By the end of the semester, students will have a better understanding of how evolution has
shaped human biology and variation.
COURSE TEXTBOOK:                  Boyd R and Silk J (2018) How Humans Evolved 8th Edition. W.W.
                                  Norton and Co.
                                  The course textbook is available at the University Co-Op or as an ebook:
                                  https://digital.wwnorton.com/howhumans8
ONLINE MATERIALS:                 All additional readings, lab materials, and lab quizzes will be made
                                  available online through the course Canvas website.
                                  Shortened PowerPoints will be posted to Canvas but will include
                                  only condensed text and may not have all of the information from
                                  the actual lecture itself. If you miss a class lecture, it is your
                                  responsibility to obtain notes from a fellow classmate.
ASSESSMENT and EVALUATION
The grade that you earn in this course will be calculated as follows:
         Exam 1                   30%
         Exam 2                   30%
         Laboratory               30%
         Pre-Lab Quizzes          10%
         TOTAL GRADE              100%
Exam 1 (30%) will cover all the material presented July 15 to July 26 in the course lectures, laboratories,
and reading assignments (course textbook and any additional assigned readings from the course Canvas
website). All exam questions will be in objective format (e.g., true/false, multiple choice, matching, fill-
in-the-blank, and/or short answer).


ANT s301                           Introduction to Biological Anthropology                     Summer II 2019
Exam 2 (30%) is non-cumulative and will cover all the material presented July 30 to August 15 in the
course lectures, laboratories, and reading assignments (course textbook and any additional assigned
readings from the course Canvas website). All exam questions will be in objective format (e.g., true/false,
multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and/or short answer).
Pre-lab quizzes (10%)
Throughout this semester, students will attend five lab sessions. Before each lab session, students must
complete a pre-lab quiz on Canvas. These pre-lab quizzes draw directly from the lab readings and serve as
a preparation for their corresponding lab session. All of the questions in pre-lab quizzes will be in
objective format (true or false, multiple choice, or matching). If a student does not complete a pre-lab quiz
before its corresponding lab session, she or he will obtain no credit for such a lab quiz. Late pre-lab
quizzes will not be accepted.
Laboratory (30%)
A laboratory assignment will be completed during the laboratory period. These assignments are available
on the course Canvas website within weekly laboratory folders under the Assignments tab. You are
required to download, print, and bring laboratory assignments with you to class.
ASSIGNMENT OF GRADES
A        93 to 100                      B-       80 to 82.99                    D+       67 to 69.99
A-       90 to 92.99                    C+       77 to 79.99                    D        63 to 66.99
B+       80 to 89.99                    C        73 to 76.99                    D-       60 to 62.99
B        83 to 86.99                    C-       70 to 72.99                    F        ≤ 59.99
There is no rounding is this course and final grades are non-negotiable. There may be some extra
credit questions on exams, but no other opportunities are available. If you are struggling with the course
material, please seek help from me and/or your TA as soon as you are unhappy with your performance in
the course. Do not wait until the end of the semester to ask for help.
If your performance during the semester is adversely affected by personal problems (e.g., death of a
family member, mental health issues, etc.), please contact your Dean’s office as soon as possible to
discuss your options.
GENERAL COURSE POLICIES
Please attend all of the lectures and lab sessions. Punctuality is greatly appreciated. Late arrivals and early
departures are very disruptive. Please be polite and respectful. Do not sleep, talk, or text in class. Please
silence your cell phone and stow it away during lectures and lab sessions. If you engage in disrespectful
and disruptive behavior, you may be asked to leave. You can take notes on your personal computer.
However, you cannot make audio or video recordings during lectures and lab sessions.
LECTURE EXAMS POLICIES
DO NOT BE ABSENT ON AN EXAM DAY. Make-up exams will only be given in cases of a
documented (medical or family) emergency. If you miss an exam due to an emergency, you must contact
me as soon as possible and provide documentation of your absence within 3 days of the missed
exam.
Exam scores will not be curved. If you have questions about an exam grade, your exam will be regraded.
Re-grades will only be considered, however, for exams completed in indelible ink (meaning no pencil!).
Questions about your grade must be addressed to me in writing within 3 days upon receipt of your graded
exam. The exam should be handed to me along with the written request.
                                                       2


ANT s301                           Introduction to Biological Anthropology                    Summer II 2019
LAB POLICIES
Lab meetings are taught by the course Teaching Assistant and will be held once a week during our regular
class time.
Absence on Laboratory Days
If you are absent on a day that we are conducting lab due to illness, observance of religious holy day, or
military service, you must email the teaching assistant at least 24 hours before (for religious holy days,
military service, or university sponsored athletic events) or at least 1 hour before (for illness) the start of
lab time to notify them of your absence. You must then provide documentation of your absence (e.g.,
doctor’s note, obituary) within 72 hours of this time for your make-up request to be considered. If your
request to make-up the laboratory assignment is approved, the assignment must be completed prior to the
next scheduled lab session. Note that permission to make-up a laboratory assignment will be
considered by the course teaching assistant on a case-by-case basis. If a student fails to abide by the
conditions stated above, the option to make-up the laboratory assignment will be revoked, and the student
will receive a score of zero.
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. As members of this university, we must uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect towards peers and community.
SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic
records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair advantage to the student (such as, but
not limited to, submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor), or the attempt to commit such an act. Any student found cheating on an
exam or assignment will receive a grade of zero for such an exam or assignment and will be referred to
the Dean’s office for further disciplinary action. Any attempt to alter a graded, returned exam in order to
improve the score is considered cheating and will result in an exam grade of zero. Students who violate
University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university.
For a tutorial and information on plagiarism, please read:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
In addition, please read:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis/php
Finally, please read Section 11-802 in the General Information Catalog:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/app/gi09.appc03.html#subchapter-11-800-student-standards-
of-conduct
E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed on changes to her or his e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
                                                       3


ANT s301                          Introduction to Biological Anthropology                    Summer II 2019
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
If you require special accommodations for exams (e.g., a reduced-distraction environment or additional
testing time), you must contact your course instructor and teaching assistant in advance in order to discuss
the necessary arrangements. There will be no exceptions to this rule. Proof of qualification for
accommodations from the University of Texas at Austin Services with Disabilities (SSD) office must be
provided. Faculty is not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter
from SSD.
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact SSD at
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-
related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
A student is free not to use an approved accommodation. However, if a student opts out of an
accommodation for one exam and then decides to use it for another exam, it is the responsibility of the
student to make advanced arrangements with the course instructor.
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
Following university policies, you must notify the course instructor of your pending absence at least 14
days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination,
a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will provide you with an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q DROP POLICY
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to 6. As
stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher
education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including
any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit
door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the course instructor in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instructions of the course instructor/teaching assistant.
Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
                                                       4


ANT s301                     Introduction to Biological Anthropology                    Summer II 2019
                                      COURSE SCHEDULE
WEEK 1                                                                  READINGS/ASSIGNMENTS
15 July (M)  Primate Diversity I: Strepsirrhines                        Ch. 5 (p. 108-119)
16 July (Tu) Primate Diversity II: Haplorrhines                         Ch. 5 (p. 119-125)
17 July (W)  Evolution I: Natural Selection & Adaptation                Ch. 1 (p. 3-12; 17-22)
18 July (Th) Evolution II: Microevolutionary Processes                  Ch. 2; Ch. 3 (p. 53-65, 70-74)
19 July (F)  Lab 1: Skeletal Anatomy and Taxonomy                       Lab 1 Reading
                                                                        Lab 1 Quiz Due
WEEK 2
22 July (M)  Evolution III: Macroevolutionary Processes                 Ch. 4 (81-95)
23 July (Tu) Primate Behavior I: Socioecology                           Ch. 5 (p. 125-137)
24 July (W)  Primate Behavior II: Sociobiology                          Ch. 6
25 July (Th) Primate Behavior III: Cognition & Life History             Ch. 7; Ch. 8
26 July (F)  Lab 2: Locomotor and Dietary Adaptations                   Lab 2 Reading
                                                                        Lab 2 Quiz Due
WEEK 3
29 July (M)  MIDTERM EXAM
30 July (Tu) Primate Evolution I: Paleontological Methods               Ch. 4 (p. 95-105);
                                                                        Ch. 9 (p. 207-214)
31 July (W)  Primate Evolution II: Fossil Prosimians                    Ch. 9 (p. 214-218)
1 Aug (Th)   Primate Evolution III: Fossil Anthropoids                  Ch. 9 (p. 218-230)
2 Aug (F)    Lab 3: Fossil Primates                                     Lab 3 Reading
                                                                        Lab 3 Quiz Due
WEEK 4
5 Aug (M)    Paleoanthropology I: The Evolution of Bipedalism           Ch. 10 (p. 233-243)
6 Aug (Tu)   Paleoanthropology II: Australopithecines                   Ch. 10 (p. 244-258)
7 Aug (W)    Lab 4: Australopithecines                                  Lab 4 Reading
                                                                        Lab 4 Quiz Due
8 Aug (Th)   Paleoanthropology III: Early Homo                          Ch. 11
9 Aug (F)    Paleoanthropology IV: Late Homo                            Ch. 12
WEEK 5
12 Aug (M)   Paleoanthropology V: Modern Homo sapiens                   Ch. 13
13 Aug (Tu)  Lab 5: Genus Homo                                          Lab 5 Reading
                                                                        Lab 5 Quiz Due
14 Aug (W)   Modern Human Variation                                     Ch. 14; Ch. 15
15 Aug (Th)  Human Variation & Concluding Remarks
16 Aug (F)   FINAL EXAM
OTHER IMPORTANT DATES
      16-Jul Last day of official ADD/DROP period for Summer Session II
      2-Aug  Last day to change registration to or from the PASS/FAIL or CREDIT/NO CREDIT basis
                                                  5
