                                MSF Program: Acc 280K.7– Fall 2019
                                      Financial Statement Analysis
Professor                              Dr. Patrick Badolato, CPA
Office Hours                           T/Th 3-4. RRH 5.406.
Phone                                  (512) 471-7920
E-Mail                                 patrick.badolato@mccombs.utexas.edu
                                       Please post all non-personal questions on our Discussion Board
Course Summary: This Financial Statement Analysis course focuses on using an array of financial
information to best determine the why behind past and current performance. To achieve this we combine
quantitative and qualitative factors to understand drivers of performance and to tell the story of the firm.
With a solid understanding of the past and current conditions, we move towards motivating sound
forecasts and briefly discuss well-supported inputs to valuation models.
This course is advised for individuals who possess all of the following:
    1)  an interest in learning and a willingness to develop new skills and perspectives;
    2)  an interest in how businesses operate, make decisions, change and report their performance;
    3)  a willingness to benefit from and contribute to the UT/McCombs’ educational experience;
    4)  a general, but strong, understanding of financial accounting at an introductory level as the logical
        language of business. This course builds off introductory Accounting classes.
What you should expect:
Historically this has been a challenging class that requires a commitment. It is not challenging as you
must memorize complex formulas that you could easily look up, but as it will challenge perspectives and
require critical thinking and the synthesis of information. This is also a class that actively shuns
memorization of terms and formulas and the regurgitation of anything. We will not waste your time (and
your educational investment) with memorizing items such as ratios or formulas or emphasizing jargon
and catchphrases over thoughtful analysis. Instead we will focus on more useful ways of approaching
various issues. Therefore, you may hear many “Yes, but…” questions: “Yes, but in your own words.”
“Yes, but why? “Yes, that is the general economic argument, but how has it played out in this scenario?”
“Yes, that is the change, but what drove that change? …We will get dirty trying to best understand
various firms and how to best use financial information. You need to be involved in these discussions.
How to do well and get the most out of the experience:
This class is also one that has a straightforward plan for success as directly affirmed by former students.
Students who truly commit to all of the following usually end up with solid grades: (1) consistently
preparing for class, using the materials provided and asking questions when needed; (2) being active
learners within the classroom and (3) thoughtfully reviewing the material (with peers) after class.
Individuals who do not do or want to do the work, check out during class or miss class, believe they
know everything, maintain a closed mind or refuse to be thoughtful usually find this class to be dreadful.
