     ALD 327: Sociocultural Influences on Learning (Unique #09080)
                              The University of Texas at Austin
                                   MWF 11:00am-12:00pm
                                               SZB 278
Instructor: Judith Landeros (Pronouns: she/her)                    Office: SZB 528E
Office Hours: W: 12:00-2:00pm or by appt.                          Email: judithlanderos@utexas.edu
Required Text: Au, Brown, & Calderón (2016), Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of U.S.
Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official Knowledge in Education
Course Description
How have children of minoritized backgrounds been impacted by schooling and schooling
practices that do not attend to their experiences? In this course, a sociocultural, sociohistorical,
and sociopolitical lens will be utilized to critically examine issues pertaining to minoritized and
historically marginalized groups. Course readings are intentionally grounded within a cross-
disciplinary approach that draws from Indigenous studies, Black studies, Latinx studies, Asian
studies, Gender studies, Queer studies, and Dis/ability studies. We will explore the complex
relationships between schools and the larger society, especially in terms of social, cultural, racial,
and economic inequities. We will review her/his/theystories and consider the complex ways that
settler-colonialism, social constructions of race and gender, capitalism, neoliberalism,
im/migration, and socio-economic class intersect and influence the schooling experiences of
Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC). Issues of power and privilege will be
interrogated to understand how they influence one’s perceptions of teaching, pedagogy,
education policy, and curriculum. During this course everyone will be encouraged to engage in
critical self-reflection by questioning their own identities and beliefs, and that of others’ in a
respectful manner. It is expected that you are open to dialoguing about issues of race, gender,
class, privilege and sexual orientation. If you feel uncomfortable about this expectation, this may
not be the right class for you.
                                                                                                     1


Cultural Diversity Flag
This course carries the flag of Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of U.S. cultural
experiences, including groups who have historically experienced marginalization and exclusion.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments
covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of Indigenous, Black, Asian, and Latinxs in this
course.
                                          Class Information
Preferred Pronoun & Name Pronunciation: Please let me know if you would like to be referred
by a particular preferred name or gender pronoun. I also want to make sure that your name is
honored and pronounced correctly.
Class Time/Lateness
Since we will meet three days a week for one hour, it is critical that you arrive by 11:00am and
are prepared to be engaged until 12:00pm. Two late arrivals equal one absence. If you know
you’ll be late let me know ahead of time. It is important that you are here and on time out of
respect for our community.
Communication/Canvas
Canvas will be used to post announcements, course documents, assignments, and supplementary
materials. Please make sure to look out for messages or announcements that I may send to the
whole class via Canvas.
Academic Integrity
All work must be your own. We use APA format in this course and I encourage you to visit the
Purdue Owl website which offers guidelines for how to approach citations and avoid plagiarism.
Whenever you are referring to ideas or information from others, make sure that you cite the
source. Students who violate university rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
proceedings, including the possibility of failing the course and dismissal from the University. No
credit will be given for work that violates this principle and it will be reported.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Media & Technology
Some seminars may require the use of a laptop or tablet so we can access readings and share
pertinent information in class for learning and collaboration. The use of technology during class
time is expected to be respectful i.e. used only for purposes directly related to current class
activities. Cell phones must be on vibrate mode and kept in your bookbag. If you have an
                                                                                                    2


emergency and need to have your phone out on the table, make sure that you notify me in
advance. Any type of social media, checking e-mails, online shopping, or texting in class is
considered inappropriate classroom etiquette. If technology is being used in disrespectful
manners to disengage from class material, I will require all students to print readings and bring
them to class.
Religious Reasonable Accommodations
If you find that there are any conflicts with assignment deadlines and required class attendance
because of religious obligations make sure to talk with me at least two weeks in advance to
request a special accommodation.
Emergency Evacuation
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation announcements requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instructions of faculty or class
instructor. Do not re-enter a building unless the Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services has given you instructions to do so. Information regarding emergency
evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found on the UT emergency page.
Late Work
Extensions may be granted with adequate reason in extreme cases and with prior notice before
the deadline, unless there is an emergency. You may NOT receive an extension on the actual
due date. Any work that is handed in late without an extension from the instructor, will
automatically receive one letter grade deduction. Mandatory assignments must be turned in, in
order to pass this course.
Assignment Submission
Assignments will be submitted via Canvas. Unless you have an excused absence, you must be
present in class for your work to be accepted.
Syllabus Changes
The instructor reserves the right to alter (add, delete, and/or modify) the syllabus to meet the
individual needs of the students.
                                            Student Resources
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. Please
submit a letter to me from Services for Students with Disabilities early in the course so that your
needs may be addressed. For example, if there are circumstances that make our learning
                                                                                                    3


environment and activities challenging let me know how I can best support you. If you have
accommodations or medical information you need to share with me please let me know. I am
committed to making this an effective learning environment for you and keeping our discussion
confidential.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
It is common to need support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your
control. Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office
is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862
and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. Walk-in hours are also available Mondays and
Wednesdays from 1-2PM in JES A115 and Tuesdays and Fridays from 1-2PM in SZB 216. All
services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without your written consent.
Identity Based Support and Discussion Groups
• Asian Voices @ UT Austin: Tuesdays, 12:30-2:00PM – Bellmont 220A
• Black Voices: Wednesdays, 2:00-3:30PM – Gordon White Building
• Latinx Voices: Day/Time TBD
• Queer Voices: Wednesdays, 12:30PM-2:00PM – SAC 2.112
• Finding Our Voice - A Woman of Color Discussion Group: Mondays 12:30-2:00PM – SAC 2.112
Writing Center
The University Writing Center provides free, one-on-one writing consultations for undergraduate
students. You have the option of scheduling an appointment if you would like additional support
with your writing. There are also a variety of events, workshops, and “write-ins” that are offered
throughout the academic school year.
                                              Assignments
I. Attendance & Participation – 15%
Attendance and participation are key for your success in this course. You must inform me at least
two weeks in advance about your absence in order for it to be excused. I also understand that
emergencies may come up, so I ask that you contact me (708) 214-7813 and let me know about
your absence. You will be required to provide documentation (doctor’s note, etc.) in order for the
absence to be excused. If you have unexcused absences, points will be deducted from your final
grade. You are also expected to be fully present, read prior to class, and be prepared to participate
in class discussions. A critical reading reflection template will be provided to serve as a tool to
take notes, practice citing authors, ask questions, and present your ideas. The first portion of the
handout is to be completed prior to class, the remaining sections will be completed the last five
minutes of class, and the handout will be collected at the end of each class. These reading
reflections will be returned by the next class since you may find them useful as you prepare to
write your critical reading reflection essays. It is your responsibility to download readings and have
them available before you come to class to engage in a critical discussion with your peers. Class
time is not the time to download a reading. Therefore, if it becomes evident that students are not
                                                                                                     4


reading prior to class, they will be required to print all readings and bring them to class. Our
seminars will consist of group discussions, working in partners, and/or small groups. Students are
expected to be in class promptly by 11:00am and will be dismissed by 12:00pm. Two late arrivals
equal one absence. If you know you’ll be late let me know ahead of time. It is important that you
are here and on time out of respect for our community.
II. Critical Reading Reflection Essays– 40%
At four points during the semester, you will write a 3-to-4 page critical reading reflective essay
about a thematic concept that is central to the course and education broadly. You are required to
discuss three readings or two readings and one film that we watch in class within each essay.
Your critical reading reflection essay will consist of the following:
    1. Write a critical summary of the three readings or two readings and one film that includes
        key arguments, themes, and conceptual understandings. It may be that you see two to
        three themes that are similar within each reading, or that you connect the arguments
        authors make to expand the conversation. Make sure you cite each reading.
    2. Write your personal reflection about the three readings or two readings and film. You are
        encouraged to provide examples from your own lived experiences within schools or other
        learning spaces. The following questions are suggestions and/or invitations for you to
        consider as you think critically about your own personal reflections. (1) What questions
        were raised for you after engaging with the readings? (2) What questions were answered
        for you after engaging with the readings? (3) Do the readings challenge your perspectives?
        Affirm your perspectives? Provide other ways of knowing and seeing the world? Explain
        with examples. (4) Prior to this course have you learned about the topics presented? Why
        or why not? (5) How do the ideas, arguments, and topics presented impact your own self-
        understanding? Affirm your lived experience? Or, challenge you to acknowledge your
        privileges? (6) Why is it important for educators and/or people who work with children
        and youth to engage with these topics? (7) How have these readings affected your thinking
        about teaching, learning, and/or schooling?
There is no specific format to these critical reading responses, nor do you have to first summarize
key themes and arguments and then write your own personal reflection. Think of it as a speech,
something you will read to others, and consider how you would keep your audience engaged. If
you are bi/multilingual, you can draw from your languages to write your essays. If you’ll be
adding words in Spanish, Spanglish, or Nahuatl you do not need to provide translations.
However, if you will be using another language, I do ask that you include the translation within
the text.
The critical reading reflection template that you complete after each reading should facilitate the
writing process and support you with further developing your analysis and ideas. Each critical
reading reflection essay is worth 10 points, consisting of 40% of your grade. Critical reading
reflection essays are to be NO LESS than 3 pages and NO MORE than 4 pages, double-spaced in
Times New Roman, 12 pt. font, and include APA style citations. Your name, date, and number of
                                                                                                    5


critical reflection are all that is needed to be at the top of your essay. Please refer to the
formatting example on Canvas to make sure you are fulfilling the requirements.
III. La Caminata/Community Walk & Collaborative Creative Response – 12.5%
As a class we will do a community walk called a La Caminata around Zavala Elementary and
Kealing Elementary in East Austin. In order to get credit for this course you must participate in the
Caminata. As a class we will decide what day during week 11 to schedule the Caminata, which
will take up 3 hours in total. Students will not have regular class during this week since we will
be meeting for 3 hours for the Caminata. You will be responsible for taking notes and
collaborating with a partner on developing a creative response with a two-page artist statement
(double-spaced, 12-pt font, Times New Roman). Some examples of a creative response include,
but are not limited to, designing/painting a sketch of a mural, photography album/essay, creative
writing, writing a zine, creating a comic book, spoken-word and/or poetry, dance interpretation,
writing a song, collage, etc. On the due date you will have a few minutes to share your creative
response with the class. More details, requirements, and examples about this assignment will be
provided.
IV. Educational Autobiography Paper – 12.5%
In this 4-to-5 page paper, you will write and reflect on your own educational experiences, both
within schools and/or outside of a school context. You will bring into the conversation your
family background such as ethnic/racial heritage, im/migration history, religious background,
cultural practices, and/or parents and grandparents educational and work history. You will also
include your family’s socio-economic class background and your experiences related to class. An
analysis of gender issues and experiences in your life will also be included within this paper. You
are also encouraged to discuss other significant experiences that impacted you such as language,
im/migration status, ability, etc. It is important for you to address how the various aspects of your
identity relate to your past and present experiences with schooling and education. Therefore, you
will be required to think critically about your family history and education journey. The paper
does not have a specific format, but the following exercises are a requirement in order to engage
in critical inquiry. Although I will not collect the answers from exercise one, I will ask that you
turn in a map of your education journey which should include some of the information from your
critical family history reflection.
     1. Critical Family History Reflection Questions (Sleeter, 2019)
             a. What laws and other processes that benefit white people shaped opportunities for
                my ancestors?
             b. What kinds of relationships did my ancestors have with members of other groups
                around them? How and why was most of my family history forgotten or
                suppressed?
             c. What happened to the diverse languages and cultures my ancestors brought?
             d. What role(s) did my ancestors play in the colonization of Indigenous peoples?
             e. What was my ancestors’ location within the growing capitalist economy, and how
                did that location impact them?
                                                                                                     6


            f. How did patriarchal systems and norms play out in my family history?
            g. Did any of my ancestors work for equity and justice?
            h. How has my family experienced, enacted, confronted, or in other ways were
                implicated in social relationships based on racism, colonization, capitalism, and
                patriarchy?
    2. Your education journey map is meant to capture trajectories throughout your educational
        experiences. This activity will help you convey how you view the world and how you
        imagine yourself in it. Consider the following prompt before mapping your education
        journey:
        “Map your education journey from when you started school to now. Include people,
        places, obstacles, and opportunities on the way. Draw your relationship with school. You
        can include what works for you and/or what doesn’t. You can use different colors to show
        different feelings, use symbols like lines and arrows or words. These are just suggestions.
        Be as creative as you like and, if you don’t want to draw, you can make more of a flow-
        chart.” (Annamma, 2017).
Educational autobiography papers are to be NO LESS than 4 pages and NO MORE than 5 pages,
double-spaced in Times New Roman, 12 pt. font, and include APA style citations.
V. Service Learning Project & Presentation – 20%
This course includes a 15-hour service-learning component, which you need to complete in
order to receive credit for class. It’s your responsibility to contact one of the sites on the Service
Learning Opportunities list (or an equivalent site with my approval) to complete your volunteer
service learning. You’ll need the supervising staff member at your site to sign off the form
certifying that you have completed the required volunteering hours. The service learning project
will be divided into five parts.
Part I: Write a journal entry after each service learning/volunteering session. Your journal entry
should be at least one paragraph (between 200-300 words/5 to 6 sentences). You can keep your
journal entries on a word document or in a physical notebook. Remember that you have to
complete 15 hours of volunteering with an approved site. You should plan to provide me with an
update of your service-learning site by October 11, 2019.
Part II: Engage in a minimum of 30-minute walk through the neighborhood surrounding your
service learning site and take photos of at least 5 community assets, forms of cultural wealth,
and/or funds of knowledge. Create a map that disrupts cartographies of inequity and highlights
forms of cultural wealth and funds of knowledge. Remember you are a guest and you must be
respectful when taking pictures and not take pictures of people. Your map can be designed using
word, google drawings, ppt, etc. However, you can also physically draw it and glue pictures, etc.
You will submit a copy of your community map.
Part III: Interview a parent, grandparent, family member, or elder of the community for a
minimum of 20-minutes. If you need support figuring out how to approach the person you will
                                                                                                       7


interview feel free to talk to me during office hours or your service learning supervisor. It all
depends on the context of your service learning site. You will develop a set of at least 5 questions
to learn more about their thoughts/ perspectives on education and their aspirations for their
children. Make sure to submit these questions to me prior to your interview for approval. Ask the
person you interview for their consent to audio record the interview, since you will transcribe the
interview. You will submit the interview transcription as well as a one-page reflection of your
experience, what you learned, and how this knowledge could inform your service work in the
community. The one-page reflection must be 12 pt. font, double spaced, Times New Roman
format.
Part IV: You will write a 3-to-4 page paper where you engage in the process of self-reflection and
self-analysis. Consider everything that you have learned throughout the class and how that
informs your understanding of your service learning experience. To write this paper, you should
reference your journal entries, the community walk of your service learning site, the map you
created, the interview you conducted, and your own personal experience working with children.
In this paper you should reflect on the relationships you developed, use asset-based perspectives,
and consider social justice and transformative educational possibilities. The paper must be
double-spaced, Times New Roman, and 12 pt. font. You will have until December 9th to submit
this paper. The other parts of this project will be due by the day you present in class.
Part V: You will prepare a 5 minute presentation to share with the class your experiences with
this service learning project and what you learned. Think about what you have learned in this
course through your service learning, readings, and class discussions. How has this experience
affected your thinking about teaching and learning? Make sure to describe your intellectual and
emotional growth during this service learning experience and course. For your presentation you
should use power point or prezi and include artifacts, photos, video clips, etc. Presentations are
schedule for December 4th and December 6th.
                                                                                                   8


                            Assignment Schedule
           Due date                       Assignment                Total points
                                Critical Reading Reflection #1
   September 16th @ 11:00am                                           10 pts.
                            (Readings from Aug. 29th to Sep. 13th)
                                Critical Reading Reflection #2
   September 27th @ 11:00am                                           10 pts.
                             (Readings from Sep. 16th to Sep. 27th)
                                Critical Reading Reflection #3
    October 11th @ 11:00am                                            10 pts.
                             (Readings from Sep. 30th to Oct. 11th)
    October 25th @ 11:00am       Educational Autobiography           12.5 pts.
                                Critical Reading Reflection #4
   November 11th @ 11:00am                                            10 pts.
                            (Readings from Oct. 14th to Nov. 11th)
                             Caminata/Community Walk Creative
   November 15th @ 11:00am                                           12.5 pts.
                                           Response
       December 4th & 6th   Service Learning Project Presentation
                                                                      20 pts.
    December 9th at 11:59pm        Service Learning Project
Grade Scale
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+
83-86.9 points: B
80-81.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-60.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F
                                                                                 9


                     Course Topics, Readings, & Schedule
                     Introduction to the Course/Disrupting Single Stories
       August 28: Overview of Syllabus, Class Expectations, Caminata date,
       Presentation sign-up, Meeting sign-up, Service Learning & service learning
Week 1 check-in update, Introductions
       August 29:
       Continue Introductions
                            Deficit Thinking & Funds of Knowledge
       September 2: NO CLASS/Labor Day
       September 4:
          & Weiner, L. (2006). Challenging deficit thinking. Educational Leadership,
              64(1), 42-45
Week 2    & Valencia, R. (1997). Conceptualizing the notion of deficit thinking. In R.
              Valencia (ed.) The evolution of deficit thinking (pp. 1-12). London: Falmer
              Press.
       September 6:
          & Moll et al., 1992. Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a
              qualitative approach to connect homes and classrooms. Theory into
              Practice, 31(2), 132-141
           Critical Race Theory, Community Cultural Wealth, & Dehumanization
       September 9:
          & Ladson-Billings, G. (1998). Just what is critical race theory and what's it
              doing in a nice field like education?. International journal of qualitative
              studies in education, 11(1), 7-24.
          & Berson, M. & Cruz, B. (2001). Eugenics Past and Present:
              Remembering Buck v. Bell Social Education, 65(5), 300-306.
Week 3
       September 11:
          & Yosso, T. 2005. Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory
              discussion of community cultural wealth. Race, Ethnicity, and
              Education, 8(1), 69-91
       September 13:
          & Kohli, R., & Solórzano, D. G. (2012). Teachers, please learn our names!:
              Racial microagressions and the K-12 classroom. Race Ethnicity and
              Education, 15(4), 441-462.
                                                                                          10


                                        Western & Colonizing Knowledges
                 September 16:
                    & Ted Talk – Pedagogy of the Decolonizing by Quetzala Carson
                    & Peterson, Bob (2019). Burning Books and Destroying Peoples: How the
                       World Became Divided Between “Rich” and “Poor” Countries, pp. 133-
   Week 4              137. In Rethinking Ethnic Studies.
*9/16 - Critical September 18:
   Reading          & Tuhiwai Smith, L. 2001. Ch. 3. Colonizing Knowledges. In Decolonizing
Response 1 due
                       Methodologies. (pp. 61-78)
                 September 20:
                    & Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 1, pp. 1-17. In
                       Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of
                        Color and Official Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College
                       Press.
                                   Settler Colonialism and Indigenous Peoples
                 September 23:
                    & Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 2, pp. 18-36. In
                       Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of
                       Color and Official Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College
                       Press.
                 September 25:
   Week 5           & Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 2, pp. 37-45. In
                       Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of
                       Color and Official Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College
                       Press.
                    & Valdez, Carolina (2019). Challenging Colonialism: Ethnic Studies in
                       Elementary Social Justice, pp. 153-156. In Rethinking Ethnic Studies.
                 September 27: Watch Film: More than a Word: Native American-Based Sports
                 Mascots; (Kanopy)
                                            Race and Black Education
   Week 6        September 30:
                    & Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 5, pp. 114-145.
*9/30 - Critical       In Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of
   Reading             Color and Official Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College
Response 2 due
                       Press
                                                                                             11


                  October 2:
                     & Ladson-Billings, G. (2004). Landing on the Wrong Note: The Price we
                        paid for Brown. Educational Researcher, 33(7), 3-13
                  October 4:
                     & Watch Film: Race - The Power of An Illusion: How the racial wealth gap
                        was created
                     & Brown, K. and Brown, A.L. (2011). Teaching K-8 Students about Race:
                        African Americans, Racism, & the Struggle for Social Justice in the U.S.
                        Multicultural Education, 19(1), 9-13.
                             Deficit Perspectives and Schooling of Mexican Americans
                  October 7:
                     & Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 4, pp. 80-113. In
                        Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of
                        Color and Official Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College
                        Press.
   Week 7         October 9:
                     & Watch Film: Stolen Education – The Legacy of Hispanic Racism in
                        Schools (Kanopy)
                  October 11:
                     & Urrieta Jr, L., & Calderón, D. (2019). Critical Latinx Indigeneities:
                        Unpacking Indigeneity from Within and Outside of Latinized
                        Entanglements. Association of Mexican American Educators
                        Journal, 13(2), 145-174.
                               Beyond the Asian Americans “Model Minority” Myth
                  October 14:
                     & Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 3, pp. 46-79. In
   Week 8               Reclaiming the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of
                        Color and Official Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College
*10/14 - Critical       Press.
    Reading       October 16:
Response 3 due
                     & Watch video: A Conversation with Asian Americans on Race
                     & Watch video: EdTalk: Hmong Perspective of Public Education
                  October 18:
                     & Ngo, B. (2017). The Costs of “Living the Dream” for Hmong Immigrants:
                        The Impact of Subtractive Schooling on Family and Community,
                        Educational Studies, 53(5), 450-467.
                                                                                                 12


                              Intersectional Analysis of Schooling Experiences
              October 21:
                 & Ted Talk: The urgency of intersectionality - Kimberlé Crenshaw
                 & Carbado, D.W., Crenshaw, K.W., Mays, V.M., Tomlinson, B. (2013).
                    Intersectionality: Mapping the Movements of a Theory. DuBois Review:
  Week 9            Social Science Research on Race, 10(2), 303-312.
  *10/25 –    October 23:
Autobiography
                 & García, L. (2009). “Now Why do you want to know about that?”:
     due
                    Heteronormativity, sexism, and racism in the sexual (Mis)education of
                    Latina youth. Gender and Society, 23:4, 520-541
                 & Queering Schools by editors of Rethinking Schools, pp. 5-7
              October 25:
                 & Annamma, S. A., Connor, D., & Ferri, B. (2013). Dis/ability critical race
                    studies (DisCrit): Theorizing at the intersections of race and
                    dis/ability. Race Ethnicity and Education, 16(1), 1-31
                          Re-Segregation by Design, Power, and Marginalization
              October 28:
                 & Busch, A. 2013. Building “A city of upper middle class citizens”: Labor
                    Markets, Segregation, and Growth in Austin, TX, 1950-1973. Journal of
                    Urban History
 Week 10      ***October 30:
                 & Film: Clarksville - 1970
  ***online      & Video: A City Divided
   sessions
              ***November 1:
                 & Torres, R. et al. 2013. Building Austin, building justice: Immigrant
                    construction workers, precarious labor regimes and social citizenship.
                    Geoforum, 45, 145-155
                 & Video: Building the American Dream
                                         Caminata/Community Walk
              The Caminata/Community Walk is mandatory. We will meet on ____________
 Week 11      November, ______ at ____:____. Please meet at Zavala Elementary -
              _______________________.
              Doodle Poll: https://doodle.com/poll/tvracibenwve3bx3
                                                                                             13


                                                        Ethnic Studies
                  November 11:
                     & Tintiangco-Cubales, A., Kohli, R., Sacramento, J., Henning, N., Agarwal-
                         Rangnath, R., & Sleeter, C. (2015). Toward an ethnic studies pedagogy:
                         Implications for K-12 schools from the research. The Urban
  Week 12                Review, 47(1), 104-125
*11/11 - Critical
                  November 13:
    Reading          & Romero, A., Arce, S. & Cammarota, J. 2009. A barrio pedagogy:
  Response 4             Identity,intellectualism, activism, and academic achievement through the
                         evolution of critically compassionate intellectualism. Race, Ethnicity, and
                         Education 12:2, 217-233
                  November 15:
                     & Valdez, C. (2018). Flippin’the scripted curriculum: ethnic studies inquiry
                         in elementary education. Race Ethnicity and Education, 1-17.
                                                        Ethnic Studies
                  November 18:
                     & Dueñas, R., López, J., López, E. (2019). Reimagining and Rewriting Our
  Week 13
                         Lives Through Ethnic Studies. In Rethinking Ethnic Studies, pp. 221-233
   *11/20 –          & Watson, R. (2019). Happening Yesterday, Happened Tomorrow:
   Caminata              Teaching the Ongoing Murders of Black Men. In Rethinking Ethnic
    creative             Studies, pp. 239-243.
 response due     November 20:
                     & La Caminata Creative Response presentations
   ***online
    sessions      ***November 22:
                     & Zamora, E. & Valenzuela, A. (2019). Ethnic Studies and Community-
                         Engaged Scholarship in Texas, pp. 328-334
                     & Wolfe-Rocca, U. (2019). Standing with Standing Rock: A Role Play on the
                         Dakota Access Pipeline. In Rethinking Ethnic Studies, pp. 257-267
                                                          NO CLASS
  Week 14           This period is for off-site class time to work on service learning final project. I
                       will also be available to meet by appointment if you need any support.
                                                                                                      14


                                  Healing & Transformative Educational Spaces
                 December 2:
                    & hooks, b. (1994) Teaching To Transgress: Education as the Practice of
  Week 15               Freedom. New York: Routledge. Read Chapter 1 (pp. 13-24), Chapter 3
                        (pp. 35-44) & Chapter 14 (pp. 201-207)
*12/9 – Service
Learning Project
      due        December 4:
                 Service Learning Project Presentations
                 December 6:
                 Service Learning Project Presentations
                                                                                            15
