ANT 324L: Sonic Ethnography
Marina Peterson
marina.peterson@austin.utexas.edu
OH: TH 2-4 (WCP 5.148)
TA: María Fernandez Pello
mfpello@utexas.edu
OH: T 9-11 (WCP 5.114)
Course description
Sonic ethnography starts with listening, and listening to how people listen. Listening is a practice that people
do as a way of being in and knowing the world – it is something in which we are all expert, even if not always
acknowledged. Thus sonic ethnography investigates ways in which people orient themselves via the aural,
how expertise is enacted through listening, and how sociabilities emerge around attunement to sound. At the
same time, sound it is neither separable from other senses nor an object in and of itself. Instead, sound is, as
anthropologist Steven Feld suggests, a way of being in and knowing the world.
Themes of acoustemology, hearing history, silence, noise, and technologies of listening will organize
discussion of topics that include the history of recorded sound in anthropology, acoustics and environmental
sound, nonhuman listening, and listening beyond the ear. Class meetings will be spent on discussion of
readings, listening, fieldtrips, guest lectures, audio workshops, and writing. The course pays particular
attention to concerns of writing sound, writing with sound, and writing about sound. Writing sound is
approached as a practice, with modes of inscription that might include writing or audio recording. With an
emphasis on developing ways of using written language to address sound as an ethnographic concern, we will
also attend to the breadth of the meaning of “phonography” by listening to ethnographic recordings and
creating short audio pieces at the end of the semester.
Course objectives
     • Develop skills in ethnographic listening
     • Become versant in topics in the anthropology of sound
     • Learn research methods in sonic ethnography
     • Explore diverse ways of writing sound
     • Acquire basic field recording skills
Readings
The following book has been ordered at The Co-op:
Novak, David and Matt Sakakeeny, eds. 2015. Keywords in Sound. Durham: Duke University Press.
Other assigned readings are available as PDFs or links on Canvas
Course requirements
Participation and attendance [10%]
This course will be run in a seminar format, with class sessions consisting of discussion of readings, listening
material, and sonic investigations. As such, it depends on the participation of all. Be versant with the assigned
readings and other material, and be prepared to engage in productive discussion. Bring the readings to class as
you will need to be able to refer to them. We will maintain an ethos of respect in all interactions. The class
will be a welcoming and safe place for all people regardless of race, gender, class, and sexual orientation.
If you must miss class please let me know in advance, or as soon as possible. It is especially important that
you attend all fieldtrips. Absences will be considered excused for religious holidays, illness, or extenuating
circumstances due to an emergency. More than 1 unexcused absence will affect your grade.


Reading responses [20%]
Readings are drawn from Keywords in Sound, Theorizing Sound Writing, and articles and chapters (on Canvas) that
demonstrate modes of writing sound ethnographically and/or provide material that supports our sonic
ethnographic investigations. Thorough engagement with the readings is crucial for the success of the course.
In order to facilitate active discussion on days focusing on readings, students will write responses to the
readings for that day. These should be posted to Canvas on 10 a.m. on Tuesday. The class will be divided in 2
groups that will alternate posting and commenting on the reading responses. Those commenting should be
prepared to comment on reading responses in class.
Your 1-2 paragraph (200-400 word) reading response should include the following:
     • Main point/s of the reading with a quote from the text that best captures this
     • Key concept/s or terms used and their meaning, as you understand it
     • Something that was particularly interesting, curious, or confusing to you
     • The significance of the text for sonic ethnography (or a more specific prompt, to be provided)
     • Questions raised by the readings, posed as discussion questions for the class
When there are multiple readings, aim to read across them, drawing out a shared theme and addressing
commonalities and differences between the texts. Your responses should demonstrate that you have read all
assigned readings, that you have a good understanding of the argument or focus of the text/s, and that you
put thought into developing a discussion question.
“Writing sound” entries [30%]
There are 10 ethnographic listening events during the course of the semester. (12 are listed, but 2 – specified
in the syllabus – are optional.) Following each fieldtrip, lecture, or listening session you will write up your
notes as an entry that incorporates modes of “writing sound.” Specific prompts will be provided for the
listening events. Each submitted entry should be a thoughtfully revised version of your notes from the
listening event. The 500-word entry is due on Canvas 1 week after the listening event. These will be drawn on
for peer response and review during class.
Midterm [10%]
A report on your project site, research question, and plan for research for your final project
DUE: MARCH 12 BY 12 P.M.
Final project [30%]
The final project is a sonic ethnography engaging with a setting of your choice. It consists of a written
component (8-10 pp.) and an audio recording (3 min.). The two parts have equal weight [15% each]. You
should select an ethnographic case in which there is socially meaningful sound and where you can focus on
listening as a social process. You will apply techniques of sonic ethnography learned in class. Plan for a
minimum of 4 visits for participant observation and/or interviews. You may also utilize archival sources and
audio technologies as part of your ethnographic research. Your paper should engage with a minimum of 4
course readings, used to develop your conceptual framework and discussion. More specific guidelines will be
provided.
The last weeks of class will shift from “writing sound” to “writing with sound.” Following a field recording
and editing workshop, you will create a 3-minute sound piece, “writing sound” with a microphone and
recording device or other mode of technological transduction. The audio recording should be guided by your
ethnographic investigation, engaging and capturing socially meaningful sounds. Drafts will be presented for
peer review during the last week of class. The final version should include notes on what revisions you made.
DUE: MAY 12 BY 5 P.M.
                                                                                                                2


Grade scale used for this course:
           Grade           Cutoff
           A               94%
           A-              90%
           B+              87%
           B               84%
           B-              80%
           C+              77%
           C               74%
           C-              70%
           D               65%
           F               <65%
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete
substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You
will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss
your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written
work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is considered plagiarism, a
serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe penalties. Copying someone else’s work, buying
a paper and submitting it as your own, copying and pasting text (even with changes), or borrowing images
from an online source, are some examples of plagiarism. Even if you plagiarize accidentally, you can be held
responsible and penalized.
Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional. When you are unsure
about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor (who is already an expert in the discipline) what is
appropriate in the context of your assignment. Consultants at The University Writing Center can also help
you determine whether you are citing sources correctly—and they have helpful guides online for using direct
quotations and paraphrasing. Reviewing those skills will help you feel confident that you are handling sources
professionally in your writing.
You can read the University’s definition of plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty in Sec. 11–402
of the Student Conduct Code. For more information, visit the Dean of Students’ site.
                                                                                                                3


WEEK                 DATE READINGS                                                        LISTENING      DUE
ACOUSTEMOLOGY
                                                                                          FIELDTRIP:
                                                                                          Soundwalk #1,
1. Writing sound      1/21                                                                Listening
                                                                                                         • Reading response:
                                                                                                         list ways of writing
                                                                                                         sound
                                                                                                         • Soundwalk #1
                           “Listening” in Keywords in Sound                                              notes for
                      1/23 “Traffic Patterns” in Theorizing Sound Writing                                workshopping
                           “Acoustemology” in Keywords in Sound
                           “Waterfalls of Sound,” Feld
                           “From Ethnomusicology to Echo-Muse-Ecology: Reading R.
                           Murray Schafer in the Papua New Guinea Rainforest,” Feld
2. Acoustemology      1/28 “Doing Anthropology in Sound,” Feld and Brenneis                              Reading response A
                                                                                          LISTEN: “A
                                                                                          Village        1. Soundwalk 1
                      1/30                                                                Soundscape”    revised entry
                           “On Alternating Sounds,” Franz Boas
3. Listening with          “Listening Acts,” in Theorizing Sound Writing
others                 2/4 “Sounding Bodies,” Tom Rice                                                   Reading response B
                                                                                          FIELDTRIP:
                                                                                          Soundwalk #2,  2. “A Village
                       2/6                                                                Listening with Soundscape” entry
HEARING HISTORY
                           “Phonography” in Keywords in Sound
                           “The Echoes of Hearts Long Silenced,” Cowen
4. Phonography        2/11 “The First Time, the Heart,” Dario Robleto                                    Reading response A
                                                                                          IN CLASS
                                                                                          PROJECT:
                      2/13                                                                Sonic memories 3. Soundwalk 2 entry
                           “Echo,” in Keywords in Sound
                           “Acoustic Palimpsests” in Theorizing Sound Writing
5. Echoes             2/18 “Listening to Southern Slavery,” White and White                              Reading response B
                                                                                          GUEST
                                                                                          LECTURE:
                                                                                          Zachary James
                                                                                          Watkins, “High
                                                                                          Vibration
                                                                                          Resonance”     4. Sonic memories
                      2/20                                                                (RLP 0.112)    entry
                           “Performers and the Phonograph,” Erica Brady
                           “An Archival Dilemma: The Densmore Cylinder Recording
                           Speeds,” Judith Gray
                           “Epilogue,” in Modernity’s Ear, Roshanak Kheshti
6. Collecting sound   2/25 “Tribal Elder Hears Grandfather’s Voice in Archived Songs”                    Reading response A
                                                                                          FIELDTRIP:
                                                                                          Harry Ransom   5. Resonance entry
                      2/27                                                                Center         (optional)
SILENCE
                           “Acoustics” and “Silence” in Keywords in Sound
                           “Let’s Listen to Nothing: Silence, Silencing, and the Anechoic
7. Composing silence   3/3 Chamber,” Michael Heller                                                      Reading response B
                                                                                                                     4


                                                                                           FIELDTRIP:
                                                                                           Anechoic
                         3/5                                                               Chamber          6. Sonic archive entry
                             Wild Sanctuary
                             “One Square Inch of Silence”
                             “Rustications: Animals in the Urban Mix,” Connor
                             “Silent City: Listening to Birds in Urban Nature,” Bruyninckx
                             “Sonic Ecology: The Undectable Sounds of the City,” Jones
8. Sensing silence      3/10 “Ungrid-able Ecologies,” Myers                                                 Reading response A
                                                                                           FIELDTRIP:       •7. Anechoic
                                                                                           More than        Chamber entry
                        3/12                                                               human listening •MIDTERM
SPRING BREAK
NOISE
                             “Noise” in Keywords in Sound
                             “Between Silence and Pain,” Heller
                             “Why is Everything Getting Louder?” Bosker
9. Urban noise          3/24 Measuring Sound, by Brüel & Kjaer                                              Reading response B
                                                                                           GUEST
                                                                                           LECTURE: Dr.
                                                                                           Preston Wilson,
                                                                                           Mechanical       8. More than human
                        3/26                                                               Engineering      listening entry
                             “The Politics of Noise Control in São Paulo,” Cardoso
10. Measuring Noise     3/31 City of Austin Noise Ordinance                                                 Reading response A
                                                                                           FIELDTRIP:
                                                                                           Noise            9. Measuring noise
                         4/2                                                               measurement      entry (optional)
LISTENING
TECHNOLOGIES
                             “Body” and “Deafness,” in Keywords in Sound
11. Listening beyond         “Do Signals Have Politics?” Mara Mills
the ear                  4/7 “Sound Studies Meets Deaf Studies,” Friedner and Helmreich                     Reading response B
                                                                                           IN CLASS
                                                                                           PROJECT:
                                                                                           Listening beyond 10. Noise
                         4/9                                                               the ear          measurement entry
                             “Transduction,” in Keywords in Sound
                             “The Aelectrosonic and Energetic Environments,” Kahn
                             “Earthquakes and frack-waste: sounds of extraction-related
12. Sound of/as energy  4/14 disaster in Appalachian Ohio,” Harnetty                                        Reading response A
                                                                                           FIELDTRIP:
                                                                                           Electomagnetic   11. Listening beyond
                        4/16                                                               listening        the ear entry
13-14. Writing with                                                                        Phonography
sound                   4/21                                                               workshop         Reading response B
                                                                                           Field recording  12. Electromagnetic
                        4/23                                                               day              listening entry
                        4/28                                                               Editing
14.2-15. Final
presentations           4/30
                       5/7-9
         FINAL PROJECT DUE 5/12
                                                                                                                        5


Resources
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
• The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning.
o Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
o Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
o Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
o Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
o Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                                 6
