                                                                                                      1
                                                       AFR 374D/ HIS 350R/ WGS 340
                                                                      Black Women on Trial
                                                                    UT-Austin, Spring 2019
Instructor: Dr. Ashley D. Farmer
She/ Her/ Hers
Course Description:
This seminar course provides an overview of race, class, gender, and sexuality constructs in the late
19th and early 20th century using the public trials of women. Students will investigate the trials of
women like Rosa Lee Ingram and Angela Davis in the context of their historical moment while also
exploring how these women shaped, and were shaped by, contemporaneous definitions of rape, civil
disobedience, sexual harassment, and self-defense. Students will examine primary media coverage of
the trials along with secondary sources on race, gender, and queer theory to learn how these
historical moments shaped and reflected public understandings of womanhood, race, class, and sex.
By the end of the course, participants will have a more nuanced understanding of American history
and the ways in which race, class, gender, and sexuality shape public opinions of womanhood today.
Required Texts:
    1. Melton McLaurin, Celia: A Slave (also available online via UT libraries)
    2. Kali Gross, Hannah Mary Tabbs and the Disembodied Torso: A Tale of Race, Sex, and
        Violence in America
    3. Elizabeth M. Smith-Pryor, Property Rites: The Rhinelander Trial, Passing, and the Protection of
        Whiteness
    4. All other readings accessed Canvas or online
Grading:
Class Attendance                           10%            Weekly Media Analysis:      15%
Class Participation:                       20%            Visual Analysis:            15%
Document Analysis:                         15%            Final Paper:                25%


                                                                                                        2
Class Attendance:
Regular attendance in class is very important. Furthermore, you are expected to come to class having
read the material and prepared to engage with the assigned texts. Multiple absences will count
against you. Please notify me in advance (if possible) if you know that you will need to be absent
from class. After one unexcused absence, I will begin deducting 1/3 of a letter grade off your final
participation grade for every missed class provided. This policy can be updated on a case-by-case
basis for students with accommodations.
Class Participation:
Your participation grade will be calculated based on your contributions to in-class discussion, critical
engagement in our group activities, and thoughtful participation during our in-class practicums. Often
times, we will perform written tasks or activities that will be collected and recorded as part of your
participation grade.
Weekly Media Analyses:
You will write a short analysis of a contemporary news article, report, blog, or video featuring a
woman or group of women. These pieces should be between 200 and 500 words. In each post, you
should explain the topic of the article/ blog/ video the main argument of the author, and your
thoughts about how the piece frames race, class, gender, and/or sexuality. Media Analyses are due by
6 p.m. on the Sunday before class via CANVAS.
Posts will be assessed as follows:
0 points: No post for the week
1 point: LATE, but includes: Link to article/video, main argument/ summary of media
2 points: ON TIME and includes: Link to article/video, main argument/ summary of media AND
reflection on/ analysis of media
3 points: ON TIME and includes: Link to article/video, main argument of media, reflection on media
AND meaningful connection to course readings and discussion.
    •   Note: you are not required to turn in a media analysis Week 1, Week 9 (spring break), or
        Week 12 (research paper workshop)
Document Analysis: Rolling Deadline
This is a 5-7-page paper on a textual primary source document. This can be a document we have
used in class or one you locate on your own. The document should speak to the particular woman’s
experiences on trial, situate the document in its historical context, consider the author’s background,
and how the author is advocating for her cause. Your paper should make an argument about how the
document shapes popular narratives women and the law. This paper is due in class the week after
we examine the figure. For example, you write about Alice Jones, your paper will be due on
Monday February 18th


                                                                                                       3
Visual Analysis: Rolling Deadline
This is a 5-7-page paper that analyzes an image of one of the women we studied in the course. This
can be an image we have discussed in class or one that you locate on your own. Possible images
include photographs, posters, drawings, cartoons, and political caricatures of the figure in question.
 It should situate the image in historical context, pay special attention to the medium of the image,
how it was circulated, and the intended audience, and make an argument about the role of this image
in supporting or undermining the woman’s case. Like the Document Analysis this paper is due the
week after we examine the figure.
Final Paper: Due May 17th via CANVAS by 5pm
This 12-15-page research paper will deal with some aspect of a trial that we have studied in the
course in more depth. You will create an original research paper with a strong argument about the
importance of the trial in shaping how we understand race, class, and gender during a given era. You
will submit the research paper topic and source material for approval on the dates listed below.
Revisions:
Students can rewrite the Document and Visual Analysis assignments if they so choose. The revised
paper is due one week after the student turned in the original draft.
     • Revised papers turned in late will be graded according the late policy listed below
     • Revised papers also must include a one-paragraph synopsis of the revisions made based on
        the comments from the original paper. Revisions that do not include the one-paragraph memo
        will be considered incomplete


                                                                                                           4
                                      Rules, Regulations, and Respect:
Late Assignment Policy:
Please contact me advance of an assignment’s due date if you think that you will have difficulty
meeting a particular deadline. All assignments submitted late without permission will automatically
be marked down one half grade per day.
Academic Integrity:
The University's Institutional Rules (Section 11-802(d)) define plagiarism as including, "but not limited
to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any other means material that is
attributable in whole or in part to another source . . . and presenting that material as one's own
academic work offered for credit." In other words, “handing in someone else's work and taking credit
for it as if it were your own.” (Source: History Department statement on Academic Integrity).
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
Accessibility:
This course is intended for all students at UT Austin. This includes those with mental, physical, or
cognitive disabilities, illness, injuries, impairments, or any other condition that tends to negatively
affect one’s equal access to education. If, at any point in the semester, you find yourself not able to
fully access the space, content, and experience of this course, you are welcome (but not required!) to
contact me by email, phone, or during office hours to discuss your specific needs. I also encourage
you to contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone)
or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Preferred Names and Pronouns:
Courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor by the university. I will gladly honor your
request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holy Days
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class. Students will be excused from attending classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including
travel for that purpose. University policy required students to notify each of their instructors as far in
advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
E-mail Correspondence:
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible
for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. Email
communication with should be considered formal, and follow the conventions of professional emails.
I will usually be able to answer emails within 24 hours except for weekends and holidays.


                                                                                                   5
                                         Course Schedule
                                     Week 1: Introductions
                        rd
Wednesday, January 23
     • Welcome and Introductions
                               Week 2: The Trial of Celia the Slave
Monday, January 28th
     • Celia: A Slave, chapters 1-4.
Wednesday, January 30th
     • Celia: A Slave, chapters 5-8 (no conclusion)
     • Brenda Stevens, “What’s Love Got to Do with It? Concubinage and Enslaved Women and
         Girls in the Antebellum South, Journal of African American History 98:1 (Winter 2013): 99
         – 125. (CANVAS)
                             Week 3: The Trial of Hannah Mary Tabbs
                    th
Monday, February 4
     • Hannah Mary Tabbs and the Disembodied Torso, Prologue & Chapters 1-3
Wednesday, February 6th
     • Hannah Mary Tabbs and the Disembodied Torso, Chapters 4-6 & Epilogue
                                 Week 4: The Trial of Alice Jones
Monday, February 11th
     • Property Rites, Chapters 1-4
Wednesday, February 13th
     • Property Rites, Chapters 5-6, and 9
     • Jamie L. Wacks, “Reading Race, Rhetoric, and the Female Body in the Rhinelander Case,”
         (CANVAS)


                                                                                                  6
                              Week 5: The Trial of Rosa Lee Ingram
Monday, February 18th
     • Erik S. McDuffie, “A New Freedom Movement of Negro Women”: Sojourning for Truth and
         Justice, and Human Rights During the Early Cold War,” Radical History Review (Spring
         2008): 81-106. (CANVAS)
     • Charles H. Martin, “Race, Gender, and Southern Justice: The Rosa Lee Ingram Case”
         American Journal of Legal History (July 1985): 251-268. (CANVAS)
Wednesday, February 20th
     • We will review the Research Paper guidelines & discuss potential topics and methods for
         finding source material
                                  Week 6: The Trial of Rosa Parks
Monday, February 25th
     • Jo Ann Robinson, “The Origin of the Trouble” in The Montgomery Bus Boycott and the
         Women Who Started It (CANVAS)
     • Jeanne Theoharis, “‘A Life of Being Rebellious:’ The Radicalism of Rosa Parks” (CANVAS)
Wednesday, February 27th
     • Marissa Chapell, Jenny Hutchinson, and Brian Ward, ““Dress modestly, neatly … as if you
         were going to church”: Respectability, Class, and Gender in the Montgomery Bus Boycott
         and Early Civil Rights Movement,” Gender and the Civil Rights Movement, 69-102
         (CANVAS)
                                 Week 7: The Trial of Angela Davis
Monday, March 4th
     • Bettina Aptheker, “Prologue” and “The Trial” in The Morning Breaks: The Trial of Angela
         Davis (CANVAS)
Wednesday, March 6th
     • Angela Davis, “Afro Images: Politics, Fashion, Nostalgia” in Soul: Black Power: Politics and
         Pleasure, 23-31 (CANVAS)


                                                                                                 7
                                  Week 8: The Trial of Joan Little
                   th
Monday, March 11
     • Genna Rae McNeil, ““Joanne is You and Joanne is Me”: A Consideration of African
         American Women and the Free Joan Little Movement” (CANVAS)
Wednesday, March 13th
     • Danielle McGuire, ““It was Like All of Us Had Been Raped: Sexual Violence, Community
         Mobilization, and the African American Freedom Struggle,” Journal of American History
         (December 2001): 906-931. (CANVAS)
     • Angela Davis, “Joan Little and the Dialectics of Rape,” Ms. Magazine Spring 2002 (online)
                                       Week 9: Spring Break
                                  Week 10: The Trial of Anita Hill
                   th
Monday, March 25
     • Excerpts from Anita Hill, Speaking Truth to Power (CANVAS)
     • Whaneema Lubiano, “Black Ladies, Welfare Queens, and State Minstrels: Ideological War
         by Narrative Means,” (CANVAS)
Wednesday, March 27th
     • In-class film analysis, Anita
                                 Week 11: Rachel Jeantel on Trial
                st
Monday, April 1
      • Jennifer Nash, “Unwidowing: Rachel Jeantel, Black Death, and the “Problem” of Black
          Intimacy,” Signs 41: 4 (2016): 751–774 (CANVAS)
      • Sarah Muller, “Zimmerman Case: Is Rachel Jeantel on Trial Too?” MSNBC.com, June 29,
          2013 (online)
Wednesday, April 3rd
      • “Trayvon Martin Case: How Rachel Jeantel went from Star Witness to ‘train wreck’”
          Christian Science Monitor, June 29, 2014 (Online)
      • Alexander Abad-Santos, “My Star Witness is Black: Rachael Jeantel Testimony Makes
          Trayvon Martin a Show Trial,” The Atlantic, 27 June 2013 (Online)
      • Jelani Cobb, “Rachel Jeantel On Trial,” New Yorker Magazine, 27 June 2013 (online)


                                                                                               8
                             Week 12: Research Paper Development
Monday, April 8th
     • Bring to class, 1 page statement that includes:
            o 2 possible research topics
            o 3 primary and 2 secondary sources for each of the 2 topics
            o 1-2 written Questions/ concerns you have about pursuing your research topic
Wednesday, April 10th
     • Bring to class, 1 page that includes:
            o Updated topic & source list based on Tuesday’s discussion
            o Possible thesis statement
            o 2-paragraph summary of steps for research
                            Week 13: The Trial of Marissa Alexander
Monday, April 15th:
      • Kali Gross, “African American Women, Mass Incarceration, and the Politics of
         Protection,” Journal of American History 102: 1 (June 2015): 25–33.(CANVAS)
      • Marissa Alexander, “In Her Own Words: Marissa Alexander Tells Her Story,” Essence,
         March 4, 2015 (online)
Wednesday, April 17th:
      • Kristen T. Edwards, “Is It ‘Marissa’ or ‘Michelle’”: Black Women as Accessory to Black
         Manhood in Trayvon Martin: Race, and American Justice (CANVAS)
      • Sean Davis, “No Marissa Alexander’s Conviction Was Not a ‘Reverse Trayvon Martin’
         Case in Florida,” Media Trackers July 16, 2013 (online)
                              Week 14: The Trial of Cece McDonald
Monday, April 22nd
      • “The Transgender Crucible,” Rolling Stone, July 30, 2014 (online)
Wednesday April 24th
      • “Cece McDonald Murder Trial,” Citypages, May 9, 2012 (online)


                                                                                                9
                                  Week 15: The Trial of the NJ4
Monday, April 29th
      • “Four Women Are Convicted in Attack on Man in Village,” New York Times, April 19,
         2007 (online)
      • “Lesbian Wolfpack Guilty,” New York Daily News, April 19, 2007 (online)
Wednesday, May 1st
      • In-class film analysis, Out in the Night
                                         Week 16: Cyntoia Brown
Monday, May 6th
      • Andrea Ritchie, Invisible No More, chapter 7, “Policing Sex” (CANVAS)
      • “Cyntoia Brown, Serving life for murder, asks Tennessee Parole Board for Clemency: A
         Look at her Case,” FoxNews.com, May 23,2018. (Online)
      • “Parole Board Is Divided on Cyntoia Brown, Trafficking Victim Serving Life Sentence for
         Murder,” New York Times, May 23, 2018 (Online)
Wednesday, May 8th
      • In class film analysis, Clips from Me Facing Life: Cyntoia’s Story
                  ****Final Paper Due Friday May 17th by 5pm via CANVAS *****
