             IRG 320F: Foundations in International Relations and Global Studies
                                Summer I Session: June 4-July 9, 2020
                    https://utexas.zoom.us/j/98035546610 (password: IRG320F)
                                       MTWThF 10-11:15am
Instructor: Dr. Michael R. Anderson
E-mail: mra@austin.utexas.edu
Office hours: MW 11:30am-1pm (by appointment on Canvas)
Course description and objectives:
This course is designed to provide foundational knowledge in International Relations and Global
Studies, providing a link between the introductory course (IRG 301) and capstone seminar (IRG
378) or honors thesis (IRG 678) for IRG majors. The scope and the theme of the course crosscut
the broad subject areas of the major’s four tracks: international security; international political
economy; science, technology, and the environment; and culture, media, and the arts.
There are two over-arching objectives of this course. The first is to examine in detail key
controversies surrounding the contemporary era in international affairs. Using insights from
history, political science, economics, geography, anthropology, and area studies, we will
examine the nature of today’s international system, the possibility of political and economic
global governance, as well as the state of international civil society. A second, related objective
is to help students conceive a project for their capstone seminar or honors thesis, normally taken
soon after the completion of IRG 320F. Through the process of writing a literature review on a
contemporary global challenge or controversy, students in this course will lay the foundation for
a successful capstone/thesis experience.
Classes for this online-only summer course alternate between more traditional lectures led by the
instructor and small-group, discussion-based sessions moderated by the instructor and teaching
assistants centered around student-led debates on specific topics.
Required text:
CQ Researcher, Global Issues 2020 (SAGE Publications, 2020).
Grading overview:
Assignment                                     Percent
Class attendance                               5
Class participation                            10
Debate presentations (4)                       20
Reflection papers (7)                          35
Literature Review: Summary/outline             10
Literature Review: Essay                       20
                                                   1


Explanation of grading criteria:
Class attendance (5 percent): This online summer course is synchronous with the regular class
time schedule (M-F 10-11:15am). Students are expected to attend each class session via Zoom.
Six times during the summer session, unannounced in advance, the teaching assistants will take
note of those in attendance (this may occur at any point during the session). If technology or
other factors prevent you from attending on a given day, please notify the instructor or a teaching
assistant as soon as possible. Students are granted one unexcused absence without penalty.
Class participation (10 percent): This course places a premium on student participation; indeed,
the course is designed so that half of the sessions are student-led. Students are expected to
participate in each class session by responding to questions or prompts by the instructor during
large-group lectures or by asking follow-up questions of the discussion leaders in small-group
debates.
Debate presentations (20 percent): Every other day, class sessions will be led by six discussion
leaders. Discussion leaders will be assigned a debate position (Yes or No) to one of three sub-
questions in the assigned reading and are responsible for articulating their position to their
classmates in a five-minute presentation. Students need not use audio/visual aids in their
presentations. Student presenters should draw supporting evidence not only from the assigned
reading, but from outside sources as well, making special use of the UT Library database “Gale
in Context: Opposing Viewpoints” for scholarly and journalistic articles. Each student will serve
as a discussion leader four times during the course, and their contribution each time will be
graded on a five-point scale (5 = excellent, 4 = satisfactory, 3 = unsatisfactory).
Reflection papers (35 percent): Every two days, students are required to reflect on the broader
global controversy or challenge under discussion and synthesize materials from 1) the lecture 2)
the debate and 3) the required reading. In a reflection essay between 400 and 500 words,
students should make specific note of the materials that helped frame this debate/controversy and
offer their analysis of the state of the debate. Where are the primary points of contention, and
where might there be points of convergence? What might be some key areas for future research?
Each reflection paper will be graded on a five-point scale (5 = excellent, 4 = satisfactory, 3 =
unsatisfactory).*Note: debate presenters will not be required to submit a reflection paper on
days they are leading discussion. So of the 12 reflection papers assigned, students need to
complete 8 total, with the lowest score dropped from their overall average.
Literature Review – Summary and Bibliography (10 percent):
Students are expected to select a particular controversy in international relations and global
studies (apart from one previously used in a reflection essay) that they would like to explore in
greater depth. Gale in Context provides the best overview of many international and global
controversies, along with specific links to further reading. For the assignment, students should
state the nature of the controversy in a summary between 400 and 500 words and include
specific reference to academic/scholarly studies on the subject. They also are required to
include the titles of 6-8 academic journal articles that they found most promising as the basis for
                                                   2


a literature review. In addition to Gale in Context, students are encouraged to search the UT
databases Academic Search Complete and JSTOR for additional scholarly sources.
Literature Review – Essay (20 percent):
At the end of the class session, students are expected to write a literature review that assesses the
state of the scholarly debate on the subject under discussion. During the course of the paper,
students should be able to identify 1) major schools of thought or approaches to the subject, 2)
significant turning points in how scholars have approached the subject over time, and 3) some of
the areas that scholars have identified as in need of greater exploration in order to resolve
disagreement. Papers should be 6-8 pages (double-spaced, 12-point font) and cite 10-12
articles, at least six of which must be peer-reviewed. All material that you use to support your
paper should be cited. Please use Chicago-style citations from Kate L. Turabian’s A Manual for
Writers of Research Papers, Theses and Dissertations (8th ed., Chicago: University of Chicago
Press). https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide/citation-guide-1.html
Overall semester averages will earn the following letter grades:
93-100: A        90-92: A-
87-89: B+        83-86: B       80-82: B-
77-79: C+        73-76: C       70-72: C-
67-69: D+       63-66: D        60-62: D-      0-59: F
Resources and reminders:
University Writing Center: Because writing is an important part of this class, as well as a
necessary skill for the job market, students are strongly encouraged to make use of the University
Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The UWC offers free,
individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-
in basis. Any undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any
writing project. They work with students from every department on campus, for both academic
and non-academic writing. Their services are not just for writing with "problems." Getting
feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants
help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is intended
to foster independence. The consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that
preserve the integrity of your work.
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Any student found guilty of scholastic
dishonesty may receive an “F” in the course and be remanded to the appropriate University of
Texas authorities for disciplinary action. For more information, view Student Judicial Services
at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
                                                  3


Religious Holidays: According to UT-Austin policy, students must notify the instructor of an
impending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If a
student must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the student will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Student Privacy: The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) requires that
student privacy be preserved. Thus the posting of grades, even by the last four digits of the
social security number, is forbidden. All communication will remain between the instructor and
the student, and the instructor will not be able to share details of the student’s performance with
parents, spouses, or any others.
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937
(video phone).
Technology: DUO multi-factor authentication is now required for Canvas entry, and a required
update to Zoom v. 5.0 must be completed as well. Students should contact ITS for support at
https://it.utexas.edu/. Please use LAITS’s new Online Course Tech Support chat tool for
assistance with course technical problems and to reach human support if an automated answer is
not readily available. The chat tool can be found on the left navigation bar in your Canvas
course.
                                      COURSE CALENDAR
Thursday June 4
Introduction to course
Friday June 5
Lecture: The Present Global (Dis)Order
Reading: “The New Spheres of Influence” (PDF)
Monday June 8
Debate: U.S. Foreign Policy in Transition
Reading: CQ Ch. 9
Assignment: Reflection paper 1 due by midnight
Tuesday June 9
Lecture: The New Nationalism
Reading: “Why Nationalism Works” (PDF)
Wednesday June 10
Debate: The European Union at a Crossroads
Reading: CQ Ch. 8
Assignment: Reflection paper 2 due by midnight
                                                   4


Thursday June 11
Lecture: The United Nations and World Order
Reading: “Go Your Own Way” (PDF)
Friday June 12
Debate: India Today
Reading: CQ Ch. 6
Assignment: Reflection paper 3 due by midnight
Monday June 15
Lecture: Democracy in Retreat
Reading: “Learning to Live with Despots” (PDF)
Tuesday June 16
Debate: Saudi Arabia’s Uncertain Future
Reading: CQ Ch. 2
Assignment: Reflection paper 4 due by midnight
Wednesday June 17
Lecture: Global Capitalism
Reading: “The Clash of Capitalisms” (PDF)
Thursday June 18
Debate: The Future of Cash
Reading: CQ Ch. 7
Assignment: Reflection paper 5 due by midnight
Friday June 19
Lecture: Foreign aid and the international development agenda
Reading: “The Human Capital Gap” (PDF)
Monday June 22
Debate: Africa in Transition
Reading: CQ Ch. 5
Assignment: Reflection paper 6 due by midnight
Tuesday June 23
Lecture: The Migrant Crisis
Reading: “Nowhere to Go” (PDF)
Wednesday June 24
Debate: Turmoil in Central America
Reading: CQ Ch. 3
Assignment: Reflection paper 7 due by midnight
Thursday June 25
Lecture: The Urbanization Dilemma
Reading: “Mean Streets” (PDF)
                                                  5


Friday June 26
Debate: Global Population Pressures
Reading: CQ Ch. 12
Assignment: Reflection paper 8 due by midnight
Sunday June 28
Assignment: Literature review summary and bibliography due by midnight
Monday June 29
Lecture: Cosmopolitanism and intolerance
Reading: “The Importance of Elsewhere” (PDF)
Tuesday June 30
Debate: The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict
Reading: CQ Ch. 1
Assignment: Reflection paper 9 due by midnight
Wednesday July 1
Lecture: The End of Privacy?
Reading: “The Digital Dictators” (PDF)
Thursday July 2
Debate: Algorithms and Artificial Intelligence
Reading: CQ Ch. 13
Assignment: Reflection paper 10 due by midnight
Friday July 3
Lecture: The Global Food System
Reading: “The Precision Agriculture Revolution” (PDF)
Monday July 6
Debate: Global Fishing Controversies
Reading: CQ Ch. 15
Assignment: Reflection paper 11 due by midnight
Tuesday July 7
Lecture: Environmental Governance
Reading: “The Climate Club” (PDF)
Wednesday July 8
Debate: Climate Change and National Security
Reading: CQ Ch. 14
Assignment: Reflection paper 12 due by midnight
Thursday July 9
Course wrap-up
Friday July 10
Assignment: Literature review essay due by midnight
                                                6
