                           M s325K - Summer 2019
                              Discrete Mathematics
                                                    86455
   Instructor: Kathryn Dabbs
                                                                    Class
   Office: RLM 13.140
                                                                    MTWThF 1:00 pm - 2:30 pm
   Office Hours: TWTh 2:30-3:30 pm, or by appointment
                                                                    RLM 6.104
   E-mail: kdabbs@math.utexas.edu
Course Description and Goals This course is intended to provide an introduction to understanding
and creating mathematical proofs in the context of discrete mathematics, providing a transition from
the problem-solving approach of calculus to the rigorous approach of advanced courses such as M365C
or M373K. In this course students will learn how to write formal mathematical proofs, disprove
mathematical statements, and find counterexamples. Topics include fundamentals of logic, elementary
number theory, sequences and mathematical induction, and set theory.
Prerequisites M408D, M408L, or M408S with a grade of at least C-.
Required Textbook
Discrete Mathematics: An Introduction to Mathematical Reasoning, by Susanna S. Epp, First Edition
(Brief Edition)
ISBN: 9780495826170
Recommended Course Materials
We will occasionally use UT Instapoll in Canvas during class. Please plan to bring an internet-ready
device to class each day for this purpose.
Grading and Exams
The exams are scheduled as follows:
    • Midterm: Wednesday, July 31 (in class)
    • Final Exam: Saturday, August 17, 9:00 am-12:00 pm
      See https://registrar.utexas.edu/students/exams for more information.
All scores are recorded in Canvas, and grades are computed as follows:
                                    Homework                         25%
                                    Classwork and Participation      15%
                                    Midterm Exam                     30%
                                    Final Exam                       30%
                                    Total                            100%
If your final exam grade is higher than your midterm grade, your final exam grade will replace your
midterm grade. No makeups for exams will be given.
We will spend the majority of our class time solving and discussing problems. You are expected to be
in class, participate in class activities, and contribute to the discussion. You will usually be working in
groups. Your classwork and participation grade will be based on a combination of attendance checks,
                                                       1


UT Instapoll submissions, and collected classwork. The lowest 3 of these grades will be dropped to
account for necessary absences.
Additional out of class work will be assigned every week. Homework assignments will be posted on
Canvas. No late homework will be accepted, but the lowest homework grade will be dropped.
Your percentage grade will be rounded to the nearest whole number, and your letter grade will be
assigned according to a scale no stricter than the following:
                                   Percent    Grade   Percent    Grade
                                      93      A          73      C
                                      90      A-         70      C-
                                      87      B+         67      D+
                                      83      B          63      D
                                      80      B-         60      D-
                                      77      C+
                                  General Policies and Info
Notes on the Calendar
The last day of the official add/drop period for the second term is July 16, and the last day to drop
with dean’s approval or change to a credit/no credit basis is August 16. The midterm exam date is
fixed, but the lesson plan may change according to our needs. You are responsible for knowing what
material will be covered for each exam by coming to class and checking Canvas.
Makeups/Religious Holidays
Per university policy, the only excused absences are for official university business and for religious
holy days. These absences require documentation and advance notice. Absences for illness are not
officially excused. No make up work will be permitted for undocumented, unexcused absences for
illness or any other reason.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Calculators/Cell Phones/Laptops
Calculators will not be allowed on exams. Laptops are permitted for note-taking in class, but please
take care to not be too distracting to your neighbors. I reserve the right to revoke this permission.
Phone use not related to course is not allowed.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a disability requiring accommodations may make a request from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, at 471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd
Academic Integrity
Academic dishonesty and plagiarism will not be tolerated in this course. Please refer to the Honor
Code and Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities, which may be
found at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint student.php.
                                                    2


Counseling and Mental Health Center CMHC is located in the Student Services Building (SSD)
on the fifth floor. They are open M-F 8-5, and their website is www.cmhc.utexas.edu.
Evacuation Procedures The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation are from
the Office of Campus Safety and Security:
   1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
      buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
      assembling outside.
   2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remem-
      ber that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
   3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
      first week of class.
   4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
   5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
      The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
   6. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
   7. A link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
      found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                     3


                Summer 2019
                    sM325K
                     Monday                      Tuesday                  Wednesday                     Thursday                        Friday             Saturday
             Intro to the Course; 2.1:
                                                                       2.3: Valid and Invalid     3.1-3.2: Predicates and    3.3: Statements with Multiple
 July 15    Logical Form and Logical     2.2 Conditional Statements
                                                                            Arguments              Quantified Statements               Quantifiers
                    Equivalence
                                                                                                                                4.5: Indirect Argument:
               3.4: Arguments with        4.1-4.2: Direct Proof and    4.3: Direct Proof and        4.4: Direct Proof and
 July 22      Quantified Statements            Counterexample            Counterexample               Counterexample
                                                                                                                                   Contradiction and
                                                                                                                                     Contraposition
           4.6: Indirect Argument: Two
 July 29        Classical Theorems
                                               5.1: Sequences              Midterm Exam                5.2: Induction                5.3: Induction
                                                                                                7.1: Functions; 7.2: One-to-
          5.4: Strong Induction and the
August 5      Well-Ordering Principle
                                               6.1: Set Theory        6.2: Properties of Sets     One and Onto, Inverse       7.3: Function Composition
                                                                                                          Functions
           7.4: Cardinality and Sizes of
August 12              Infinity
                                              8.1-8.2: Relations    8.3: Equivalence Relations 9.4: The Pigeonhole Principle             Review            Final Exam
