               CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN POPULAR CULTURE
FALL 2019
Professor Xavier Livermon
AFR 340 (30085), WGS 340 (44825), ANT 322C (31065)
T Th: 2 – 3:30pm JGB 2.218
Office Hours T 12-2pm GWB 3.118
email: livermon@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
The aim of this course is to introduce students to some of the most significant aspects of popular
culture in contemporary sub-Saharan Africa. Manifestations of popular culture are considered as
markers of modern African identities, embedded in complex and varied socio-cultural, historical
and political contexts. Within the current era of global, diasporic, and transnational flows, it is
neither sufficient any longer to view Africa solely from the perspective of political economies,
nor to discuss contemporary African culture within the tradition-versus-modernity debate.
Manifestations of popular culture in Africa show that the continent is part and parcel of the
postmodern world, with cultural production simultaneously influenced by global trends and
specific African contexts.
The course will cover various forms of cultural expression and genres, including popular film,
music, literature, dance, comics and cartoons, fashion, sport, street art, theatre, and contemporary
visual arts. Attention will be paid to the production modes, audiences and sites of consumption of
these different genres and aspects of popular culture. Course instruction will include extensive
film and clip viewings, analysis of music, and reading fictional texts such as popular novels and
comics.
Learning Objectives
At the conclusion of this course, students will be able to:
    1) Identify major themes of Contemporary African Popular Culture.
    2) Understand Popular Culture Theory and its relationship to African lives.
    3) Understand the importance of popular culture in Africa as a site of politics.
Grading Policy
Attendance and Participation 20%
Group Presentation 20%
Quizzes 20%
Popular Culture Report 20%
Group Final Paper 20%
                                                                                                     1


   Grading Scale
   A 94-100                          C 74-76
   A- 90-93                          C- 70-73
   B+ 87-89                          D+ 67-69
   B 84-86                           D 64-66
   B- 80-83                          D- 60-63
   C+ 77-79                          F 0- 59
Required Texts :
Aya: Life in Yop City Marguerite Abouet and Clement Oubrerie
East African Hip-Hop: Youth Culture and Globalization Mwenda Ntarangwi
Required Texts are available for purchase at The University Cooperative Bookstore 2246
Guadalupe St. (512) 476-721.
All other required readings will be posted on Canvas.
Course Requirements:
Attendance and Participation: Students are expected to attend class every session. Participation
in all aspects of the class is MANDATORY. All readings and assignments should be completed
before class meetings and students are responsible for adding to class discussions of material.
Please note that attendance and participation is worth 20% of your total grade. Late arrivals are
disruptive to class and I will not repeat concepts and assignments given during class. If you miss a
class or are late, you are still responsible for any announcements, assignments, lecture material
and/or deadlines that are made. Your grade will be affected if you have more than three absences
during the semester.
Active Learning Environment: This is a discussion -based course. While I will do some
lecturing, it is my expectation that students will come to class having completed the readings and
ready to discuss the articles assigned. It is my teaching philosophy that students will learn as
much from each other as they will from me. Discussion based courses allow
students to be active participants in their learning, giving the student the opportunity to place the
reading in the context of his or her lived experience. This does not mean that the student should
ignore the scholarly evidence presented or make arguments solely based on their opinion. Rather,
it allows students to enrich the scholarly environment in relation to their life experiences. My job
as the instructor is to facilitate and guide the discussion, create a safe participatory environment
and make sure that we stay on topic. Merely being
present does not count as active engagement.
Bringing Materials to Class: As part of an active learning environment, students are
required to bring all necessary materials to actively engage in the discussion to class each week.
These necessary materials include but are not limited to the books/articles/texts assigned
                                                                                                      2


for the day. While students are not required to print out hard copies of the pdf. materials for in
class discussions/assignments, they will be expected to have these materials accessible in
electronic form.
Group Presentation:
Students will form groups and be responsible for a short (15-20 minute) presentation to the class on
a current African popular culture phenomenon (i.e Skateboarding in Ethiopia, Surfing in Guinea-
Bissau, Romance Literature in Northern Nigeria) that deals with the issues relevant to the class, but
has not necessarily been covered in the readings. If students choose an issue covered in the
readings they should be careful to make sure that their presentation adds new insight or covers new
ground not discussed in the readings. Students should consult African popular culture websites,
                                                                           th
twitter, tumblr, and instagram for ideas. On Tuesdays, beginning in the 5 week of class, the
group will present their findings to the class and we will have a short discussion about the
presentation. Students may use information gleaned from their presentation to complete their final
group paper.
Popular Culture Report:
During the class, students should be consulting African popular culture websites and news outlets
in order to enhance their knowledge of African popular culture. During Week 13 students should
turn in to the professor a short report (5 pages) discussing an aspect of African popular culture not
discussed in the readings. The report will introduce the form of popular culture, explain its
importance and significance, and connect the popular culture to the themes of the class. This
report is due by 5pm on November 21st .
African Popular Culture Blogs
The following are a list of continent wide popular culture blogs. I do encourage students to seek
out additional popular culture blogs beyond these, but this is a good aggregate list to begin learning
more about African Popular Culture. Keep in mind that occasionally mainstream western media
outlets such as The New York Times, FADER, and pitchfork will feature articles on African
popular culture. Furthermore there are many aggregators of African popular culture content on
tumblr and instagram.
    1.   Africa is a country: africasacountry.com
    2.   Brittle Paper: brittlepaper.com
    3.   This is Africa: thisisafrica.me
    4.   Okay Africa: okayafrica.com
    5.   Afripop! : afripopmag.com
    6.   Muse Origins: museorigins.net
    7.   Dynamic Africa: dynamicafrica.tumblr.com
    8.   African Hip Hop: Africanhiphop.com
Quizzes:
                                                                                                      3


Each week on Thursday, beginning in the 4th week of class, unless noted, there will be a short (15
minute) quiz on the reading assignments for the previous week. These quizzes are designed to test
whether you have understood the main concepts introduced by the authors. 10 of these quizzes will
count toward the final grade.
Final Group Paper
Students should complete a group research paper (15 pages) on a topic of their choosing that deals
with African Popular Culture. This paper may be an expansion of the work done for their
presentation or it may be an entirely new project. The paper should not be simply informational. It
should contain some original research. The paper should have a clear thesis statement along with
an argument supported by evidence. Blending scholarly articles with popular culture analysis will
be key to completing a successful paper. December 5th .
Canvas: I will be in contact with you about updates in assignments through Canvas. It is the
students’ responsibility to make sure that Canvas has your updated email address.
Code of Mutual Respect: In general, this is not a lecture class, but one grounded in dialogue.
Feel free to be candid and direct in this class. Your insights are important, and your voice needs to
be heard, so look forward to the opportunity to chime in. I will respect you
as adults and assume that you will treat others in the class with respect as well. Because we will
be sharing many personal ideas which may conflict with your own personal ideas and
beliefs, it is important that you strive to be considerate, sensitive, and respectful. Be prepared to
offer constructive criticism as well as receive it. We will discuss work that includes lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender themes in this course. Students are expected to approach all class
material with maturity and academic rigor.
Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are
not your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action which will also be reflected in their grade. As a reminder, the honor code of the University
is as follows, “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
of the University and uphold academic integrity.” For more information on the Honor Code
please see the following link
http://www.utexas.edu/about-ut/mission-core-purpose-honor-code
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive)
who requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY
for users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, please come talk to me.
                                                                                                      4


Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, PCL
2.330 , 471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The UWC offers free, individualized, expert
help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. These
services are not just for writing that has "problems": Getting feedback from an informed
audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. The UWC’s trained consultants work
with students from every department on both academic and non-academic writing. Using
methods that preserve the integrity of your work, they help you develop strategies to improve
your writing and become a more independent writer. Whether you are writing a lab report, a
resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants
will be happy to work with you.
                                                                                              5


COURSE OUTLINE
  DATE                          Reading Assignment
  PART I: INTRODUCTION AND KEY
  TERMS
  WEEK 1
  8/29                          Introduction to Class No Reading
                                In Class Film: Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie
                                “The Danger of a Single Story”
  WEEK 2
  9/3                           In Class Film: Pop Culture in African Cities
  9/5                          “How to Write About
                               Africa” Binyavanga
                               Wainana
                                “African” Kevin Gaines
                                “Culture” George Yudice
 WEEK 3
 9/10                           “Ethnicity” Henry Wu
                                “Globalization” Lisa Low
                                 “Modern” Chandan Reddy
 9/12                           “What is Popular Culture” John Storey, Ch.1
 WEEK 4
                               Film: Tuko Macho
  9/17
  9/19                           “Popular Culture and Public Space in
                                Africa:The Possibilities of Cultural
                                Citizenship” Nadine Dolby
                               QUIZ 1
  WEEK 5
                                                                             6


 PART II: KEY DEBATES IN AFRICAN
 POPULAR CULTURE
9/24                              “Introduction to Readings in African
                                  Popular Culture” Karin Barber
                                  GROUP PRESENTATION 1
  9/26                            “Talking About Tribe, Moving From
                                  Stereotypes to Analysis” African Policy
                                  Initiative Center
                                  QUIZ 2
  WEEK 6
  PART III: CASE STUDIES IN
  AFRICAN POPULAR CULTURE:
  POPULAR FILM AND TELEVISION
  POPULAR FILM AND TELEVISION
  10/1                           FILM: The Wedding Party
                                 GROUP PRESENTATION 2
  10/3
                                   “Popular Culture and Social Change in
                                  Africa: The Case of the Nigerian Video
                                  Industry” AL Abah
                                 QUIZ 3
  WEEK 7
  10/8                            TV Show: Shuga
                                  GROUP PRESENTATION 3
  10/10                           “Heavy Sexual Content Versus Safer Sex
                                  Content” Booker et. al.
                                  “Yizo Yizo: Citizenship, Commodification
                                  and Popular Culture”
                                                                           7


                 QUIZ 4
  WEEK 8
  POPULAR MUSIC
  10/15         “East African Hip-Hop” Mwenda Ntarangwi,
                 Ch 1 -2
                GROUP PRESENTATION 4
 10/17           “East African Hip-Hop” Mwenda Ntarangwi
                 Ch 3-4
                 QUIZ 5
 WEEK 9
 10/22            “East African Hip-Hop” Mwenda Ntarangwi
                 Ch 5-6
                GROUP PRESENTATION 5
 10/24           “Body Politic: The Emergence of a Kwaito
                 Nation in South Africa” T. Pietela
                 QUIZ 6
 WEEK 10
 DANCE
 10/29           “Sound of Kuduro Knocking at My Door”
                Hershini Bhana Young
                 “Vintage Cru: Challenging the Status Quo in
                South Africa With Dance”
                GROUP PRESENTATION 6
10/31            “Transnational Circulation and Digital
                 Fatigue in Ghana’s Azonto Dance Craze”
                 Jesse Shipley
                 QUIZ 7
 WEEK 11
 FASHION
                                                             8


 11/5                         “Sartorial Ecumenes: African Styles in a
                              Social and Economic Context” Hudita
                              Mustafa
                              GROUP PRESENTATION 7
 11/7                         “Dream and Drama: The Search For
                              Elegance Among Congolese Youth” Ch.
                             Didier Gondola
                             QUIZ 8
WEEK 12
COMICS
 11/12                        Aya of Yop City Part I “Preface”, “Interview
                              with Author”
                             GROUP PRESENTATION 8
 11/14                         Aya of Yop City Part II
                             QUIZ 9
WEEK 13
                              Aya of Yop City Part III
11/19
                             GROUP PRESENTATION 9
11/21                        POPULAR CULTURE REPORT DUE
                              NO CLASS
 WEEK 14
 11/26-11/28                 NO CLASS THANKSGIVING BREAK
 WEEK 15
 MAGAZINES AND PRINT CULTURE
  12/3                        “Chimurenga: Communal Yard for Sick
                              Heads” Jamal.
                             GROUP PRESENTATION 10 (if needed)
 12/5                         GROUP FINAL PAPER DUE
                                                                           9


10