                                    Dr. Austin's M302, Summer 2019
                                       Introduction to Mathematics
                                           Unique Number: 86300
LECTURES            MTWThF 10:00 - 11:00 am in ETC 2.108
June 6 - July 31, 2019
PROFESSOR                    Dr. Austin
Jennifer K. Mann Austin, Ph.D.
Office: RLM 11.150
Office Hours: Tuesdays 11:00 am -12:00 pm, Thursdays 11:00 am - 12:00 pm, and Fridays 11:00 am - 12:00
pm
Email: jmann@math.utexas.edu
Website: http://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/jmann/
REQUIRED TEXT                    The Heart of Mathematics: An Invitation to Effective Thinking, 4th Edition
by Edward B. Burger (Southwestern University) and Michael Starbird (University of Texas at Austin)
RECOMMENDED READING                              The 5 Elements of Effective Thinking by Edward B. Burger and
Michael Starbird
COURSE GOALS
M302 Introduction to Mathematics will actively involve students "in authentic mathematical experiences that
      are both challenging and intellectually stimulating,
      provide meaningful cognitive and metacognitive gains, and,
      nuture healthy and informed perceptions of mathematics, mathematical ways of thinking, and the ongoing
      impact of mathematics not only on STEM fields but also on the liberal arts and humanities."
      (http://www.artofmathematics.org/about)
STUDENT OBJECTIVES
M302 Introduction to Mathematics students will be challenged and encouraged to:
      "Make mistakes and fail, but never give up.
      Keep an open mind.
      Explore the consequences of new ideas.
      Seek the essential.
      Understand the issue.
      Understand simple things deeply.
      Break a difficult problem into easier ones.
      Examine issues from several points of view.
      Look for patterns and similarities." (The Heart of Mathematics: An Invitation to Effective Thinking, 4th
      Edition by Edward B. Burger and Michael Starbird)
HONOR CODE
The class is expected to uphold The University of Texas at Austin Honor Code. The core values of the
University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,


trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
QUANTITATIVE REASONING                               This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag.
Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the
types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-
world problems.
MATHEMATICS COMPONENT OF UNIVERSITY CORE                                                This course may be used to
fulfill the mathematics component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following three core
objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical
thinking skills, and empirical and quantitative skills.
ATTENDANCE POLICY
You are expected to attend all lecture sessions. If you are absent, do not email or otherwise contact me to ask
what material we covered during class, what the assignments are, what sections the exams will cover, or any
other questions that I have answered or will answer during class. In such a situation, you should contact a
classmate to get notes and information for the class you missed. It is certainly a good idea to work together
throughout the semester.
HOMEWORK
Homework will be posted in Canvas. Homework is due via online submission by 5:00 pm on Tuesdays and
Fridays as indicated on the Canvas calendar. You must upload a pdf file of your homework in Canvas. It is
preferred that homework be typed. It is acceptable to write out the homework by hand, but your only
means of homework submission is by uploading a pdf of your work in Canvas. Only a portion of each
homework assignment will be graded for accuracy, although all problems will be graded for attempt. Students
are encouraged to discuss all aspects of the course with each other. However, each student should type and
submit their own solutions to homework problems. Copying another student's solution or that from another text
is a violation of the honor code and fails to contribute to your personal mathematical development. Students
must show ALL work to each solution. No late homeworks will be accepted for any reason! No credit will be
given for unsupported answers. This means that all work should be shown, neatly and logically, using
correct notation.
QUIZZES
M302 Quizzes will be given in class on unannounced dates. There will be NO MAKEUP QUIZZES. UT
Instapoll within Canvas will be utilized for most, if not all, of these engagement checks. Students need to bring
an internet-ready device such as a smartphone, laptop, or tablet to class each day.
SEMESTER EXAM DATES
There are two in-class exams during the semester. There will be NO MAKEUP EXAMS. Use of approved
calculators is expected during exams. Dr. Austin does give partial credit on exams. However, Dr. Austin
entertains NO discussion of partial credit. If a student misses a semester exam, then he or she will need to meet
individually with Dr. Austin to determine whether a medical withdrawal or an incomplete is appropriate.
Exam 1: Thursday, June 20
Exam 2: Tuesday, July 9
FINAL EXAM DATE                      Wednesday, July 31, 9:00 am - 12:00 pm
See the university schedule here: http://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/196/finals
The final exam will be a cumulative, in-class exam. You cannot miss this, so plan accordingly. Final exams are
not returned to students.


GRADING
10% Homework (after dropping 3 lowest)
10% Quizzes
22% Exam 1
22% Exam 2
36% Final Exam
The lowest exam grade will be replaced by the final exam grade if the final exam grade is higher than the lowest
exam grade. Grades will be recorded in Canvas. Canvas is NOT used to determine your semester grade in this
course. Canvas is only used as a means to store and share your grades. All of your individual grades will remain
in Canvas as the score you originally earned on each of them. Your semester grade for the course is determined
as detailed in this syllabus. No semester assignments will be accepted after the last day of classes Tuesday, July
30, 2019. Your final exam grade is final and non-negotiable. Thus, any discussions of your course grade must
occur prior to the final exam administration.
Plus/minus grades will be assigned for the final grade as follows: A (100-92.6), A- (92.5-89.6), B+ (89.5-86.6),
B (86.5-82.6), B- (82.5-79.6), C+ (79.5-76.6), C (76.5-72.6), C- (72.5-69.6), D+ (69.5-66.6), D (66.5-62.6), D-
(62.5-59.6), F (59.5-0).
COURSE WEBSITE                   http://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/jmann/su19M302.html
Additionally homework assignments, grades, and other essential course information will be posted in Canvas.
COURSE MATERIALS ARE COPYRIGHTED                                       You cannot share any assignments, handouts,
exams, solutions, or documents related to this class. Sharing any class materials online or otherwise in any form,
including your own work submitted for this class, without my express approval is considered academic
dishonesty. If something is found online which you have posted, you will be reported for an academic integrity
violation.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY POLICY                              Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies
on academic dishonesty will be strictily enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
ADVICE FOR SUCCESS
Actively participate in the course by attending lectures, asking questions, doing the assigned homework
problems and additional problems covering your weak topics, and utilizing the office hours of Dr. Austin and
our LAs. Please do come to my office hours if you have questions or concerns.
Before you email me to ask a question about the rules and procedures of this course, please read through this
syllabus to see if the answer is written here. I diligently tried to include here any information that you might ask;
please utilize it.
PREREQUISITE
Three units of high school mathematics at the level of Algebra I or higher. The Mathematics Level I test is not
required. It may be used to satisfy Area C requirements for the Bachelor of Arts degree under Plan I.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
M302 is intended primarily for general liberal arts students. It may not be included in the major requirement for
the Bachelor of Arts or the Bachelor of Science degree with a major in mathematics. In some colleges M302
cannot be counted toward the Area C requirement nor toward the total hours required for a degree. Only one of
the following may be counted: M302, 303D, or 303F. A student may not earn credit for Mathematics 302 after


having received credit for any calculus course.
The course topics include: logic, number theory, infinity, geometry, topology, and probability.
SERVICES AVAILABLE TO STUDENTS
The University of Texas provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Utilize the Sanger Learning and Life Center!
Counseling and Mental Health Center, Student Services Bldg (SSB), 5th Floor, Hours: M-F 8am-5pm, 512-471-
3515
COMPUTER LAB
The mathematics department's 40 seats undergrad computer lab, RLM 7.122, is open to all students enrolled in
math courses. Students can sign up for an individual account themselves in the computer lab using their UT EID.
RLM Building Hours are:
M-Th: 6:00am -- 11:00pm
F: 6:00am -- 10:00pm
Sat: 6:00am -- 5:00pm
Sun: 2:00pm -- 11:00pm
STUDENT CONDUCT
All computers, cell phones and other hand-held devices must be put away out of sight and sound during class.
You will be excused from class for the day if you are using your phone, laptop, tablet, etc. Please come to class
on time. If you will be late or need to leave early for some legitimate reason, please tell me in advance. Coming
and going during class is distracting to your fellow students and the instructor, and we do not like it.
PLANNED LECTURE and EXAM SCHEDULE                                     See our Course Calendar in Canvas.
Deviations from this tentative calendar may occur during the semester. The actual material covered each day can
only be determined by attending the lectures.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
DEADLINES FOR DROPPING A COURSE
Tuesday, June 11 is the last day to drop a class without the approval of the dean. Wednesday, June 26 is the last
day to change course registration to or from pass/fail or credit/no credit basis. See the Registrar's website for full
calendar information.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize
yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit
door may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall
inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the
instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following:
Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services


office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line
BCAL: 512-232-5050
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Return to Dr. Austin's Home Page             http://www.ma.utexas.edu/users/jmann/


             Dr. Austin's M302     Summer 2019       Introduction to Mathematics
Date      Text Sections                            Concepts                      Homework
  6‐Jun       Ch. 1       Syllabus; Fun and Games
  7‐Jun       Ch. 1       Fun and Games
10‐Jun         2.1        Counting
11‐Jun         2.2        Numerical Patterns in Nature                           HW 1 Due
12‐Jun         2.2        Numerical Patterns in Nature
13‐Jun         2.3        Prime Cuts of Numbers
14‐Jun         2.6        The Irrational Side of Numbers                         HW 2 Due
17‐Jun         2.6        The Irrational Side of Numbers
18‐Jun         2.7        Get Real                                               HW 3 Due
19‐Jun Exam 1 Review Ch. 1 Fun & Games; Ch. 2 Number Contemplation
20‐Jun          Exam 1: Ch. 1 Fun & Games; Ch. 2 Number Contemplation
21‐Jun         3.1        Beyond Numbers                                         HW 4 Due
24‐Jun         3.2        Comparing the Infinite
25‐Jun         3.3        The Missing Member                                     HW 5 Due
26‐Jun        Ch. 3       Mindscape Day
27‐Jun         4.1        Pythagoras & His Hypotenuse
28‐Jun         4.3        The Sexiest Rectangle                                  HW 6 Due
   1‐Jul       4.5        The Platonic Solids Turn Amorous
   2‐Jul      Ch. 4       Mindscape Day                                          HW 7 Due
   3‐Jul       4.7        The Fourth Dimension
  4‐Jul                                     4th of July Holiday!
   5‐Jul       4.7        The Fourth Dimension                                   HW 8 Due
   8‐Jul Exam 2 Review Ch. 3 Infinity; Ch. 4 Geometric Gems
  9‐Jul               Exam 2: Ch. 3 Infinity; Ch. 4 Geometric Gems               HW 9 Due
 10‐Jul        5.1        Rubber Sheet Geometry
 11‐Jul        5.2        The Band That Wouldn't Stop Playing
 12‐Jul          No Class Day for Nine‐Week and Whole Session Classes            HW 10 Due
 15‐Jul        5.3        Knots and Links
 16‐Jul       Ch. 5       Mindscape Day                                          HW 11 Due


17‐Jul   6.1    Circuit Training
18‐Jul   6.2    Feeling Edgy?
19‐Jul 7.1; 7.2 Images; The Infinitely Detailed Beauty of Fractals  HW 12 Due
22‐Jul   8.1    Chance Surprises
23‐Jul   8.2    Predicting the Future in an Uncertain World         HW 13 Due
24‐Jul   8.3    Random Thoughts
25‐Jul   8.4    Down for the Count
26‐Jul  Ch. 8                        Mindscape Day                  HW 14 Due
29‐Jul Review   Final Exam Review
30‐Jul Review   Final Exam Review
31‐Jul           Final Exam: All Topics Covered During the Semester
