                                       ARC335 Construction V – Architecture in Detail – Materials and Methods
                                                                      The University of Texas at Austin, School of Architecture
                                                                                                     Fall 2018 M/F 0930-1100
                                                                                             Instructor: Matthew Z Leach, AIA
  Stone Towers, ABIA Austin TX. (Page)
  Course Syllabus
  I.     Objectives
         This is a critical thinking course disguised as a technical drawing course. Through the
         course of the semester you will be asked to engage and demonstrate an understanding of
         the role of the detail in carrying out a project’s design intent.
         The course has the following learning objectives:
                I.    Improved ability to observe, understand and discuss architectural character and concepts
              II.     Improved understanding of how performance criteria impacts envelope design
             III.     Learn how to use the appropriate tool for communicating specific qualitative design aspects
             IV.      Improved ability to develop and manipulate architectural details
 II.     Admin
         Instructor: Matthew Z Leach, AIA
         Contact: matthew.leach@gmail.com
         Office Hours and Location: By appointment, available with two day notice.
         Class Time: MON/FRI, 0930-1100
         Class Location: TBD
III.     Prerequisites
         This course is required for undergraduates in the School of Architecture. It is the final class in the
         Construction Sequence, featuring advanced concepts, and Construction I-IV must have been successfully
         completed prior. Taken in conjunction with ARC560T. Please see me or your academic advisor for
         exceptions.


                            ARC335 Construction V – Architecture in Detail – Materials and Methods
                                                                   The University of Texas at Austin, School of Architecture
                                                                                                  Fall 2018 M/F 0930-1100
                                                                                          Instructor: Matthew Z Leach, AIA
IV. Attendance
    This course follows UT’s attendance policy found here: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
    information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/
    Regular attendance is mandatory. Full participation is expected. Three (3) unexcused absences will result in
    a mandatory full letter grade deduction from your final course evaluation. Students with excessive
    unexcused absences will be encouraged to drop or withdraw from the course.
    The University of Texas at Austin provides students with disabilities the ability to request appropriate
    academic accommodations. Students with such needs should follow up with the Division of Diversity and
    Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities.
 V. Evaluation
         Student evaluation will be based on the following assignments:
                       1. In Detail 1-3                                            45%
                       2. In Detail 4                                              25%
                       3. Field Reports (2)                                        10%*
                       4. Readings Discussion                                      5%
                       5. Class Participation                                      15%
         Assignment evaluation will be based on the following demonstrable criteria:
                       Understanding, Thought + Grasp                              25%
                       Process + Rigor                                             25%
                       Completeness + Resolution                                   25%
                       Engagement + Contribution                                   25%
VI. Assignments
         1.  In Detail 1-3
             Explore architecture in detail through analysis, concept, synthesis, and refinement
             ID.1: Critical Intersection – Existing building analysis and comparative alternates
             ID.2: Exemplary project – Studio project precedent analogue – Critical Analysis and Conceptual
             Synthesis.
             ID.3: Material/Detail Concept – Physical Model
         2.  In Detail 4
             Final project presentation and drawing set.
             Presentation that demonstrates an understanding and implementation of a detail concept
             throughout several coordinated drawing types. Will be fully integrated with final studio project.
             ID.4: Material/Detail Concept – Drawing Set Presentation with refined model, detail drawings, and
             related plan/sections.
         3.  Field Reports*
             Construction site visit observations shall be submitted for review in the form of 1 page field
             reports. Reports shall include descriptive sketches along with text.
             *in the case that only one site visit is available, the second field report grade will be scored as an
             average between the first field report, participation, and reading contribution.
         4.  Class Participation and Readings Discussion
             Reading shall be completed prior to class. Participation and discussion is expected. Evaluation
             may include in-class quizzes based on readings and related lecture content.


                         ARC335 Construction V – Architecture in Detail – Materials and Methods
                                                                The University of Texas at Austin, School of Architecture
                                                                                                Fall 2018 M/F 0930-1100
                                                                                        Instructor: Matthew Z Leach, AIA
VII. Grade Descriptions
        A/A- :       Excellence
                     Work surpasses course and instructor expectations. Work is consistent, inventive,
                     appropriate, thoroughly resolved, conceptually clear and rigorous. Subject of work
                     pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Student
                     demonstrates strong personal growth.
        B+/B/B- :    Above average
                     Work is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed.
                     Subject of work pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and demonstrates
                     resolve of project objectives. Work shows potential for excellence.
        C+/C/C- :    Average
                     Work meets the minimum requirements. Work content is minimally developed but is
                     appropriate for class objectives. Work is not pursued with dedication nor rigor. Student is
                     not engaged nor responsive to suggestions for improvement. (Note: C- does not meet
                     the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree in architecture or interior
                     design.)
        D+/D/D- :    Below average
                     Basic skills including graphic skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
                     appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required skill and knowledge base.
        F:           Failure
                     Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will
                     be assigned with excessive unexcused absences.
        X:           Excused incomplete
                     Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments
                     are not a cause for assigning this grade. An incomplete is assigned after consultation
                     with the Associate


                              ARC335 Construction V – Architecture in Detail – Materials and Methods
                                                                   The University of Texas at Austin, School of Architecture
                                                                                                  Fall 2018 M/F 0930-1100
                                                                                          Instructor: Matthew Z Leach, AIA
VIII. Text Books (Readings will be provided in PDF format)
           Ford, Edward R. The Architectural Detail (Princeton Architectural Press, 2011)
           Boswell, C. Keith Exterior Building Enclosures. Design Composition for Innovative Facades (Wiley,
                          2013)
 IX.  Bibliography - Supplemental Reading Sources (subject to change)
           Allen, Edward. Architectural Detailing. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1993.)
           Allen, Edward. Fundamentals of Building Construction Materials and Methods.
           Architecture Graphic Standards
           Ballard bell, Victoria. Materials for Design 2 (Princeton Architectural Press, 2006)
           Ballast, David K. Architect’s Handbook of Construction Detailing. (BNI Publications, 2000)
           Brock, Linda. Designing the Exterior Wall. (Wiley, 2005)
           Deplazes, Andrea Constructing Architecture (Birkhauser, 2013)
           Evans, Robin Translations from Drawing to Building and Other Essays (MIT Press, 1997)
           Frampton, Kenneth. Studies in Tectonic Culture. (MIT Press, 1996)
           Lstriburek, Joseph Builders Guide to Hot Humid Climates (Building Science Corporation, 2005)
           Sennett, Richard The Craftsman (Yale University Press, 2008)
