American Sign Language I (ASL f601D)
Course Syllabus
Department of Linguistics
University of Texas at Austin
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/linguistics/asl_program/ASL-Program.php
Lecturer: Michael F. Wynne, Jr.                          Location: Online via Canvas
Date: Summer 2020 (Session I)                            Class Hours: M-Th 12:00-4:00p
E-mail: mwynnejr@mac.com                                 Office Location/Hours: By appointment only
Course Number: 81070
Online course information and assignments available through Canvas: canvas.utexas.edu
Course Description: This course aims to support a student’s learning of American Sign
Language (ASL) and is appropriate for students who have no previous knowledge of the
language. Students work on developing perceptual, attentional, manual, and non-manual skill
necessary to learn ASL, and successfully manage various uncomplicated communicative tasks in
straightforward social situations. The course introduces the student to vocabulary and grammar
for introducing oneself, exchanging personal information, talking about surroundings, giving
directions, and describing various activities. The course also includes the teaching of information
about Deaf Culture, history, values, social norms, communication norms, and the role that those
norms play in the Deaf community.
Course Goals:
This course is intended to support a student’s ability to achieve the following by the end of the
semester:
     a. manage a basic vocabulary in ASL, with particular focus on signs for communicating
         information about oneself and about school life
     b. manage basic grammatical structures in ASL, including the use of manual (i.e., the hands)
         and non-manual (i.e., the torso, face, etc.) features
     c. comprehend short dialogues and narratives produced in ASL
     d. produce short dialogues and narratives in ASL
     e. demonstrate ASL conversation, facilitating/regulating behaviors such as attention getting
         techniques, turn taking signals, leave-taking patterns, etc.
     f. demonstrate an elementary knowledge of Deaf Culture, including being able to identify
         markers of Deaf Culture in artifacts and behaviors.
     g. demonstrate knowledge of historical topics as they relate to the Deaf community, such as
         important figures and institutions in Deaf Culture and the role of technology in Deaf
         Culture
Required Materials:
     • Signing Naturally, A Student Workbook and Videotext, Units 1-6 (Smith, Lentz, &
         Mikos, 2008)
     • Introduction to American Deaf Culture (Holcomb, 2012)
     • Marco Polo Video Chat Application on a mobile device


Course Requirements and Weights:
     A. Exams (2): 30%
     B. Quizzes (+/- 5): 30%
     C. Assignments: 30%
     D. Electronic Portfolio: 10%
     No extra credit will be offered.
A. Exams
The course includes two comprehensive exams that contain receptive and expressive portions (2
exams with 2 parts each.) Make-up exams will only be given in extenuating circumstances (i.e.,
an emergency arises and the instructor is notified immediately and documentation is provided or
the instructor is notified in advance of a planned religious holiday absence, etc.). Exams are
computer-based and will be administered online through Canvas. Additional information about
exams will be provided online.
B. Quizzes
There will be three types of quizzes in this course:
1. Comprehension quizzes: These are based mostly on a student’s ability to understand ASL.
    Questions might also be based on the understanding of information from the Signing Naturally
    books or videos or linguistic information discussed in class.
2. Quizzes about cultural information that are based on readings (from the Signing Naturally
    books or from Introduction to American Deaf Culture), or the viewing of videos/movies.
3. Quizzes about information such as glossing/transcription conventions, how to correctly
    produce an ASL video assignment, or information that is contained in the syllabus.
Make-ups for quizzes will not be allowed. If you miss a quiz, you will earn zero points for that
assignment.
C. Assignments
Each student will need to devote multiple hours per week online completing different
assignments and interactive learning activities through Zoom. This time is vital for optimal
acquisition of ASL, and online assignments constitute a notable portion of each student’s grade.
It is suggested that students plan time in their schedules each week to participate and complete all
of these assignments. Details about each of the assignments will be posted on Canvas.
D. Electronic Portfolio
Throughout this course each student will create and maintain an electronic portfolio of select
assignments.      The portfolio will also include self- and peer-evaluations of progress and
descriptions of the portfolio for the instructor. Much of the content will be produced in ASL,
although there will be some written information included. Students are required to create and
maintain a portfolio through which the instructor can monitor their progress. Due dates for
specific parts of the portfolio will be provided as they approach, and the complete portfolio
evaluation will be due at the end of the course semester.
Attendance:
Students should plan on attending all scheduled online Zoom sessions through Canvas, inasmuch
as the material covered during these sessions and participation are vital to your performance in
this course. Attendance will be taken every Zoom session. Because this course involves
interactive activities, absences and/or early departures will not be tolerated. For any unexcused
absence, this results in one whole letter grade reduction (i.e. from an A to a B) and a letter grade
reduction for each absence thereafter (if you started with an A the first absence brings you to a B,
for each absence after that, B-, C+, C, C- and so on).


Given that the approach to Zoom sessions range from whole class meetings, to small cohort group
meetings, and possibly individual meetings. Attending your scheduled sessions on time is
imperative. Tardies and early departures will not be tolerated.
If an emergency or illness causes a student to be absent, the student must provide the instructor
with appropriate documentation (e.g., a note from a physician in the case of an illness) and the
instructor will take that into account when calculating participation based on absences.
Participation in UT-sponsored sporting events: Students must bring an official notification of the
upcoming event to class before the actual event, in order for the absence to be excused.
Observance of Religious Holy Days: students must notify the instructor at least 24 hours prior to
holy days. If you must miss a class, a quiz, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will have an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time before or after the absence. See UT policy on this matter at: http://www.utexas.edu/provost/
policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf
Participation:
It is essential that students make every effort to attend Zoom session on time and be prepared to
participate in class activities. Attention to different activities is imperative, behaviors such as
using pagers/cell phones, laptops, or doing work for another purpose other than sessions on Zoom
will not be tolerated. Because this is an ASL course, we aim to encourage the development of
signing skills, this also means that talking or voicing during our sessions will not be allowed.
Assignments:
Students will complete a variety of assignments for this course with primary focus on developing
productive language skills. This includes developing and creating video projects as well as
giving presentations on Zoom that demonstrate proficiency in target language skills in ASL. For
more information on when specific assignments are scheduled, please refer to the Canvas
modules. Late assignments will not be accepted, if you fail to submit assignments on time, they
will not be considered for grade.
At Home
Language learning, in particular, requires continuous practice. Since it is a process that relies on
active participation on the part of the learner, do not expect to master the material simply by
coming to class three times a week.
Studying
You should not limit your work at home only to online assignments, which count for a grade.
Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis, since attempts to memorize
large amounts of material quickly before quizzes are not normally successful. You should
frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of any items you may not
understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions and resolve issues
before quizzes.
Practice
Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as watching videos of vocabulary
and/or studying handouts/slides provided to you on Canvas. This type of studying is not usually
sufficient in a language course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home
often don’t develop the automaticity necessary to successfully complete quizzes and video
compositions within a limited time frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside
time to actively engage with course material by producing signs yourself as well as viewing
relevant videos along with opportunities to interact with others practicing ASL. Given our current
situation, practicing with others may be limited to online chat sessions.


Zoom Sessions
Your sessions are an important opportunity for you to interact with your classmates and your
instructor. Participation is an essential component of the course and does not refer exclusively to
attendance. Please keep in mind the following elements of our language courses:
Interaction
Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and rely heavily
on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will be pair
work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the facilitator.
All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.
Focus
The focus of your attention should be on activities while you are in class. Cell Phones, laptops
and outside reading materials are NOT allowed during Zoom sessions, as they limit your
participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.
ASL
In order to improve your expressive communication skills, you must practice both receiving and
producing ASL! Therefore, your instructor will communicate almost exclusively in ASL (written
English may be used at the instructor’s discretion), which will not only help you learn new
vocabulary and grammatical structures, but will also increase your comfort level over the course
of the semester. In turn, you are expected to reciprocate and use ASL for activities as well as for
basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.) Don’t
be shy! You’ll never be graded on the accuracy of your productions in these situations. You are,
however, expected to make the effort.
Course grades will be based on the following total percentages:
A = 93.45% - 100%         A- = 89.45% - 93.44% B+ = 86.45% - 89.44%
B = 83.45% - 86.44% B- = 79.45%-83.44% C+ = 76.45% - 79.44%
C = 73.45% - 76.44% C- = 69.45% - 73.44% D+ = 66.45% - 69.44%
D = 63.45% - 66.44% D- = 59.45% - 63.44% F = 59.44% and below
Notes:
There will be No pass/fail grade; this course is based on letter grade only.
Rounding up to the nearest whole percentage is done at the instructor’s discretion.
University Notices and Policies:
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students
are responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible to keep the university informed about
changes to your e-mail address. Students should check their email regularly (i.e., daily)
to stay current with class information. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating email addresses at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php


Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site at http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Documented Disability Statement:
If a student requires special accommodations, they must contact the Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) within the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement (471-6259 or 471-4641 [TTY] for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
Upon registration with the SSD office, students will be given letters to present to their
instructors in order to discuss appropriate accommodations. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity.ddce/ssd/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If a student is worried about someone who is acting strangely, they may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss their concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), AND the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Students should be
aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
〈        Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of the classroom and the
         building. The nearest exit door may not be the one that was used when a student
         entered the building.
〈        If a student requires assistance to evacuate, please inform the instructor in writing
         during the first week of class.
〈        In the event of an evacuation, students should follow the instructions given be the
instructor.
〈        Students should not re-enter a building unless they have been given instructions by
         the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
         Services office.


Course Schedule:
*Course schedule subject to change, all changes will be communicated in class or on Canvas.
 Dates                          Topics                                  Resource & Materials
 6/4 (Online Zoom Session,      Introduction to the Course: SN Unit 1
 first meeting with an          Requirements,Technology and
 Interpreter present at         A S L , C o u r s e S y l l a b u s Begin Unit 1 work on Canvas
 12:00pm)                       overview
 6/8-6/11                       Zoom Session Topics:                    SN Unit 1: During Zoom
                                                                        Sessions (Monday &
                                Unit 1: Personal Information,           Wednesdays, small cohort
                                Getting to know you,                    groups)
                                introducing yourself, asking                - on Canvas click on
                                who, specifying where, giving                   People to find out
                                commands, and numbers in                        your group for the
                                ASL.                                            week
                                                                        Begin Unit 2 work on Canvas
                                                                        Unit 1 Quiz
                                                                        Film Quizzes
 6/15-6/18                      Zoom Session Topics:                    SN Unit 2: During Zoom
                                                                        Sessions (Monday &
                                Unit 2: Exchanging Personal             Wednesdays, small cohort
                                Information: giving                     groups)
                                information about yourself,                 - on Canvas click on
                                narrating experiences with                      People to find out
                                languages, leisure activities,                  your group for the
                                identifying people, and                         week
                                numbers in ASL
                                                                        Begin Unit 3 work on Canvas
                                Unit 3: Discussing living
                                s i t u a t i o n s , r e a l w o r l d Unit 2 Quiz
                                orientations, giving
                                commands, basic directions, American Deaf Culture Book
                                and number signs with time.             Quiz
 6/22-6/25                      Zoom Session on Monday to SN Units 1-3
                                Review for the Exam
                                                                        Mid-term Exam Week
                                We d n e s d a y - E x a m 1
                                (Receptive)
                                Thursday - Exam1
                                (Expressive - Groups)


6/29-7/2                 Zoom Session topics:               SN Units 4&5: During Zoom
                                                            Sessions (Monday &
                         Unit 4: Talking about family,      Wednesdays, small cohort
                         negation, numbers involving        groups)
                         ages, relationships, family            - on Canvas click on
                         members.                                   People to find out
                                                                    your group for the
                         U n i t 5 : Te l l i n g a b o u t         weekBegin working
                         activities, agreement verbs,               on Units 4 & 5
                         and frequency of activities
7/6-7/9 (Last class day) Monday - Review Session on SN Units 1-5
                         Zoom
                                                            Exam Week
                         Tuesday - Exam 2 (Receptive)
                         We d n e s d a y - E x a m 2
                         (Expressive)                       Final Deadlines:
                         Thursday - Individual                  - Expressive Exam
                         meetings                                   Video          due
                                                                    Wednesday, July 8th
                                                                    at 3:45pm
                                                                - Portfolio Evaluations
                                                                    due Thursday, July
                                                                    9th at 3:45pm
