                   LAT506: First-Year Latin I-WB (Unique #: 80085)
  _________________________________________________________
UT Instructor: Becky Kahane
Email: bkahane@utexas.edu
In-Person Office Hour: M 11:30-12:30 or by appt
Online Zoom Office Hour: W 11:30-12:30 or by appt
UEX Instructor: Dr. Steven Lundy (pronouns: he/him/his)
Email: steven.lundy@utexas.edu
Online Office Hours: By appt
Office: WAG 227
Course Websites: Canvas, Piazza, Memrise
Required Course Materials
    • F. M. Wheelock, Wheelock’s Latin, 7th ed. Harper Collins, 2011. ISBN: 978-006-1997228.
    • A.H. Groton and J.M. May, 38 Latin Stories. Bolchazy-Carducci, 2003. ISBN: 978-
         0865162891.
    • Email account connected to Canvas: You are responsible for any announcements posted
         on Canvas.
    • Accounts with the following platforms: Piazza and Memrise
    • Optional: If you want a review of the foundations of English grammar, a good book to
         purchase is N.W. Goldman, English Grammar for Students of Latin: The Study Guide for
         Those Learning Latin
    • Optional: A Latin dictionary, although phone apps (e.g., SPQR) and online resources
         (e.g., Archimedes.fas.harvard.edu/pollux) make paper dictionaries redundant.
Course Description
This course will introduce the foundations of Latin vocabulary, grammar, and syntax to the
beginning Latin student. We will work our way through Wheelock’s Latin, chapters 1-25,
covering around two-thirds of the textbook and bringing the student around halfway to
intermediate competency (when the student becomes able to read unabridged Latin texts with
assistance). Students will be graded according to work in midterms, online course modules,
language and culture assignments, and vocabulary exercises. (To clarify, there are two exams in
this course, and they are both called “midterms” even though the second one is at the end of
the semester.)
This is a fully online course. Students are not required to attend class on campus at any time
during the semester except for midterms (which can be taken at a designated testing center
with instructor approval). Students will, however, have opportunities to interact with the
instructor and other students in collaborative online exercises and through Piazza (an online
discussion board).


Students who achieve a C or higher (not a C-) in this course will have demonstrated sufficient
mastery of the Latin language to advance to First-Year Latin II (LAT 507) or the equivalent at
other institutions.
Course Assessment
a. Assessment Activities (see below for explanations of each activity)
Midterms: 45%
Quizzes: 30%
Language and Culture Assignments: 20%
Memrise Vocabulary: 5%
b. Midterms (45%)
Students will complete TWO two-hour midterms, which will emphasize translation and
comprehension (with some composition). These will be held on campus, although students who
are taking this course outside of the Austin area or are otherwise unavailable may seek
permission from the instructor to take their midterm(s) at an approved testing center at their
own expense. Students are advised to note the midterm dates ahead of time and anticipate any
scheduling conflicts by discussing them with the instructor at the earliest opportunity. Make-
ups are only permitted in the instance of a medical or family emergency or religious holiday (on
religious holidays, see below), or if there is a legitimate, documented time conflict.
    Midterm dates
    • Exam 1: June 24
    • Exam 2: July 12 or 13 (during finals period – the date and time are TBD)
c. Quizzes (30%)
Ten modules will be released and completed throughout the course of the semester. In general,
two modules are due per week, one on Wednesday at 11:59 pm and the other on Saturday at
11:59 pm. (Please see the course schedule below for more information on due dates.) Each
module contains three types of quizzes that will count towards your overall quiz grade:
    •    Learning quizzes
    •    Module quiz (also called a summary quiz)
    •    Practice translation quizzes
There will be several learning quizzes for each module. Learning quizzes do NOT have a time
limit, so you can work at your own pace. However, you will only get TWO attempts to take
these quizzes, and your score for each quiz will be the AVERAGE of your two attempts.
Therefore, you should try your best at each attempt.


There will be one module (or summary) quiz for each module. Module quizzes DO have a time
limit and are meant to test your comprehension of material covered in the entire module. You
will have THREE attempts at this quiz, but you will receive different questions with each
attempt. The HIGHEST score that you receive out of the three attempts will count toward your
overall quiz grade.
There will be one practice translation quiz each week (that is, one translation for every two
modules). These quizzes will ask you submit your translation of a passage of Latin (either from
your textbook or from 38 Latin Stories). The student will receive a score and feedback from the
instructor.
(Note: After the module deadline has passed, access to all module content will remain available
for students so that they can continue to review the material throughout the course of the
semester. However, additional attempts at the quizzes made after the deadline has passed will
not be considered for grading purposes. See below, “Late Work.”)
d. Language and Culture Assignments (20%)
Throughout the semester, students will complete five assignments which will test their abilities
in reading comprehension, translation, and composition. These assignments will center around
a substantial reading in Latin and typically will include a collaborative element (web annotations
and passage translation) as well as a worksheet to be completed individually.
e. Memrise Vocabulary (5%)
Memrise is a language app that will help you work on vocabulary memorization. We will release
new vocabulary courses on this app each week and you will have to complete at 85% or higher
to get credit for this part of your work.
f. Grade Reporting
All scores will be reported on Canvas’ “Grades” function at the earliest opportunity after the
return of the assessment item. In general, students are responsible for ensuring their scores are
recorded correctly, and informing the instructor if there is a discrepancy.
g. Late Work
Students may submit work late twice in the semester without penalty, as long as the work is
submitted within 48 hours of the original deadline. Thereafter, all late work will be given a zero.
h. Grade Allocations


Your final percentage grade will be translated into a letter grade according to the following
table. I round to the nearest full percentage (e.g., 92.5=93). Please note the unusual point
allocations in the C-F range.
100-93: A           77-75: C
92-90: A-           74-72: C-
89-87: B+           71-70: D+
86-83: B            69-68: D
82-80: B-           67-65: D-
79-78: C+           Below 65: F
If you are taking this course on a pass/fail or credit/no credit basis, you must earn at least a 65
to receive credit for the course. Note: If you take the class on a credit/no credit basis or if you
are taking the course pass/fail, you will not be able to advance to the next level of Latin
(LAT507) regardless of your overall grade in the course.
Contacting the Instructor
The instructors will check email for this course during designated email hours (M-F, 8am-5pm).
Under normal circumstances, instructors will reply within 24 hours to emails that are received
during those times. Emails sent during the weekend may not receive an answer until Monday,
but we will do our best to be responsive to urgent matters.
The instructors expect professional and proper format on all emails. Emails without
salutations/greetings (Dear…) or appropriate formatting (punctuation, complete sentences,
etc.) will not be answered.
Often, your queries can be best addressed by referring them to the class, where they will be
most helpful to other students. Therefore, if you have questions about course logistics (e.g.,
What is the homework? When is the next assignment/midterm? What is going to be covered on
the midterm?), you are advised to follow this procedure:
    • First, check the syllabus, the Canvas announcements page, and associated pages, like
         module instruction pages.
    • If that doesn’t work, post your question to Piazza for a fellow student or one of the
         instructors to answer.
    • If your question is not urgent, you can bring it to the instructor’s office hours. If you
         can’t make these sessions, contact your instructor and schedule an alternate meeting
         time.
    • If you still have a question after pursuing these avenues, or the question is more urgent,
         email the instructor; if your question can be answered by consulting Canvas, the
         syllabus, etc., the instructor will direct you to those resources.
Piazza would also be a great place to discuss content-related issues, as well as any other related
course matters you may have discovered as you work through the course.


Since this is a fully online course, technology-related issues can sometimes be a problem. We
invite students experiencing technology-related issues to report them through the affected
platform itself (e.g., Canvas or Piazza).
Urgent and/or sensitive matters, including issues with grade reporting, should be addressed
directly to the instructor.
Other Course Policies
Conduct
Students are expected to behave in a civil and courteous manner towards other class members,
both in face-to-face and online environments.
To encourage this, we require that you agree to an etiquette policy, stating your willingness to
abide by these standards and awareness of the consequences of their transgression. If you are
found to be in violation of these standards, you will receive a written warning from the
instructor. If you continue to violate these standards, we will ban you from the platform in
question (e.g., Piazza), pending a disciplinary discussion with the instructional team. Further
issues will be reported to the relevant authorities.
If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line (BCAL) to discuss your concerns by phone. This service is provided through a partnership
among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),
the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Academic Honesty
Academic dishonesty in any form will not be tolerated. Please familiarize yourself with the
University of Texas’s Code of Conduct: “The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect towards peers and community.”
Any student caught or facilitating cheating on any assignment will receive an F in the course
and immediately be referred to the Dean of Students. In cases where dishonesty is strongly
suspected, I reserve the right to re-examine the student(s). I will however, assume absolute
integrity on your part until shown otherwise. If you are unsure what constitutes academic
dishonesty, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php. It is your
responsibility to become familiar with the contents of this website.


Plagiarism
An important and complicated concern within Academic Honesty is plagiarism. Over time,
informal resources and study guides to our course texts have emerged on the web, and these
are of varying quality and invariably contain errors and misconceptions about the work.
Nonetheless, students are frequently tempted to copy these resources and represent them as
their own work. This is plagiarism, and is expressly forbidden by UT’s standards of conduct.
We have developed sophisticated systems for detecting this, and any student caught
plagiarizing will receive a 0 for that assignment. A second offense will be considered cheating,
and the student will receive an F and be referred to the Dean of Students.
Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Dean of Students at
(512)-471-6259 or see http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. In order to receive
accommodations, you must be registered with Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). This
office will document your disability, inform me of your situation, and instruct me on the
necessary accommodations. If you chose not to register with SSD, I cannot make special
accommodations for you.
Religious Holidays
According to Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code, students shall be excused from
attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. If you will miss class (including exams) to
celebrate a religious holiday, you must notify me AT LEAST 14 days prior to the holiday so that
we can make arrangements for you to make up the assignment. All make-up work must be
completed no later than one week after the missed class.
University Resources
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students. Here are just a few:
    • Sanger Learning and Career Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
    • Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
    • Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
             o if you need urgent help, you can call 512-471-CALL (2255) 24 hours a day, 365
                days a year
             o if you have concerns about a student, faculty, or staff member, you may use the
                Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
                or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
    • Student Veteran Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/veterans/
    • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/


                                 Class Schedule and Deadlines
Week           Items due                         Subject       Wheelock
               6/6: First class day              Orientation
Week 1
               6/12                              Module 1      ch 1-2
               6/15                              Module 2      ch 3-4
Language & Culture assignment 1 (due 6/16)
               6/19                              Module 3      ch 5-7
Week 2
               6/22                              Module 4      ch 8-10
Language & Culture assignment 2 (due 6/21) / Midterm 1 (6/24)
               6/26                              Module 5      ch 11-13
Week 3
               6/29                              Module 6      ch 14-16
Language & Culture assignment 3 (due 6/30)
               7/3                               Module 7      ch 17, 20, 22
Week 4
               7/6                               Module 8      ch 18, 19, 21
Language & Culture assignment 4 (due 7/7)
               7/11                              Module 9:     ch 23, 24
Week 5                                           participles
                                                 Module 10:    ch 25
                                                 ind statement
Final (7/12-13) (using Language & Culture 5)
