University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
Underland
Underland
Project for The Friesenhahn Cave Foundation
Studio Hours MWF 1-5pm
Murray Legge
murray@murraylegge.com
Studio Overview
The studio will introduce beginning students to the underlying
foundations of architecture while allowing more advanced
students to strengthen and refine their abilities. Through a
series of focused design exercises we will develop skills
important to the practice of architecture, including flexibility,
curiosity, and perseverance. We will explore answers to the
following question:
How do you develop an architectural idea?
In studio we will examine techniques for developing an idea by
considering both intention and reaction in the design process.
When starting a new project architects must engage many
diverse constraints and the design process can unfold as a reac-
tion to them: site, program, technical limitations, deadlines etc.
It is essential that they be resolved, but not at the expense of
a broader architectural intention. A balance of intention and
reaction synthesizes a set of mundane solutions into something
beyond itself, something that can bring wonder and meaning to
architecture.
Site and Program
The studio project is sited on the Friesenhahn Cave site
outside of San Antonio. The cave is one of the most impor-
tant paleontological sites in the United States. Homotherium or
Scimitar Tooth Cats lived in the cave more than 15,000 years
ago and used it as their den. The cave’s original formation, with
its descending entry ramp leading deep into the earth, made an
ideal home for the Ice Age cats. This 20,000 year old single-
room den is located on an approximately four acre site, situated
in the midst of the suburban sprawl of San Antonio. The
impressive feline remains originally found in the cave are in the
Texas Memorial Museum on the UT Campus.                                          Above: Homotherium skull found in the cave
                                                                                                               1


University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
Underland
Friensenhahn Cave
 “Friesenhahn Cave is a fossil-rich one-room cave, once named
Bulverde Cave and Bone Cave, located west of U. S. High-
way 281 in north central Bexar County. The cave is a sinkhole
formed in the region’s karst topography. The only entrance, as
documented since the earliest twentieth-century explorations,
is a vertical twenty-eight-foot shaft. The floor of the cave is
relatively flat, measuring thirty by sixty feet, with a seven-foot
ceiling. Due to the wealth of bones and fossils discovered at
the site, George Veni in The Caves of Bexar County described Fri-
esenhahn Cave as “one of the most important paleontological
sites in the United States.” Concordia University, the institu-
tion that is the cave’s steward, has reported that, besides the
La Brea Tar Pits in Los Angeles, “no site in the United States
has yielded a greater variety of significant Pleistocene (Ice Age)
vertebrate fossils.”
Paleontological excavations have started and stopped for over a
century at the Friesenhahn Cave; at times, decades have passed
between excavations. The first known description of the cave
was a survey conducted in December 1915 by D. V. Schucha-
rdt, a student of the Agricultural and Mechanical College at
College Station (now Texas A&M University). He estimated
that the floor of the cave was covered in three feet of fossil-
bearing material. Schuchardt collected samples from eighteen
species that were forwarded to the United States National
Museum (now the Smithsonian’s Arts and Industries Building)
in Washington, D.C.”
David Barklow, Texas State Historical Commission
        Above: Homotherium is thought to have preyed on baby mammoths which they would drag into the cave entry to feed to their kittens
                                                                                                                            2


University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
Underland
Studio Work
The studio will begin with a series of short intense design
exercises of increasing complexity, ending with a final building
project for a public Ice Age (Pleistocene) display and education
building for Concordia University’s School of Natural and Ap-
plied Science. The new building will educate the public about
the subterranean realm beneath their feet and display some of
the 4,000 isolated teeth and bones of more than 30 genera of
Ice Age mammals, reptiles, and birds that were found in the
cave.
                                                                         Above: Homotherium in the Texas Memorial Museum
                                                                                                              3


University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
Underland
Projects
1. Light Study: (one week) A one week exercise using photography of
an interior physical model to experiment with shaping natural light
over the course of a day. You will explore how to create tone and
feeling using natural light.
2. Site Study/Boundary Exercise: (Two weeks) Starting with a visit to the
Cave, both above and below ground, the studio will work on draw-
ings of the site and a design exercise focused on the idea of bound-
ary. We will also survey the cave entrance.
3. Field Building: (Two weeks) In this exercise you will be develop a
small utility field building to support the current activities that are
occurring on site.
4. Education Building: (Eight weeks) The program for the final project
will be an exhibit and educational building, including support ele-
ments. We will follow a design methodology of iterative testing:
developing overall project concepts and ideas through site diagrams
and sketch models. These concepts will then be developed through
plan, section, elevation, and three-dimensional representation.
Vertical Studio Streams Model
Architecture involves a myriad range of technical and cultural issues,
required skills and knowledge. Beginning students will be introduced
to the fundamental principles and skills and ecouraged to focus on
those while more advanced students will be encouraged to develop
projects further in terms of technical resolution. The studio will
be somewhat equally balanced among the four streams; Ordering
Systems, Humans Factors, Context and Construction with the as-
sumption that beginning students, while being introduced to technical
concerns, will be more focused on Ordering Systems and Context.
A balanced average: Ordering Systems 35%, Human Factors 30% Context
30% and Construction 15%
                                                                           Section through the cave showing the geologic composition of the site
                                                                                                                                   4


University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
Underland
Expectations
• Students are expected to be on time and present for all studio. You are responsible for coursework
assigned in your absence. Your peers will be able to fill you in on what you missed. You can also
contact me if more information is needed.
• Extensions and incompletes will not be given in this course, except where there is documented
evidence of a serious problem.
• Besides desk crits, pin-ups, and presentations, various talks may be given in the course that serve as
background to the studio projects. There may be from time to time guest speakers as well as guest
critics.
• You are encouraged to work in the studio. Architecture is an interactive discipline, not merely an
individual pursuit. The criticism of and contact with your colleagues can be as significant as that with
your studio critic.
Studio Culture
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning
encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio offers
an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals, which are
developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large. Stu-
dio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members, and provides the oppor-
tunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities.
The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project-based learning becomes the
foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the school’s core values — broad-
mindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architec-
ture’s fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
Design Conversations: Lecture Series
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the design
conversations taken place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc). Students are
encouraged to participate and be engaged. All students in this studio are expected to attend all the
Jessen Lectures (three per semester by leading practitioners from around the world). The lectures and
the ensuing discussions are an important component of intellectual engagement at the school.
Studio Course Grading Policy
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each
grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria. Student work will be evaluated according
to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absenc-
es, disruptiveness to the class, and late or incomplete work, at the discretion of the Instructor.
Grading for each assignment is broken into three components, scored as less-than-acceptable/compe-
tent (–), acceptable/competent ( • ), and superior (+) , and then averaged over the semester weighted
according to the time devoted, proportionally, to the exercise. A fourth component (participation)
is judged over the entire semester and is used to lean one way or another when final grades occur at
break-points in the A, B, C, D spectrum.
                                                                                                            5


University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
Underland
Product: How complete and handsome the final drawings and models are, and how informative the
process models and drawings are; how clearly ideas are presented at reviews, and how well illustrated
by examples, diagrams, and further analysis.
Effort: How much time has evidently been put into the assignment, that evidence consisting of
number of articles or books read, trial drawings and models made, photographs taken, notes taken,
passages written, lectures gone to, as well as hours spent in studio productively focused on the work at
hand.
Grasp: How deeply the student has gone into understanding, questioning, and researching the nature
of problem(s) posed by the assignment; how far they see the implications of the assignment extend-
ing into architecture and design generally; what knowledge of history and theory they appropriately
bring to working on it.
Participation: This is judged only over the whole semester. How positive and cooperative a presence
was the student in studio, with what attendance record in studio and at lectures, gallery shows, and
symposia? How great was their willingness to engage in respectful dialog with teacher and classmates,
to contribute to student life and studio culture generally?
Grade Descriptions
A/A - Excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual
rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond
what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B - Above Average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues
ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is com-
plete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C - Average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication
and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D - Poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F - Fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this
grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X - Excused Incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation
with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be
completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according
to the School of Architecture policy.
                                                                                                          6


 University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
 Underland
Methodology
Primary subjects of the studio include the design potentials of building and siting. Students will be
expected to produce exquisitely crafted documents of their design proposals at the site, building, and
detail scales. General material and format considerations will be suggested by the instructor through-
out the course, however, investigation and experimentation is strongly encouraged at all stages of
production and design. In addition to digital production methods, portions of the studio process will
include numerous physical models; students should equip their studio workspace appropriately.
Attendance
Punctual and regular attendance is required. With four (4) unexcused absences, the student’s final
grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full let-
ter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only
excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is respon-
sible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (45 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1)
unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known
in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate
to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
Religious Observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations,
for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence
is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take
an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in
advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
Academic Integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic
integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for
official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
                                                                                                            7


University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture Vertical ARC 694 Fall 2019 - Legge
Underland
Care Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for
students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115 https://
cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
Students With Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students
(471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be
presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Security, Safety, And The Studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful
attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should
be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your
colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and do not
leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio mates accountable for the security of your
shared space.
                                                                                                            8
