                     Spring 2020 ALD 118C Speaker Series: Innovate your Future
                                            Wednesdays 3-4 PM
                                                  GEA 105
                      Instructor: Devin Walker, Ph.D. devinwalker@austin.utexas.edu
                           Office Hours: Tuesday 11am-12pm and by appointment
                                                 SSB 4.412
                                  Office: 512.471.1205 / Cell: 3233092432
LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We begin this syllabus by recognizing that we stand on the shared lands and waters of the Comanche
and Tonkawa. We express our respect for the three federally-recognized nations: Alabama-Coushatta,
the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, and the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo, within the state as well as other
Indigenous peoples and nations such as the Karankawa, Caddo, Lipan Apache, Comanche, Wichita,
Coahuiltecan, Neches, Comecrudo, and Mission Indians that have historic ties to these homelands. We
also acknowledge the multiple ways the State of Texas and the residents of this Land have benefitted
from the forced and systematic removal of Native peoples from Texas. Land acknowledgements are a
small step toward correcting the stories and practices that erase Indigenous histories and the ongoing
presence of Indigenous peoples today. As educators and researchers, many of us are complicit in this
erasure, and it is imperative that we recognize, support, and advocate for the sovereignty of Native
nations in our work.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
The objective of this course is to expose students to the various ways in which they can innovate their
future. This course will focus on a core set of skill students need to develop in order to be effective
leaders in the 21st century globalized job market. Students will get to hear from many speakers on
various contemporary issues with an emphasis on developing a global perspective. A core focus of this
course will be to help students think about the ways in which they can start building their brand,
leverage their platform and innovate their future through the development of tangible skills. All lectures,
assignments and activities will be centered around developing the following essential skills:
    1. Social and emotional intelligence
    2. Global Perspective + Mindset
    3. Entrepreneurial Mindset
    4. Verbal communication – Finding your VOICE
    5. Risk taking
    6. Exceling in ambiguous situations
    7. Leading and working with others
    8. Goal setting
    9. Problem solving
    10. Managing a project


CLASS EXPECTATIONS
    1. Be in class on time. We will start promptly at 3:00 PM and end at 3:50 PM.
    2. Ask questions, be engaged, and use this as a platform to learn from highly successful leaders
       about the practical world.
    3. Put away technology during class unless otherwise noted.
TEACHING ASSISTANT ASSIGNMENTS
Your grade for this course will also be based upon the criteria listed below and the instructor’s judgment
regarding the quality of your performance. You will be graded by the course’s teaching assistants,
which are assigned as follows. Please direct all grading questions to your assigned TA.
                             TA                                          Email
                       Alicia Moreno                          alicia.moreno@utexas.edu
                      Enrique Aguayo                         enriqueaguayo@utexas.edu
                        Chase Moore                            chasemoore@utexas.edu
                       Javier Wallace                            jlwallace@utexas.edu
                       Jaylen Wright                          jaylenwright@utexas.edu
                      Elizabeth Gloria                    elizabeth.gloria1997@gmail.com
                        Hannah Hill                            hannah.hill@utexas.edu
GRADES
    1) Participation/Attendance (20%): Students are expected to fully participate by engaging in
       discussions during each class. After each class, there will be a discussion question posted. You
       will have until 11:59 PM of that day to post your response. There will be no excused absences
       and late assignments will not be accepted. Attendance will be taken at the end of each class. A
       few extra credit opportunities will be given throughout the class by your instructors and/or
       teaching assistants throughout the semester.
    2) LinkedIn Profile (20%): Your first assignment is to create a LinkedIn profile. Every profile
       must complete the following sections:
           • experience (resume)
           • intro (short bio)
           • skills
    3) 5 Skillz Videos (5 points each = 25%): Every lecture and activity will be centered around
       various skillz. Throughout the semester, you will need to create 5 short videos (45-60 seconds)
       highlighting one of the skillz that you have and cite an example. Each video must make a
       connection to one of the speakers or classroom experiences. Everyone must upload their video
       and tag #DDCEskillz as well as their TA. Everyone must upload at least 3 videos by the end of
       March and the final 2 in April/May.


4) Reflection Paper: What’s my brand? (35%) Due 4/29: By the end of the course, students are
   expected to turn in a 3-4 page double spaced reflection paper. Some questions to consider are:
      • What did you learn from the various speakers? How does this apply to your life? Your
          brand?
      • What makes you unique?
      • What are the ways in which you can start to curate your brand?
      • What skills do you have that you can leverage in college and in the workforce?
      • What goals do you have for your future? How will you accomplish them?
      • What skills do you need to polish or further develop? Why? How will this serve you in
          the pursuit of your goals?
      • What does it mean to innovate YOUR future? How are you doing this?
                         Tentative Course Outline and Assignment Schedule
                                   *Topics and speakers may change
      DATE                   SPEAKER                                      TOPIC
       1/22                  Dr. Walker                   The value of a Global Perspective
       1/29        Dr. Walker and Mr. Cutkelvin                   Innovate your future
                                                   TA Break-Out
        2/5                               *Turn in - LinkedIn Profile*
                                     *Read Bio aloud to the rest of class*
       2/12                 Ruben Cantu                         Developing your Brand
       2/19               Dr. Ryan Sutton                         Public Speaking 101
       2/26                Stephanie Lang                      The Power of Storytelling
                                                        My Research is Relevant – Sharing the
        3/4                 Julissa Muniz
                                                              voices of incarcerated youth
       3/11
       3/18                                      SPRING BREAK
                                                                        East 11th St.
       3/25                Javier Wallace                   *Class will meet at 912 E. 11th Street*
                                                                   2 groups: 3pm and 4pm
        4/1                  Dr. Walker                           Learning how to trust
        4/8
       4/15
       4/22
       4/29                                                  *Final Reflection paper due*
        5/6                                     Course Evaluations
