AMS370930600.pdf
 American Studies 370/ History 350 L: American Cultural History of Alcohol and
                             Drugs: Crises and Epidemics
Fall 2019                            Dr. Mark Smith
Tuesday/Thursday 11-12:15            Office: Burdine 428
BUR 436BA                            TTh 12:30-1:45
31320/39232                          Phone 512 232-2015
                                     e-mail: mcsmith@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description: Most scholars of alcohol and drug use have concentrated
upon its physiological aspects. It is clear that addiction and craving have a
physical and perhaps even a genetic basis. Yet, as many anthropologists,
sociologists, and historians have pointed out, cultures directly affect the types of
drugs used, how they are used, and for what purposes. In addition, one can
examine a culture's drug use and attitude toward it and often discover a great
deal about the functioning and values of that society. One can also note the
changes over time within a culture. Thus, drug use is not only a cultural product
but also a very useful social and historical descriptor. In this course, we will
study both how American culture affected the use of drugs and attitudes toward
them and how these serve as keys to the changing American intellectual, social,
and political landscape. Our prime goal here is to determine what use of a
certain drug at a certain time tells us about the culture.
        The study of drug use and attitudes toward it is particularly appropriate
to the United States because of its pluralism. Its settlement was roughly
contemporaneous with the first widespread European use and abuse of distilled
spirits, and different racial, ethnic, and religious groups brought their different
drug habits and attitudes with them. As each group insisted upon its own
traditional approach, the issue became one of power, control, and eventually
politics. Racial, ethnic, and class prejudices enter directly into almost every one
of the discussed issues.
        This course, and the instructor in particular, is not particularly interested
in the individual drug experience. What it is interested in why certain societies
turn to certain types of drugs at particular times and how that society responds
to this behavior. In particular, this semester will concentrate on periods when
use of a certain drug is characterized as a crisis and even an epidemic. Moreover,
we will ask ourselves whether these particular cases qualify as crises or
epidemics.
        As we go through the course, the relevance to the present War on Drugs
and the opiate crisis will be obvious. While my major interest and expertise is in
drug policy, I have also worked as a drug counselor and try to place things in an
individual as well as a societal context.
Required texts:
Michael Lerner Dry Manhattan: Prohibition in New York City
Nick Reding Methland: Death and Life of a Small American Town
Beth Macy Dopesick: Dealers, Doctors and the Company That Addicted America


Article Packet from Jenn’s Copying 2518 Guadalupe • 2518@jennscopies.com
•512-482-0779
                             AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 2
Films:
        We will use a number of documentary films in the course. You are
responsible for seeing all but the first outside of class.
HBO/Addiction Project, “Addiction Why Can’t They Just Stop?” (in-class)
Ken Burns/ PBS, “Prohibition” Three Episodes—1. “A Nation of Drunkards”; 2.
“A Nation of Scofflaws”; 3. “A Nation of Hypocrites” (Netflix)
History of Marijuana narrated by Woody Harrelson (originally Weed) (YouTube)
PBS Frontline “The Meth Epidemic”
www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/meth Internet
1986 Special Report: Crack Street (originally 48 Hours on Crack Street)
(YouTube)
PBS Evening News “America Addicted” (PBS News Hour via instructor)
Heroin(e) (Netflix)
Heroin Cape Cod USA (Kanopy)
Rise of Fentanyl (YouTube)
Best Websites
        While there is a remarkable number of websites available on the topic of
alcohol and drugs, a majority seem to be of the Just Say No variety which can’t
get it right in the present or even admit of use in the past. Even more disturbing
because of their potential danger are the amateur sites that tout various drugs as
free from all dangers. As we will see in this course, all drugs have some
potential danger.
        These are the number of sites I use most and mark on my computer.
1. Schaffer Library of Drug Policy
(www.druglibrary.org/schaeffer/misc/driving/contents.htm)
2. Drug War Chronicle (www.stopthedrugwar.org/index.shtml)
3. Erowid-Documenting the Complex Relationship Between Humans and
Psychoactives (www.erowid.org)
        This class will be conducted on a seminar basis. My idea of hell is
listening to anyone (especially myself) for anything over 15 minutes. This
requires regular and on-time attendance, up-to-date reading, and informed
discussion. For a seminar class to work or at least my seminar classes, one has to
be involved and participation is the best way to ensure this.. Class participation
will count 25% of your grade, and you will receive a grade for that at the end of
the course. I keep track of participation on a weekly basis and can give you an
idea of your performance. I reserve the right to give anyone who misses five or
more classes without acceptable excuses an F for the entire course.


                               AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 3
Course Requirements:
 In addition to class participation, your final grade will consist of two reading
exams based almost exclusively on reading and films worth 25% together—10%
on the first and 15% on the second. Again, the goal is to enrich the class as a
whole and to get you as an individual more involved. The exams will consist of
20% matching and 80% short identification questions. There will be 10 marching
and the short IDs will be 8 out of 11 choices. The reading exams will be held on
October 15 and on December 3rd. I will provide sample questions of matching
            th
and identification before the first exam. I reserve the right to give short pop
quizzes if I feel the class is not doing the reading, although I would prefer not to
do so. If I do so, the grades of these pop quizzes will be folded into these grades.
Writing Assignments: This is a writing component class and half your grade will
derive from your papers.
        The first assignment will be a short, class-designed project very early in
the semester. Much of this class will depend on an understanding of the theory
of social construction and the use of anthropology/ethnology in determining
how a society defines a certain drug at a certain time. I will ask you to write a
short four page paper on the social construction of a person, custom, behavior, or
event. The only limitation is that it can not be a drug or a drug behavior. That is,
how does social perception of a thing, phenomena, person, or event cause or at
least influence members of that society to respond in a certain way. Most
importantly, what does it tell us about the culture. Now that we know this what
do we know. An example might be western civilization’s traditional view
toward homosexuality and the cultural reasons behind it. As seen by many this
is seen as victimless so why the stigma? Or one might want to take the opposing
view and examine contemporary views toward homosexuality. You can also be
very specific as in views toward transgender individuals by the subculture of
millennial university students.
        The paper will be due September 19th. This paper will hopefully not only
provide you with a clear understanding of the key theoretical concept of the class
but a quick understanding of my personal expectations for your writing. The
paper will count only 5% toward your final grade.
        The 2nd paper will be a paper that integrates class work and some outside
research. The topic of the paper is why was there a movement to prohibit
alcohol or, indeed, why was there a successful movement to abolish alcohol
when drugs that are seen by many today as more dangerous—tobacco, opiates,
cocaine, etc.—were still widely used. Conversely, it is true that alcohol is one of
the most dangerous physiologically and behaviorally. But why is it legal when
drugs like marijuana and mescaline are criminalized? The paper should touch
on the following themes—what is prohibition, why is prohibition, which drugs
and when are they prohibited, and how does this make sense from a cultural
perspective.


                              AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 4
        While you should have most of the material for alcohol from your
reading, you will have to use some outside reading. You must have a minimum
of three outside sources although things like Wikipedia don’t count. This paper
is a combination of thought and research while the first paper is primarily
thought. The length should be from 7 to 10 pages. Longer papers aren’t, of
course, always better but they often show more thought. It will count 15% of
your final grade and will be due October 23rd.
        The third paper will be a more traditional research paper. The central
theme of the seminar is an examination of periods when drug use reaches, at
least in the eyes of the society, crisis proportions. This, of course, does not mean
that use is in reality that extensive although it certainly may. The topic for the
paper is to examine a crisis/epidemic or an aspect of one. Possible topics might
include LSD in the early Haight-Ashbury or morphine use among well-to-do
women in the late 19 century. You may deal with one of the crises we have
                        th
studied as long as it is an aspect and not just a repetition of the class. For
example, you might write a paper on women’s role in the first temperance
movement or crack in Miami. Examining drug crises in other countries is also a
possibility. Examples might include opium use in 19 century China (the worst
                                                         th
real drug crisis known)’ crockodil in Russia, on alcohol use on American Indian
reservations. I will require the selection of a topic by October 29 . You may
                                                                    th
change your topic later, but you need to speak with me first. This is the most
important grade with 30% of the final grade. It is due in my box in the American
Studies office/ Burdine 432A on December 11th by 5 p.m. I will also accept final
papers by e-mail. I will notify you within 24 hours of receiving your paper. If
you don’t hear from me, please contact me.
Cultural Diversity Flag
        The cultural diversity flag refers to the various multicultural aspects of a
culture, in this case that of the United States. Drugs and alcohol are excellent
examples of this as different ethnic, gender, racial, and economic groups select
one drug over another. Any drug that has ever been prohibited in the US has
been associated with a minority cultural group. Ethnic workers and alcohol led
to Prohibition. Mexicans and Mexican-Americans in the 1930s for marijuana is
another example. Then there are hallucinogenics and the hippies of the 1960s.
U.S. HISTORY REQUIREMENT (Core Component 060)
        This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history
component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following four
core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board:
communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal responsibility, and social
responsibility.


                              AMS SYLLABUS page 5
Writing Flag
       This course like all AMS 370s and HIS 350Ls requires a writing
component. One half of this class’ final grade will come from three writing
assignments, most from the final writing paper. But it will also satisfy the
writing component itself.
.
Students With Disabilities
       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6257.
Plagiarism
       Like my colleagues, I absolutely despise plagiarism and cheating of any
type. I will be understanding of almost anything except this. If I find you
plagiarizing, the best that can happen to you is an F in the class. The worst is
recommending to your Dean that you be dismissed from the university. I am
grateful that I have had so few cases of cheating in my career. Trying not to
sound preachy, it seems to me that this is about respect—respect in yourself, for
your fellow students, and between you and I. And, yes, I did catch someone
plagiarizing recently.


                     AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 6
Course Calendar
August    29 Introduction
September 3 Drugs and Addiction in Contemporary America
            In class film “Addiction”
         5   Where Are We Now?
             Drug War Chronicle “The Year in Drugs I: The Top Domestic Drug
             Policy Stories of 2018”
             Drug War Chronicle “The Year in Drugs II: Good, Bad, and Ugly
             Global Drug Policy in 2018”
             Drug War Chronicle “5 Things We Know after 5 Years of Legal
             Marijuana in Colorado”
             Drug War Chronicle “What’s Killing Us: The Ten Drugs Most
             Implicated in Overdose Deaths”
          10 Social Construction Theory
             Howard S. Becker “Deviance and the Response of Others”;
             Rudi Matthee “Exotic Substances: The Introduction and Global
             Spread of Tobacco, Coffee, Cocoa, Tea and Distilled Liquor, 16 to
                                                                           th
             18 Centuries,”
                th
             Jerri A. Husch “Culture and US Drug Control Policy: Toward a
             New Conceptual Framework”
          12 Cultural/Anthropological Construction of Drugs
             George Carstairs “Bhang and Alcohol: Cultural Factors in the
             Choice of Intoxicants
             Dwight Heath “Drinking Patterns of the Bolivian Camba”
             James Nason “Sardines and Other Fried Fish: Consumption of
             Alcoholic Beverages on a Micronesian Island,”
          17 The Beginning of Temperance
             Rorabaugh, chap. 7
             William Coggshall, “Little Peleg, the Drunkard’s Son”
             Neil Dow “History of a Neighborhood”
             J. T. Crane “A True Story”
             Ian Tyrell “Temperance and Economic Change in the Antebellum
             North”
          19 The Movement Toward National Prohibition
             Ken Burns “Prohibition” “A Nation of Drunkards” Part 1 (Netflix)
             Jon M. Kingsdale “The Poor Man’s Club”
             Madelon Powers “Decay from Within: The Inevitable Doom of the
             American Saloon”
             FIRST PAPER DUE


                          AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 7
        24 National Prohibition and the Big Apple
             Lerner, Manhattan, chap 1-4
         26 Prohibition and Its Ills
             Lerner, chap 5-8
             Burns Prohibition “A Nation of Scofflaws” part 2 (Netflix)
October   1 The End of Prohibition
             Ken Burns, Prohibition, “A Nation of Hypocrites” part 3 (Netflix)
             Lerner, Manhattan, chap 9-12
           3 Criminalization of Marijuana
               Harry Anslinger "Marihuana: Assassin of Youth" American
               Magazine (1937)
               “Marijuana and Mexican Americans: An Overview”
                film “History of Marijuana” produced and narrated by Woody
                Harrelson original title “Weed”
             8 Marijuana and the Drug War
             Arnold Trebach “War Orphan” The Great Drug War and Radical
             Proposals That Could Make America Safe Again (1987)
             Bruce Mirken “Marijuana and Media: Propaganda and Sloppy
             Reporting in the US Media Market,” Pot Politics: Marijuana and the
             Costs of Prohibition (2007)
          10 Where Are We Now?
             Daniel Egan and Jeffrey Miron “The Budgetary Implications of
             Marijuana Prohibition,” Pot Politics (2007)
             Patrick Radden Keefe “Buzzkill” New Yorker (November 2013)
          15 FIRST READING QUIZ
             Dry Manhattan, Packet, Drug War Chronicle to Buzzkill, films
             “Addiction,” “Ken Burns Prohibition-three episodes,” “History of
             Marijuana,”
           17 Origins of Amphetamines
             Nicholas Rasmussen “America’s First Amphetamine Epidemic,
             1929-1971 with Implications for the Present,” American Journal of
             Public Health (2008)
             see “The Meth Epidemic”
             http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/meth/


                        AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 8
           22 Meth and Rural America
          Nick Redding Methland: The Death and Life of a Small American
          Town, Prologue and Part 1
          Brian Dew, et. Al. “Social and Environmental Factors and Their
          influence on Drug Use Vulnerability and Resiliency in Rural
          Populations” Journal of Rural Health (2008)
          24 The Implications of the Midwestern Drug Epidemic
          finish Nick Redding Methland: The Death and Life of a Small
          American Town
          Paul Gaita “Rural America Threatened by Twin Epidemics”
          29 Crack and the Media
          Craig Reinarmann and Harry Levine, “The Crack Attack:
          Politics and Media in the Crack Scare” in Crack in America (1997)
           James Orcutt and J. Blake Turner “Shocking Numbers and
           Graphic Accounts”
            See 1986 “Special Report: Crack Street” (originally 48 Hours on
          Crack Street) (YouTube)
          PAPER TOPICS DUE
          31 Crack, Race, and the City
             Phillippe Bourgois “In Search of Horatio Alger: Culture and
             Ideology in the Crack Economy,” Crack in America
             Paul Goldstein, et. al. “Crack and Homicide in New York City: A
             Case Study in the Epidemiology of Violence,” Crack in America
November  5 Crack, Race and Texas
          William Finnegan “Deep East Texas” New Yorker (1994)
          Nate Blakeslee “Color of Justice: An Undercover Drug Bust Opens
          Old Wounds in Tulia Texas” Austin Chronicle (2000)
          7 Crack, Gender, and the Bill of Rights
             Loren Siegel “the Pregnancy Police Fight the War on Drugs”
             Crack in America
            “Texas DA Says Doctors Must Turn in Drug Using
            Women” Drug War Chronicle
             Susan Okie, “The Epidemic That Wasn’t” (2009)
             Libby Copeland “Oxybots: Instead of Learning from Unfounded
              Hysteria of the Crack Baby Era,” Slate (2018)
         12 The Most Dangerous Drug Rises Again
          “America Addicted” (2017) (from instructor)
           Katherine Seelye, “In Heroin Crisis, White Families Seek Gentler
           War on Drugs”


            Katherine West Savali “Gentler War on Drugs Is a Smack in Black
           America’s Face”
                         AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 9
           14 The Pharmaceutical Epidemic
              Beth Macy Dopesick: Dealers, Doctors and the Drug Company
              That Addicted America, Part 1
              Beth Macy “They Were All Lawyered Up and Rudy Gulianied
              Up” Politico (2018)
              Art Van Zee “The Promotion and Marketing of Oxycontin:
              Commercial Triumph, Public Health Tragedy” American Journal
              of Public Health (2009)
              “The Small-Town Doctor Taking on the Billionaire Blamed for
              America’s Opioid Crisis,” ABC News (March 18, 2019)
            19 Heroin and the Heartland
               Macy Dopesick Part 2
                Film “Heroin(e) (Netflix)
               Margaret Talbot “The Addicts Next Door” New Yorker (2017)
            21 Rise of the Middle Class Junkie
               Macy Dopesick Part 3
              film “Heroin Cape Cod” (Kanopy)
              American Statesman “We Are Not Immune: How the Opioid
              Crisis Is Hitting Central Texas” (2018)
              Social Workers Health Policy “Five Fast Facts about the Opioid
              Crisis in Texas” (2018)
           26 Fentanyl—Beginning or the End?
              Drug War Chronicle “Study: Crackdowns on Heroin, Pain Pills
              Give Rise to Fentanyl Overdose Epidemic” (2018)
              Martha Bebinger “Fentanyl-Linked Deaths: The Us Epidemic’s
              Third Wave Begins” NPR (2019)
              film BBC 3 “The Rise of Fentanyl—Drug Addiction on I-95”
              (YouTube)
December 3 SECOND QUIZ
            Methland, Dopesick, Packet Rasmussen to Bebinger, films Meth
           Epidemic, 48 Hours, America Addicted, Heroin(e), Heroin Cape
           Cod, Rise of Fentanyl
            5 No Class
          11 THIRD AND FINAL PAPER-- A DRUG AND IT HISTORICAL
            PERIOD AND/OR CULTURE DUE
            Paper is due either in my mailbox or via e-mail. You are
            responsible for insuring the e-mail arrives. Always keep a copy
            of your paper.


                                AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 10
AMS 370/HIS 350L CULTURAL HISTORY OF ALCOHOL AND DRUGS
1. Drug War Chronicle “The Year in Drugs I: The Top Domestic Drug Policy
Stories of 2018” (December 20, 2018)
2. Drug War Chronicle “The Year in Drugs II: Good, Bad, and Ugly Global Drug
Policy in 2018” (December 28, 2018)
3. Drug War Chronicle “5 Things We have Learned After 5 Years of Legal
Marijuana in Colorado,”( January 16, 2018(
4. Drug War Chronicle “What’s Killing Us: The Ten Drugs Most Implicated in
Overdose Deaths” (December 19, 2018)
5.Howard S. Becker “Deviance and the Response of Others” Outsiders: Studies in
the Sociology of Deviance (1963)
6. Rudi Matthee “Exotic Substances: The Introduction and Global Spread of
Tobacco, Coffee, Cocoa, Tea, and Distilled Liquor. 16 to 18 Centuries,” Drugs
                                                     th    th
and Narcotics in History, ed. Roy Porter and Mikulas Teich (1995)
7. Jerri Husch “Culture and US Drug Policy: Toward a New Conceptual
Framework” Daedalus 121 (Summer 1992)
8. George Carstairs "Bhang and Alcohol: Cultural Factors in the Choice of
Intoxicants" Marihuana Papers (1966)
9. Dwight Heath "Drinking Patterns of the Bolivian Camba” Quarterly Journal
(1958)
10. James Nason “Sardines and Other Fried Fish: Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages on a Micronesian Island,” Beliefs, Behaviors, and Alcoholic Beverages
(1979)
11. W.J. Rorabaugh The Alcoholic Republic, chapter 7, Oxford Press, 1979
12. William Coggshall, “Little Peleg, the Drunkard's Son," American Temperance
Magazine (1854)
13. Neal Dow "The Story of a Neighborhood" ibid.
14. J.T. Crane "A True Story" ibid.


15. Ian Tyrell “Temperance and Economic Change in the Ante-bellum North,”
Alcohol, Reform and Society: The Liquor Issue in Social Context, ed. Jack Blocker
(1979)
                             AMS 370 SYLLBUS page 11
16. Jon Kingsdale “The Poor Man’s Club: Social Functions of the Urban Working
Class Saloon,” The American Man, ed. Elizabeth and Joseph Pleck (1980)
17. Madelon Powers “Decay from Within: The Inevitable Doom of the American
Saloon,” Drinking, ed. Barrows and Room (1991)
18. Harry Anslinger "Marihuana: Assassin of Youth" American Magazine (1937)
19. “Marijuana and Mexican Americans: An Overview” (unpublished)
20. Arnold Trebach “War Orphan” The Great Drug War and Radical Proposals
That Could Make America Safe Again (1987)
21. Bruce Mirken “Marijuana and Media: Propaganda and Sloppy Reporting in
the US Media Market,” Pot Politics: Marijuana and the Costs of Prohibition
(2007)
22. Daniel Egan and Jeffrey Miron “The Budgetary Implications of Marijuana
Prohibition,” Pot Politics (2007)
23. Patrick Radden Keefe “Buzzkill” New Yorker (November 2013)
24. Nicholas Rasmussen “America’s First Amphetamine Epidemic, 1929-1971
with Implications for the Present,” American Journal of Public Health (2008)
25. Brian Dew, et. Al. “Social and Environmental Factors and Their Influence on
Drug Use Vulnerability and Resiliency in Rural Populations” Journal of Rural
Health (2008)
26. Paul Gaita “Rural America Threatened by Twin Epidemics”
27. Craig Reinarmann and Harry Levine “The Crack Attack: Politics and Media
in the Crack Scare” Reinarmann and Levine Crack in America (1997)
28. James Orcutt and J. Blake Turner “Shocking Numbers and Graphic Accounts:
Quantified Images of Drug Problems in the Print Media” Social Problems (May
1993)
29. Phillippe Bourgois “In Search of Horatio Alger: Culture and Ideology in the
Crack Economy,” Crack in America (1997)
30. Paul Goldstein, et. al. “Crack and Homicide in New York City: A Case Study
in the Epidemiology of Violence,” Crack in America (1997)


31.. William Finnegan “Deep East Texas” New Yorker (1994)
                          AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 12
32. Nate Blakeslee “Color of Justice: An Undercover Drug Bust Opens Old
Wounds in Tulia Texas” Austin Chronicle (2000)
33. Loren Siegel “The Pregnancy Police Fight the War on Drugs,” Reinarmann
and Levine Crack in America, 249-
34. Drug War Chronicle Newbrief: “Texas DA Says Doctors Must Turn in
Pregnant Women” Issue 357 (October 8, 2004)
35. Susan Okie, “The Epidemic That Wasn’t” New York Times (January 27, 2009)
36. Libby Copeland “Oxytots: Instead of Learning from the Unfounded Hysteria
of the Crack Era, We’re Repeating It” Slate (December 7, 2014)
37. Katherine Seelye “In Heroin Crisis, White Families Seek Gentler War on
Drugs’ New York Times (2015)
38. Kristen West Savali “Gentler War on Drugs for Whites Is a Smack in Black
America’s Face” The Root (November 8, 2015)
39. Beth Macy “They Were All Lawyered Up and Rudy Gulianied Up” Politico
(2018)
40. Art Van Zee “The Promotion and Marketing of Oxycontin: Commercial
Triumph, Public Health Tragedy” American Journal of Public Health (2009)
41. “The Small-Town Doctor Taking on the Billionaire Blamed for America’s
Opioid Crisis,” ABC News (March 18, 2019)
42. Margaret Talbot “The Addicts Next Door,” New Yorker (June 5, 2017)
43. American Statesman “We Are Not Immune: How the Opioid Crisis Is Hitting
Central Texas” (2018)
44. Social Workers Health Policy Group “Five Fast Facts about the Opioid Crisis
in Texas” (2018)
45. Drug War Chronicle “Study: Crackdowns on      Heroin, Pain Pills Give Rise to
Fentanyl Overdose Epidemic” (2018)
46. Martha Bebinger “Fentanyl-Linked Deaths: The Us Epidemic’s Third Wave
Begins” NPR (2019)


