                                                        CE 341
                         INTRODUCTION TO ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
                                               Summer 2020 Syllabus
Due to the online-learning format that is required this summer, we will be using multiple methods for delivering
lecture material. Some lectures will be (1) pre-recorded (in Pantopto in Canvas) and consumed per your
convenience, and other lectures will be (2) delivered live through Zoom (and recorded for those who can’t make
it). Regular homeworks, tests, and a final exam (where you scan and upload your solutions as a .pdf to Canvas)
also will be utilized.
UNIQUE NUMBER:                  75395
INSTRUCTOR:                     Dr. Lynn E. Katz and Dr. Mary Jo Kirisits
                                Phone: 471-0071/232-7120
                                E-mail: lynnkatz@mail.utexas.edu or kirisits@utexas.edu
OFFICE HOURS:                   Attendance at office hours is optional but highly suggested. Office hours will
                                be held live via Zoom on Tuesdays and Sundays, 5:30-6:30 pm. Zoom meeting
                                links will appear on your calendar in Canvas.
COURSE TIME:                    What would have been our normal, in-person course meeting time (MWTh 12:00-
                                2:30) now will be a live Zoom lecture or a live Zoom problem-solving session (to
                                go with a pre-recorded Panopto lecture). See lecture details as follows.
LECTURES:                       Some lectures will be (1) pre-recorded (in Pantopto in Canvas) and consumed
                                asynchronously per your convenience, and other lectures will be (2) delivered
                                synchronously through Zoom and recorded for those who can’t make it.
     1. For the pre-recorded lectures on Panopto, we will follow a typical lecture-style format and include
        Powerpoint-based material, which will be posted at the same time as the Panopto video. Additionally,
        online concept-check quizzes (in Canvas) will be utilized after the lecture to ensure that you understand
        key concepts and that you have completed that lecture in time for the next lecture. (This 6-week class
        moves quickly, and it is important to keep up). Thus, these concept-check quizzes will be graded to
        encourage you to keep up with the lectures. In conjunction with pre-recorded lectures, the regularly
        scheduled class time will be used for a Zoom discussion/problem-solving session associated with the
        material presented in the pre-recorded lecture and to answer any questions. No formal lecture will be
        presented during the regularly scheduled class time when the lecture material is available on Panopto. For
        students who cannot make the normal Zoom discussion time (e.g., due to work, other recurring constraints,
        or technical difficulties on a particular day), we will setup an after-hours session where students can work
        together on the problems; all students in the after-hours session will be required to arrange a time to speak
        with the professor (e.g., during office hours) to present their solutions and ask associated questions.
     2. For the synchronous Zoom lectures, will follow a typical lecture-style format and include Powerpoint-
        based material along with in-class problems that we will work on in breakout sessions. The Powerpoint
        slides will be posted the evening before the lecture (see schedule). Online concept-check quizzes (in
        Canvas) will be utilized after the lecture to ensure that you understand key concepts. Students who
        cannot make the normal Zoom lecture times (e.g., due to work, other recurring constraints, or technical
        difficulties on a particular day) must review the recorded Zoom lecture and complete all problems
        associated with the breakout sessions; we will setup an after-hours session where students can work
        together on the problems, and all students in the after-hours session will be required to arrange a time to
        speak with the professor (e.g., during office hours) to present their solutions and ask associated
        questions.


 OBJECTIVES:                 This course is designed to introduce the student to the principles of environmental
                             engineering, with quantitative evaluation of the environmental, economic, and
                             technical problems involved in control of pollutants of the air, water and land.
PREREQUISITES:               CH 302 and 319F, or consent of instructor.
COMPUTER:                    Proficiency with computers and familiarity with a spreadsheet program like Excel
                             is expected. Ability to use the Internet is also expected.
TEXT:                        The required text is Environmental Engineering: Fundamentals, Sustainability,
                             Design, 2nd ed, by James R. Mihelcic and Julie Beth Zimmerman (ISBN:
                             9781118741498)
ACADEMIC GOALS               This course will introduce the student to the various areas within environmental
                             engineering and their associated principles. Topics include mass and energy balances,
                             environmental chemistry, risk assessment, air quality, water quality, drinking water
                             treatment, and wastewater treatment. By the end of the course, you will be able to do
                             the following major tasks (a more detailed outline of goals is provided at the end of
                             this document):
  1. Write and solve mass and energy balances in the appropriate units.
  2. Balance chemical reactions; write and solve the associated chemical equilibria and rate law expressions.
  3. Mathematically describe the mass transfer and partitioning of contaminants between phases.
  4. Quantify health risks for exposure to a contaminant.
  5. Identify sources of aqueous pollution and indoor and outdoor air pollution; calculate pollutant concentrations
     within natural and engineered environments.
  6. Describe a typical treatment train in a drinking water or wastewater treatment plant.
CLASS FORMAT:                Lectures supplemented with reading, homework, quizzes, tests, and article
                             summary.
GRADING:                     Concept-check Quizzes                   15%
                             Tests                                   66%
                             Homework                                11%
                             Article Summary                         5%
                             Professionalism                         3%
                             Any problems, personal or otherwise, affecting grades should be brought to the
                             instructors’ attention. We will use +/- grading.
HOMEWORK POLICY: On homework, unless otherwise stated, you may work in groups. However, each
                             student must turn in their own assignment. Using homework or homework
                             solutions from previous semesters is not allowed.
                             Homework will be graded using the following scale and the grader will subtract 1
                             point for a problem that is sloppy or has a lack of systematic presentation.


   Points                                             Description
 5        Correct solution, both methodologically and numerically; carefully presented, easy to follow.
 4        Correct methodologically, but with minor computational or table look-up errors, leading to
          erroneous final result.
 3        Some conceptual error(s) but correct general approach.
 2        Major conceptual errors.
 1        Completely missed the point of the problem but made some attempt at a solution.
 0        Did not attempt problem.
QUIZZES:                 There will be a concept-check quiz in Canvas associated with each lecture.
EXAMINATIONS:            There will be six tests. Each test will be take-home and closed book. The test
                         will be posted at 9 am on the scheduled day on Canvas; then, you should work out
                         your solutions in the allotted time period, scan your solved test as a SINGLE .pdf
                         (using Camscanner or another similar program via your phone or a traditional
                         flatbed scanner), and then upload to Canvas. For each test, you may work for 1
                         hour (extend accordingly if you have academic accommodations).
                         The tests will cover lecture material, assigned reading material, and articles. A
                         class equation sheet will be prepared and distributed prior to the tests. Missed tests
                         may be made up only if the reason for missing was illness or some other
                         documented emergency.
                         This take-home testing format depends on your integrity, and we know that we
                         can count on you to rise to the occasion. Be the best version of you! Do your
                         own work, and do not utilize any outside resource (e.g., other people, problem
                         solutions, other printed or electronic resources) in the completion of your test.
ARTICLE SUMMARY          The concepts in this class provide a foundation for understanding a range of local,
                         national, and global environmental issues. The problem-solving skills that you are
                         learning as an engineer provide a unique lens through which to critically evaluate
                         environmental challenges and potential solutions. In this class, each of you will
                         have an opportunity to lead a discussion of a current environmental issue that
                         relates to our course content. We will read several articles that highlight relevant
                         environmental issues. For each article, two students will lead a ten-minute
                         discussion with the class. The two presenters will prepare four slides on the
                         article that will address:
                         1. The nature of the environmental issue
                         2. The key facts provided by the author to support their claim
                         3. At least one potential solution to the environmental issue that addresses both
                             technical and social considerations
                         4. At least one slide that puts the issue in the context of impacts on you, your
                             community, or your future
                         For students who are unable to attend live Zoom lectures, you can provide a video
                         for your article summary; then, students and professors will engage in a discussion
                         with you using the Discussion feature of Canvas.


COURSE EVALUATION An evaluation of the course and instructors will be conducted at the end of the
                   semester using the approved UT Course/Instructor evaluation forms.
DISHONESTY         Be honest. Academic dishonesty includes the following: lying, copying another
                   person’s homework or using old homework/solutions, cheating on exams,
                   allowing another person to copy your homework or exam (i.e., complicity in
                   academic dishonesty), and plagiarism. If you are caught in an act of academic
                   dishonesty, you will receive a grade of 0 for that assignment or exam. Students
                   who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to additional
                   disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
                   dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, other
                   students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will
                   be strictly enforced. For additional information, see the Dean of students’ website
                   and University General Information Catalog at:
                   http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ and http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
                   information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/
ATTENDANCE         Regular, on-time attendance in the discussion sessions (or after-hour discussion
                   sessions) is expected in accordance with the University's General Information
                   catalog and the Cockrell School of Engineering policy (see the section on
                   Attendance in the Undergraduate Catalog). Attendance at the discussion sessions
                   will be taken into consideration for the professional evaluation grade.
PRIVACY ISSUES     Web-based, password-protected class sites are associated with all academic
                   courses taught at the University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments, and other
                   information may be available at these sites. Site activities may include exchanging
                   e-mail, engaging in class discussions, and exchanging files. In addition, electronic
                   class rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their
                   names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory
                   information in the Office of the Registrar, Student Academic Records window,
                   Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information, see
                   the Course Schedule or General Information Catalog at:
                   http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/.
DISABLED STUDENTS  The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
                   accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
                   contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
                   Students with Disabilities, 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
                   http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
IMPORTANT DATES    From the 1st through the 4th class day, an undergraduate student can drop a
                   course via the web and receive a refund, if eligible. From the 5th through the
                   university’s academic drop deadline, a student may Q drop a course with approval
                   from the Dean, and departmental advisor.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS By UT-Austin policy, a student who misses classes or other required activities,
                   including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform
                   the instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements
                   can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
                   absence. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-
                   procedures/attendance/


EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PLAN
                   Emergency Preparedness means being ready, and it takes an effort by all of us to
                   create and sustain an effective emergency preparedness system. You are your own
                   best first responder. Please use https://preparedness.utexas.edu/welcome-
                   emergency-preparedness as a resource to better understand emergency
                   preparedness at the university, and how you can become part of and contribute to
                   the preparedness community. To monitor emergency communications for specific
                   instructions go to utexas.edu/emergency. To report an issue (none emergency) call
                   512-471-4441. In case of emergency, call 911.


                            Course Topics and Assignment Schedule
#  Day Date    Topic       Homework/Test                      Concept-check   Article Lecturer
                                                              Quiz            Summary
1  Th  6/4/20  1-Intro and Hmk 1 assigned                     Quiz 1 due –            Kirisits/
               Units                                          midnight                Katz
2  M   6/8/20  2-Mass      Hmk 1 due – 9 am                   Quiz 2 due –            Kirisits
               Balance I   Hmk 2 assigned                     midnight
3  W   6/10/20 3-Mass      Test 1 (Units); posted at 9 am on  Quiz 3 due –            Kirisits
               Balance II  6/10/20 and completed test must    midnight
                           be uploaded to Canvas by 9 am on
                           6/11/20
4  Th  6/11/20 4-Mass                                         Quiz 4 due –    X       Katz
               Balance III                                    midnight
5  M   6/15/20 5-Environ   Hmk 2 due – 9 am                   Quiz 5 due –            Katz
               Chem I      Hmk 3 assigned                     midnight
6  W   6/17/20 5-Environ   Test 2 (Mass Balance): posted at 9                         Katz
               Chem I      am on 6/17/20 and completed test
                           must be uploaded to Canvas by 9
                           am on 6/18/20
7  Th  6/18/20 6-Environ                                                      X       Kirisits
               Chem II
8  M   6/22/20 6-Environ   Hmk 3 due – 9 am                   Quiz 6 due –            Kirisits
               Chem II     Hmk 4 assigned                     midnight
9  W   6/24/20 7–Environ   Test 3 ( Environ Chem I); posted                           Kirisits
               Micro       at 9 am on 6/24/20 and completed
                           test must be uploaded to Canvas
                           by 9 am on 6/25/20
10 Th  6/25/20 8-Risk                                         Quizzes 7 and 8 X       Katz
               Assessment                                     due - midnight
11 M   6/29/20 9- Water    Hmk 4 due – 9 am                   Quiz 9 due –            Katz
               Quality I   Hmk 5 Assigned                     midnight
12 W   7/1/20  10-Water    Test 4 (Environ Chem II, Risk,                             Katz
               Quality II  Environ Micro); posted at 9 am on
                           7/1/20 and completed test must be
                           uploaded to Canvas by 9 am on
                           7/2/20
13 Th  7/2/20  11-                                            Quizzes 10 and  X       Kirisits
               Drinking                                       11 due-midnight
               Water and
               Wastewater
               Treatment
14 M   7/6/20  12 – Air    Hmk 5 due – 9 am                   Quiz 12 due -           Kirisits
               Quality                                        midnight
15 W   7/8/20  13-Energy                                      Quiz 13 due -           Katz
               Balance                                        midnight
16 Th  7/9/20  Course                                                         X       Katz/
               Review                                                                 Kirisits
   Sa  7/11/20 Final test  Test 5 (Water Quality I and II,
                           Drinking Water, Wastewater, Air
                           Quality, and Energy Balance);
                           posted at 9 am on 7/11/20 and
                           completed test must be uploaded to
                           Canvas by 9 am on 7/12/20


                                    COURSE OBJECTIVES
  Units/Mass Balances/Energy Balance
  1. Understand the concepts of mass, moles, concentrations, and mass and molar flow rates.
  2. Understand the types of units that are used to characterize those concepts listed in Item (1).
  3. Know how to use and convert between units of measurement for gas and liquid systems.
  4. Be able to perform a mass balance on a plug flow system, a continuous stirred tank reactor
      (CSTR) and a system consisting of two or more reactors in series.
  5. Be able to determine which type of system (e.g., plug flow or a CSTR) best represents a natural
      system such as a lake or river.
  6. Be able to incorporate a zero-, first- and second-order reaction term into the mass balance.
  7. Understand the meaning of steady state, accumulation, and conservative and non-conservative
      materials.
  8. Be able to distinguish forms of energy, write and use energy balance equations, calculate
      temperature rise from energy flux.
  9. Understand the relationship between heat and enthalpy.
  10. Understand thermodynamic processes and systems.
  Environmental Chemistry
  1. Know how to balance chemical reactions.
  2. Know how to determine the amount of product formed and/or reactants used based on
      stoichiometry.
  3. Be able to write equilibrium expressions for chemical reactions and to use the results to calculate
      the equilibrium distribution of chemical species.
  4. Be able compare and discuss the magnitude of the equilibrium constant.
  5. Understand the concept of pH and be able to calculate pH and use it to solve for the distribution
      of products in acid/base reactions.
  6. Be able to distinguish between equilibrium and kinetics.
  7. Be able to write rate law expressions from reactions, both elementary and non-elementary
      reactions.
  8. Be able to write rate law expressions (elementary and non-elementary).
  9. Be able to solve zero-, first- and second-order rate law expressions.
      Be able to incorporate rate laws into mass balance expressions and solve.
Mass Transfer between Environmental Phases
  1. Understand the concepts of equilibrium partitioning and mass transfer between phases, and be
      able to distinguish between the two concepts.
  2. Understand the concept of aqueous solubility; what it means, where it is important, factors that
      affect it, and how it is used in environmental engineering calculations.
  3. Understand the concept of vapor pressure; what it means, where it is important, factors that
      affect it, and how it is used in environmental engineering calculations.
  4. Understand the concept of Henry’s Law; what it means, where it is important, factors that affect
      it, and how it is used in environmental engineering calculations.
  5. Understand the concept of octanol-water partition coefficient; what it means, where it is
      important, factors that affect it, and how it is used in environmental engineering calculations.
  6. Understand the concept of adsorption and be able to apply various adsorption equations to
      quantify the mass of adsorbent required or the equilibrium concentration that will be achieved
      under various scenarios
  7. Understand the fundamental principles associated with cross-media mass transfer; relevant rate
      expressions, influencing factors, and applications.


Environmental Microbiology
1. Be able to define key words including pathogen, indicator organism, virus, bacteria, protozoa.
2. Be able to identify the key microorganisms associated with waterborne disease.
3. Be able to describe the methods for removing each type of pathogen from water.
4. Be able to describe how each the concentration of each pathogen type is measured.
5. Be able to identify the key properties of an indicator organism.
6. Be able to describe how microorganisms are regulated by EPA.
Risk Assessment
1. Be able to quantify daily intake, carcinogenic risk and non-carcinogenic risk.
2. Be able to interpret and explain the utility and limitations associated with dose/response curves.
    Understand the meaning of terms such as NOAEL, LOAEL, and RfD.
3. Be able to identify and quantify exposure pathways to be able to estimate risk using mass
    balance approaches.
Natural Water Contaminant Transport
1. Be able to describe the different types of point source and non-point source water pollution
    problems.
2. Be able to describe the various types of water quality contaminants found in water.
3. Be able to describe the importance of oxygen in water and the impact of other nutrients.
4. Be able to explain oxygen demand in an aqueous system and how it is measured.
5. Be able to calculate BOD5 and ultimate BOD from laboratory data.
6. Be able to calculate the steady-state oxygen transport in a stream.
7. Understand the importance of, and be able to describe the types of particulates that occur in
    natural waters, how they are measured, and their impacts on water quality.
Water and Wastewater
1. Be able to identify and describe various pollutants of concern in drinking water.
2. Be able to distinguish primary and secondary standards and MCLs and MCLGs.
3. Be able to describe a typical flow train through a water treatment plant and the objectives of
    various stages of treatment.
4. Be able to describe a typical flow train through a wastewater treatment plant and the objectives
    of various stages of treatment.
Air
1. Be able to identify the major sources and effects of the criteria air pollutants.
2. Be able to determine whether a region is in compliance with a NAAQS standard.
3. Be able to describe the major pathways for ozone formation. Be able to discuss how NOx and
    hydrocarbons contribute to ozone formation.
4. Understand the general nature of the earth’s atmosphere and its important layers.
5. Be able to identify greenhouse gases and understand the theory behind the greenhouse effect.
6. Be able to identify sources of indoor air pollution and to calculate the concentration of pollutants
    in indoor environments.
7. Be able to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of various renewable energy sources.
