David (D.S.) Cohen        ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu     Office Hours: Wednesdays from 10 to Noon, or         Fall 2019
                                                         by Appointment
AET 304: Foundations of Art and Entertainment Technologies
Course Sections
 Instructor              TAs                            UID            Meeting Times          Room
 David (D.S.) Cohen      Kyle Henkel                    20370          Tues-Thurs             RLP 0.130
                         Megan Holden                                  8-9:30am               (​Patton Hall​)
                         Michael Bruner
                         Anmol Khandeparkar
Abstract
        An introduction to the Arts and Entertainment Technology program, which includes the four
        areas of focus: Digital Imaging & Visualization, Game Development and Design, PLAI, and Music
        & Sound.
Objective
        By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
              ●  Recognize the four emphases of Arts and Entertainment Technology
              ●  Apply the principles of user experience, aesthetics, narrative, and interactivity
              ●  Articulate the tools and roles in the development and execution in technology based arts
              ●  Create and implement original design ideas
Assessment/Grading
        This course is participation and project based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on
        successful completion of project objectives, participation in forum discussion posts, team
        collaboration, professionalism, and attendance. Projects are worth 40% of your grade, Discussion
        Posts are worth 20%, Peer Reviews are 20%, and the remaining 20% is based on Professionalism.
        No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
        complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before the
        deadline for doing so passes.
        Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
        fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
        will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
        grade of A+.
        Letter grade equivalents:
          A = 94-100                         C+ = 77-79                         D+ = 67-69
          A- = 90-93                         C = 74-76                          D = 64-66
          B+ = 87-89                         C- = 70-73                         D- = 60-63
          B = 84-86                                                             F = 0-60
          B- = 80-83
                                                                                                                      1


Attendance/Absences
      ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of
      the class.
      For each unexcused absence after your first three, your final grade will be lowered by one letter
      grade.
      Seven unexcused absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
      Please be on time for class. Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class, leaving
      class without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy.
      Every two instances you are tardy will be counted as one time absent.
      If you need to miss class for legitimate reasons it is your responsibility to contact your TA directly.
      Sending a message by way of another student of an impending absence does not constitute a
      legitimate notification.
      Note: If you catch the flu, have a family emergency, or otherwise cannot attend class, please
      send an email to your TA and submit any class work as needed. Excused absences do not
      qualify for an extension in the assignment.
Religious Holidays
      Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
      classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
      day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
      may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
      an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
      University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to
      the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
      (from ​http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf​)
Q Drop Policy
      The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
      reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
      institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
      dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
      higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
REQUIRED File Naming Convention:
               When submitting a file, you must follow the file naming convention as listed below.
               Assignments that do not follow the proper file naming convention will have points
               deducted.
               If an individual assignment…
               FirstInitialLastName_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
               Example: dcohen_Project1_07042019
                                                                                                            2


              If a team assignment...
             TeamName_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
             Example: TeamAsteroid_Project2_07042019
             IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it may
             not read correctly.
     REQUIRED File Format:
             See individual assignment for required file format.
Classroom Policy
     Devices
          ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
             this with me prior to class).
          ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media (unless related to
             class activities)
          ● Do not take a call, chat, or respond to emails during class time.
     Food/Drink
          ●  Food is not allowed in class, unless for medical reasons. If for medical reasons you must
             provide an accommodation letter from Services for Students with Disabilities
             (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone
             512-471-6644).
          ●  Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
             when not in use. You spill it, you clean it up.
Required Equipment and Software
     Hardware​:
     All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running the required software
     for the course.
     Software:
          ● Adobe Creative Cloud.
                  ○ Students can obtain a significant discount on an Adobe Creative Cloud license
                      through UT’s Campus Computer Store.
                      https://finearts.utexas.edu/feature/news/new-discounted-student-price-available-a
                      dobe-creative-cloud
          ●  Audacity (Free software)
                      https://www.audacityteam.org/
          ●  Maya (Free Student License)
                      https://www.autodesk.com/education/free-software/maya
          ●  Presentation software, such as Powerpoint, Google Slides, or Keynote only.
                                                                                                       3


Professionalism
     Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the
     instructor. These will have an impact on your professionalism grade, so it is important that you
     follow these guidelines...
     1) Be on time at the beginning of class. If you must come in late at the beginning of class, please
     enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible.
     If you have a class beforehand that is on the other side of campus, you must inform your TA on
     the first day of class so adjustments can be made.
     2) Turn your cell phone off or on silent, and put it away. Looking at your cell phone during
     lectures, exercises and discussions is not acceptable. Use your computer for taking notes, not
     your cell phone.
     3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
     sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to
     loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, Sleep etc., please do so outside of the
     classroom, not during class time.
     4) Headphones and sunglasses are not allowed to be worn during lectures, exercises or
     discussions. Even if your headphones are not playing music, they should never be in your ears
     during these times.
     5) Arrive to class prepared, with your required equipment (IE: Computer), assignments completed,
     and reading/tutorials reviewed and ready to discuss.
     6) Be prepared and willing to participate in class discussions and present your work (in progress
     or completed) when called upon.
     7) Be polite and considerate to others. Insults, bullying behavor, and discrimination will not be
     tollerated.
     8) Do not fall asleep in class.
Academic Integrity
     The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
     abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to
     maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken
     at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other
     scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
          ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
          ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
              assistance in preparing them;
          ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
              academic discipline; and
          ● avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
              student.
              (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
                                                                                                         4


Academic Dishonesty
   ●  In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
      dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
      such as:
          o Cheating
          o Plagiarism
          o Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
          o Falsifying Academic Records
          o Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
              extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
          o M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
              without authorization to do so)
          o Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
          o (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)
          o Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
              penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
              University.
              (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism
      “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
      obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
      including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
      and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
      conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
      http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-con
      duct/).
Copyright and Fair Use
      Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers.
      Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the
      doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright
      holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will
      discuss these issues during the semester as needed, but when you have questions about
      whether or when you can appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K.
      Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
     The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
      for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
      Disabilities (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or
      videophone 512-471-6644).
     Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I
      can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
                                                                                                          5


Student Support Services
     There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
     include (but are not limited to) the following:
     Fine Arts Career Service​s (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
     of services and resources to support students and alumni.
     The Undergraduate Writing Center
     (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for their
     courses.
     The Sanger Learning Center ​(512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
     time-management, and note-taking courses.
     University Health Services​ (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
     promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
     officially enrolled in certain University programs.
     The Counseling and Mental Health Center​ (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with
     their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
     Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
     students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
     current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
     communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
     minimum, twice per week.
     It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
     in his or her official e-mail address (do so at
     https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
     Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable
     excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full
     inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the
     University or instructor. (see
     http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
Use of Class Materials
     The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
     assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
     violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
     Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor
     may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
     which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading
     class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
     students. (from
     https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
                                                                                                         6


Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
        If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
        Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
        is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
        Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
        Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Procedures
        Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide
        students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security
        of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff
        of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have
        the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of
        users subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
        https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
        (adapted from
        http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf
Overview of Schedule
        Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be
        altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design
        program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be
        announced via Canvas.
        Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas.
Calendar
Note – This schedule, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
 Week 1 Class         ●   Course Intro                                             Assignment​:
 Thurs: 8/29          ●   What is AET?                                             Photoshop Tutorial
                      ●   History of AET                                           Photoshop CC 2019
                      ●   Saving to the Cloud (UT Box, Dropbox, Google Drive)      Essential Training: The
                          REQUIRED                                                 Basics
                      ●   Claim your UT Gmail
                                                                                   Discussion Post:
                  HW​:                                                             Post reflection of what
                      ●   Download and Install Required Software                   you've learned about
                                                                                   Photoshop in the
                          Digital Images and Visualization                         discussion board.
 Week 2               ●   Introduction to Digital Images and Visualization
 Tues: 9/3            ●   Guest: Neal Daugherty
 Thurs: 9/5           ●   Aesthetics
                      ●   Guest: Honoria Starbuck
                                                                                                             7


Week 3           ●  3D Modeling and Texturing                       Project 1:​ (Individual
Tues: 9/10       ●  Guest: Isacc Oster                              assignment)
                                                                    Create a 3D ​model of a
Thurs: 9/12      ●  Digital Images/Visualization Exploration Part 1 Barrel in Maya
                 ●  Guest: Dax Norman
Week 4           ●  2D/3D Animation                                 Project 2:​ (Individual
Tues: 9/17       ●  Guest: Luc Dimick                               assignment)
                                                                    Create an animated GIF.
Thurs: 9/19      ●  Digital Images/Visualization Exploration Part 2
                 ●  Guest: Yuliya Lanina
Week 5           ●  User Experience                                 Discussion Post:
Tues: 9/24                                                          Find an interactive device
                                                                    or tool that is lacking in
                                                                    intuitive design. Explain
                                                                    how you would redesign it
                                                                    for better user experience.
                              Game Design and Development (3 Weeks)
Thurs: 9/26      ●  Introduction to game development                Discussion Post:
                 ●  Disciplines/The development team                Take a game and break it
                 ●  Tools in game development                       down by the elements
                                                                    used to create it.
                                                                    Due Sunday
                                                                    Assignment:
                                                                    Review Scratch Tutorials
Week 6           ●  Concept Brainstorming                           Project 3​ (Team Project):
Tues: 10/1       ●  Prototyping                                     Design a game to be built
                 ●  Iteration                                       in Scratch
                                                                    Part 1: Review Scratch
Thurs: 10/3      ●  Game Design/Design Docs                         Tutorials
                                                                    Part 2: Brainstorm
Week 7           ●  Game Art                                        Part 3: Paper Prototype
Tues 10/8                                                           Part 5: Build Game in
                                                                    Scratch
Thurs 10/10      ●  Game Tech
Week 8           ●  Game Writing/Narrative Design
Tues 10/15       ●  Narratology, Ludology
Thurs 10/17      ●  VR/AR
                 ●  Guest: MJ Johns
                                            Music & Sound
Week 9      Introduction to Music & Sound Technology                 Assignment:
Tues 10/22  Music & Sound Theory                                     Review Audio
                                                                     Recording/Editing
                                                                     software Tutorial (To be
                                                                     provided)
Thurs 10/24 Tools and Technology for music and sound
                                                                                                8


Week 10     Sound Design                                                     Project 4​ (Team Project)
Tues 10/29                                                                   Create a podcast.
                                                                             Write a podcast proposal
Thurs 10/31 Audio Editing/Mixing                                             Identify audio needs
                                                                             Record and edit podcast
Week 11     Game Audio                                                       Publish podcast
Tues 11/5
Thurs 11/7  Performing with technology, voice over, live performances,
            exhibitions.
                               PLAI (Projection, Lighting and Interactivity)
Week 12     Introduction to PLAI                                             Discussion Post​:
Tues 11/12
                                                                             Review a live event (to be
                                                                             assigned) and pick it apart,
                                                                             what lighting is involved,
                                                                             what projection is involved,
                                                                             what roles and careers are
                                                                             involved.
Thurs 11/14      ●   Designing lights for an audience                        Project 5​ (Team Project)
                                                                             Propose a redesign of a
Week 13          ●   Narrative and Interactivity in PLAI                     non interactive museum
Tues 11/19                                                                   exhibit, public exhibition,
                                                                             stagel production or
Thurs 11/21      ●   PLAI at exhibitions and events                          installation art.
Week 14          ●   Escape Room Project                                     Make a full proposal with
Tues 11/26                                                                   presentation on
                                                                             redesigning it as an
Thurs 11/28      ●   No Class - Thanksgiving                                 audience interactive
                                                                             experience.
Week 15          ●   PLAI in theater/stage performances
Tues 12/3
Thurs 12/5       ●   Final Class:
                         ● Where do we go from here?
                         ● Guest Speakers:
                         ● Doreen Lorenzo, Assistant Dean, School of
                              Design and Creative Technology
                         ● Michael Baker: Acting Chair, Arts and
                              Entertainment Technology
                                                                                                          9


Units of Study
   1. Digital Imaging and Visualization: ​Digital visual content that focuses on digital art, which
      includes digital drawing, 3D modeling, 2D & 3D Animations, VR/AR, plus the tools and career
      paths involved.
   2. Game Development and Design: ​The creation of a digital game from concept to completion,
      exploring the disciplines of game art, tech, design, sound, and production, and how they work in
      collaboration on a professional development team.
   3. Music & Sound: ​Using technology in the creation of music arrangements and sound design to
      produce performances, compositions, soundscapes, and voice over. Will explore how sound and
      music technology can also enhance other forms of media such as games, films, and animation.
   4. PLAI (Projection, Lighting, and Interactivity): ​Converge of lighting, projection, digital media and
      imagery, projecting, and interactive systems to enable the design and development of new
      performances as well as live and immersive experiences.
Process
                          Team Focused Projects and Discussions
              For all discussion posts and Projects 3 - 5 students will be assigned teams for
              collaboration and reflection. Grading will be based not on the outcomes of the projects
              and quality of reflection in discussion post, as well as contribution and teamwork as
              reflected in peer reviews.
                                                    Projects
      The following is a summary of project assignments for the course. For full details, requirements
      and the grading rubric, please refer to the assignment posting in Canvas.
      Project 1: (Individual Assignment)
              Following a provided tutorial, students will create a 3D model of a barrel. In addition to
              including PNG files showing the final barel model from multiple different angles, students
              must submit their original maya file.
      Project 2 (Individual Assignment)
              Students will use tools and techniques discussed in class to create an original animated
              GIF (​Graphics Interchange Format)​. In addition to submitting the GIF file, you must provide
              the original files/images used in creating the final work.
      Project 3 (Team Assignment)
              In assigned teams, students will brainstorm, conceive, develop and execute a digital
              game built using Scratch. Final submission will include the game build, a game design
              document following provided template, files of all assets used, and a breakdown
              discussion of each team members contribution.
                                                                                                          10


Project 4 (Team Assignment)
       In teams students will conceive, compose, record, edit and finalize a podcast using
       approved recording and editing software. Podcast topics/genre will be selected from a
       provided list. Final podcast must be both submitted and published live.
Project 5 (Team Project)
       In teams, students will review a non-interactive museum exhibit, public exhibition, stage
       production or installation art, the create a fully realized proposal with presentation on how
       to redesign it as an interactive experience. Presentations must include both the redesign
       as well as the technology and roles involved in the development and execution.
                                        Discussion Posts
       Discussions are designed to allow students to articulate what they have learned, engage
       interaction with other students in the course, and provide constant, helpful feedback.
       Discussion posts and responses should be courteous, thoughtful, and carefully written.
       Details and requirements for each discussion post and response will be outlined for each
       topic in the Discussions section of Canvas.
                                           Peer Review
       On Team based Projects, students within each team will provide a reflection of each of
       their fellow team members based on collaboration and contribution to the project. This
       will be based on a provided review and will result in an individual grade for each team
       member. Reflections and feedback must be accurate, courteous, and professional.
                                                                                                   11
