                            THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:             SW 327                    Instructor:      Rosalie Ambrosino, PhD
Unique Number:             87545                     Email:           rambrosino@utexas.edu
Semester:                  Summer 2020               Office:          Remote
Meeting Time/Place:        MTWR 2-4 p.m.             Phone:           210-241-0391
                           Asynchronous MW           Office Hours:    TR 12:30-1:45 p.m.
                           Meet on Zoom TR                            Other times by appointment
      HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
         (W- Fulfills the writing flag requirement; Required BSW Course)
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course explores the biopsychosocial and cultural functioning of human beings across the life
span using an ecological-systems lens and major developmental theories as a framework to guide
the processes of engagement, assessment, intervention, and evaluation. Using the generalist social
work lens, this course integrates content from other human behavior courses. The students will
gain an understanding of what physical, mental, social and economic justice hazards can
adversely impact individuals’ growth and development during their lifetime. Frameworks
incorporating an eco-systems/developmental perspective, including systems/ecological and
psychosocial (life span development) frameworks, are used to conceptualize stages of human
growth and development, with a primary focus on adolescence, early adulthood, the middle years,
and the aged adult within an intergenerational family context. The impacts of the family, social
groups, organizations, communities, and society on individuals during these stages of the life span
are also discussed.
This course emphasizes empirically based research reflecting a risk and resilience perspective in
making client assessments and recommending appropriate interventions. This contributes to a
social worker’s ability to understand and critically analyze the interactions among individuals,
families, groups, organizations, and communities.
Students will be able to understand how personal values are reflected in socio-cultural contexts,
such as culture, race and ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, age, class, and religion, and how
they can influence human behavior. Increasing access to resources, reducing risks, and
considering ethical dilemmas involved in dealing with human behavior are also considered.
Course prerequisites include Social Work 310 and 312 and either Psychology 304 (Child
Psychology) or Child Development 313 (Child Development). Social Work 325 (Foundations of
Social Justice) is also required as part of this curriculum area and usually is taken concurrently
with SW327.
                                                                                                    1


 This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
 experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
 regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
 from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
 revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work.
 You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written
 work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications Objectives of Critical Thinking,
 Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
 Education Coordinating Board.
 II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
 By the end of the course, the student will be able to:
 1) Explain the unique perspective that social work has in viewing the relationship between the
     individual person and environment in comparison to other helping professions;
 2) Explain and apply basic principles of learning theories and the systems/ecological
     and psychosocial frameworks and analyze individual, family, group, organizational,
     community, and societal dynamics from each of these perspectives;
 3) Describe biological, social, cultural, psychological, and spiritual aspects of
     adolescent, early adult, middle adult, and older adult developmental states within the
     context of the broader environment;
 4) Describe the dynamics of social groups, organizations, communities, and societies, and the
     ways that they can impact individual development and behavior;
 5) Explain ways that ethnicity, culture, gender, sexual orientation, class, disability, and other
     factors contribute to human development and their implications for social work practice
     in engagement, assessment, intervention, and evaluation;
 6) Describe relevant research and identify and conceptualize additional research needs
     relating to human behavior and the social environment;
 7) Apply information and theories related to human behavior and the social environment to life
     situations in a manner consistent with social work values and the promotion of social and
     economic justice;
 8) Use critical thinking skills in writing an academic literature review on a human
     development question of interest;
 9) Explain and apply basic principles of learning theories and the systems/ecological and
     psychosocial frameworks to guide the processes of engagement, assessment,
     interventions, and evaluation;
 10) Apply information and theories related to human behavior and the social environment to life
     situations in order to determine the ways social systems promote or deter people in
     maintaining or achieving health and well-being.
EPAS Competencies
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on Social
Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the UT SHSSW
engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s Educational
Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of knowledge,
                                                                                                   2


skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following competencies:
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 6.1: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other multidisciplinary theoretical frameworks to engage with clients and
constituencies.
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 7.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in the analysis of assessment data
from clients and constituencies.
Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 8.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in interventions with clients and
constituencies.
Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 9.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in evaluating practice with
individuals, families, and groups.
III.     TEACHING METHODS
This course is designed to provide the student with a meaningful learning environment that will
facilitate mastery of knowledge and skills in the area of human behavior in the social
environment. The class will be conducted remotely using an active learning approach. Teaching
methods include a combination of readings and reflection of content, small group discussion,
audiovisual presentations, case study analyses, experiential exercises, and lecture. Students are
expected to be open to learning and actively engaged in course discussion and activities, to take
appropriate personal risks, and to demonstrate both critical thinking and self-reflection
throughout the course.
IV.      REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
Hutchison, E.D. (2017). Essentials of human behavior: Integrating person, environment, and the
         life course (2nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage. (available in an E-text)
Additional readings from other books and journal articles are listed in the course schedule
section of the syllabus and posted on Canvas.
                                                                                                  3


V.        COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Your grade for this course will be based on the following requirements:
1. Discussion posts: Students will view content relating to Monday’s and Wednesday’s
   topics asynchronously, viewing PowerPoint slides and video/media presentations and
   completing assigned readings. Students will complete five discussion postings during the
   semester, applying concepts covered in asynchronous materials and readings to various
   scenarios and responding to at least two of their peers. See syllabus appendix for specific
   assignment guidelines (40% of grade)
2. Case analysis: Each student will write an independent case analysis based on one of the case
   studies in the text designated by the instructor. Students will incorporate a literature review,
   integrating at least 5 peer-reviewed journal articles, that supports the assessment and
   intervention portions of their case analysis. This case analysis will be submitted in two
   installments; the first half of the assignment will be submitted in draft form. After receiving
   feedback, students will revise their draft and combine it with remaining required content in a final case
   analysis. See syllabus appendix for specific assignment guidelines (35% of grade)
3. Final Exam: Students will complete a take-home final examination applying concepts
   learned in the course to a film. See syllabus appendix for specific assignment guidelines.
   (15% of grade)
4. Class participation: Students will be expected to attend zoom classes regularly and
   participate actively in discussions, both online and in class. (10% of grade)
Summary of Semester Assignments and Grade Breakdown
        Assignment                                                   Date Due                 % of Grade
        Discussion posts and peer responses                      Wednesdays 6/10,             40
                                                                 6/17, 6/24, 7/1, and
                                                                 7/8; responses to peers
                                                                 Fridays 6/12, 6/19,
                                                                 6/26, and 7/3
        Case analysis/ Installment 1/draft                       Monday, June 22              15
        Case analysis/final submission                           Monday, July 6               20
        Film application/take home final exam                    Saturday, July 11            15
        Participation                                                     NA                  10
                TOTAL                                                                         100 points
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and above                    A              74.0 to 76.999                  C
        90.0 to 93.999                    A-             70.0 to 73.999                  C-
        87.0 to 89.999                    B+             67.0 to 69.999                  D+
        84.0 to 86.999                    B              64.0 to 66.999                  D
        80.0 to 83.999                    B-             60.0 to 63.999                  D-
        77.0to 79.999                     C+             Below 60.0                      F
                                                                                                           4


VII.     CLASS POLICIES
1. Instructor Contact: If you wish to make an appointment to see me, cannot attend a zoom
   class, or have a question about the course, please send an email to me at
   rambrosino@utexas.edu. You can also call or text me at 210-241-0391 (cell) or we can set up
   a conference via zoom. I check my e-mail and phone messages regularly and will respond as
   quickly as possible.
2. Attendance: This course is interactive in nature, with students learning from each other as
   well as from readings and other course assignments. It also is important for social work
   practitioners to be punctual in both attendance and in meeting deadlines. This is a fast-paced
   course, and thus class attendance is expected, as is submitting assignments on time to help
   ensure that you complete the course with a satisfactory grade. Students may miss two of the
   eleven scheduled zoom class periods without penalty. Those who do not attend class on a
   regular basis (missing more than two classes without a valid excuse, e.g., medical
   documentation) will receive a lower grade in the course. Two points will be deducted from
   your final grade for each zoom class session missed beyond two. Your participation grade will
   also be impacted, since you cannot participate if you are not present.
3. Submission of Papers and Late Assignments: Assignments must be submitted on Canvas in
   a word document (no PDF files) by 11:59 p.m. the day that an assignment is due. All
   assignments must be turned in on the due date. Changes in work schedules, personal
   celebrations, transportation problems, computer/ printing problems, etc. are not considered
   legitimate reasons for missing an assignment deadline. After one day of grace, late
   assignments will result in a deduction of 5% for each day it is late. Any legitimate adjustments
   in due dates must be discussed with the instructor at least 24 hours PRIOR to the regularly
   scheduled due date unless there is a valid documented reason for not being able to meet this
   requirement.
4. APA & References: The School of Social Work uniformly requires APA editorial style as the
   standard format for all written assignments. Details of APA style are included in the
   Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association. Information on APA style and
   format can be found at the Learning Resource Center (LRC) in the School of Social Work and
   on the UT library website. Another excellent source is Purdue University’s Online Writing Lab
   (OWL). Appropriate referencing is required. Failure to use quotation marks for direct quotes
   or citations for indirect quotations and/or others’ ideas constitutes plagiarism and may result in
   receiving no credit for the assignment. All assignments in this course may be processed by
   TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an archived database of published work to check
   for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to determine if a paper is the student's
   original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member will make the
   final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
5. Course Feedback: Students will have two formal opportunities to evaluate the quality of the
   course and instruction. About midway into the course students will be asked to provide an
   anonymous evaluation about the course and any suggestions for improving content, delivery,
   and discussion. The second evaluation will occur at the end of the course, using the format
   provided by the University. At any time during the course, students should feel free to
   comment on the quality of the course and instruction and suggest changes that will increase
   their learning. These comments can either be made during a zoom class session, by making an
   appointment to meet with the instructor, or via any other means selected by the student.
6. Course Modifications: Any modifications, amendments, or changes to the syllabus and or
   assignments are at the discretion of the instructor. Changes will be announced in a zoom
   session and posted on Canvas. It is the responsibility of students to inquire about any changes
   that might have been made in their absence.
                                                                                                         5


   VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
1.    The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
      Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
      responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
      integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
2.    Documented Disability Statement: Any student who requires special accommodations
      must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
      Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259
      voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should
      present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
      accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor
      of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
      information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
3.    Professional Conduct and Civility in the Classroom: The professor expects students to
      act as professionals in class. This means students should sign in on time for zoom class
      sessions, be prepared to participate in class discussions both online and in zoom sessions,
      and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
      individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors
      as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins,
      and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an
      atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social work also deals with
      complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and
      it would be impossible to offer a substantive course experience that did not include
      potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment we
      will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the
      ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one
      another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
4.    Unanticipated Distress: Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions
      to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged
      to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
      students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
      communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students
      may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at
      512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
5.    Policy on Social Media and Professional Communication: Public social networks are
      not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain
      that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
      choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read,
      and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc.,
      can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and
      prospective careers.
      Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other
      forms of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their
      communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work
      students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be considered
      inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this, social work
      students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid
                                                                                                        6


    posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
    image.
    Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and
    are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks.
    Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media,
    including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise
    client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any
    material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as
    certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
    Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
    Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social
    work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program
    while in courses, the university community, and the broader area communities.
6.  Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
    dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
    course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
    all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
    strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the
    Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity, Office of the Dean of Students
    https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
7.  Use of Course Materials: The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to
    exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any
    unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result
    in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course
    materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the
    University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in
    further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading class
    materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or
    future students.
8.  Classroom Confidentiality: Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
    personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
    supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
    Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the
    educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions
    taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located
    in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
9.  Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students: Email is recognized as an
    official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading
    their email for university and course-related information and announcements. Students are
    responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students
    should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—
    to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
    sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
    address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
10. Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
    absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the
    student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
                                                                                                   7


    religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the
    missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
11. Title IX Reporting: In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
    the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that
    is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, field instructors, staff, and/or
    teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex
    discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or any other
    forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
    University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator.
    Further information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found
    at http://titleix.utexas.edu.
12. Campus Carry Policy: The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
    here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
    Links menu on the School’s website.
13. Safety: As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
    involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
    present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession.
    It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related
    to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any
    safety concerns.
14. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If students have concerns about their
    behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else,
    students may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns.
    This service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students,
    the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
    (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
    visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
15. Emergency Evacuation Policy: Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
    required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
    announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
         • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building.
             Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
             building.
         • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
             week of class.
         • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
         • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
             Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
             office.
                                                                                                    8


  IX.     COURSE SCHEDULE
Date           Topic                         Assignments   Readings
                                             Due
Class 1        •  Introduction and course                  •  Syllabus
Thursday,         overview
June 4 (ZOOM) •   Establishment of
                  guidelines for class
                  discussion
Class 2        •  A multidimensional                       •  Hutchison, Chapter 1,
Monday,           approach to human                           Human Behavior: A
June 8            behavior and social work                    Multidimensional
(Asynchronous)    practice                                    Approach and Chapter
               •  Writing from a social work                  2, Theoretical
                  perspective                                 Perspectives on
                                                              Human Behavior
Class 3        •  Theoretical perspectives                 •  Hutchison, Chapter 3,
Tuesday,          on human behavior and the                   The Biological Person
June 9 (ZOOM)     social environment                       •  Canvas: Ambrosino et
                  o The ecological/systems                    al., The
                      framework                               Ecological/Systems
                  o Integrating theory,                       Framework
                      research, and practice
Class 4        •  Client engagement          •  Discussion •  Hutchison, Chapter 4,
Wednesday,     •  Biopsychosocial               post 1        The Psychological
June 10           dimensions                                  Person
(Asynchronous)    o Biological and                         •  Canvas: Hepworth, et
                      psychological                           al., Chapter 3,
                      perspectives                            Overview of the
                                                              helping process, pp.
                                                              35-45
Class 5        •  Application: Continuation  •  Discussion
Thursday,         of discussion on              peer
June 11           biopsychosocial               responses
(ZOOM)            dimensions                    due 6/12
Class 6        •  Life course and                          •  Hutchison, Chapter
Monday,           psychosocial life span                      10, The Human Life
June 15           development perspectives                    Journey: A Life
(Asynchronous)                                                Course Perspective
                                                           •  Readings on life span
                                                              development
                                                              framework posted on
                                                              Canvas
Class 7        •  Client assessment                        •  Hutchison, Chapter 5,
Tuesday,       •  Continuation of discussion                  The Spiritual Person
June 16           on life course perspective               •  Canvas: Hepworth, et
(ZOOM)         •  Religion/spirituality                       al., Assessment
                                                                                    9


Class          • Cultural and physical       • Discussion  •  Hutchison Chapter 6,
Wednesday,        environmental factors that   post 2         Culture and the
June 17           shape development                           Physical Environment
(Asynchronous)   o Race and ethnicity,
                     gender/gender identity,
                     class, religion/
                     spirituality, ability,
                      sexual orientation
Class 9        • Continuation of discussion  • Discussion
Thursday,         on cultural and physical     peer
June 18           environmental factors that   responses
(ZOOM)            shape development            due 6/19
Class 10       • Understanding family        • Draft of    •  Hutchison, Chapter 7,
Monday,           systems and dynamics         case study/    Families
June 22        • Family constellations         Installment
(Asynchronous) • Changing family roles and     I
                  structure
Class 11       • Group processes and                       •  Hutchison, Chapter 8,
Tuesday,          dynamics                                    Small Groups, Formal
 June 23       • Organizational culture and                   Organizations, and
(ZOOM)            dynamics                                    Communities
               • Community culture and
                  impact on human
                  development
Class 12       • Social inequality and       • Discussion  •  Hutchison, Chapter 9,
Wednesday,       impact on human               post 3         Social Structure,
June 24          development/behavior                         Social Institutions and
(Asynchronous) • Globalization on and                         Social Movements:
                 impact on human                              Global and National
                 development/ behavior
               • Social movements
Class 13       • Important prenatal and      • Discussion  •  Hutchison, Chapter
Thursday,         childhood links to           peer           11, The Journey
June 25           adolescent and adult         responses      Begins: Conception,
(ZOOM)            development                  due 6/26       Pregnancy, Childbirth,
                       o Reproductive rights                  and Infancy
                       o Prenatal
                          development
                       o Birth/ infancy
Class 14       • Client intervention         • Case study   •  Hutchison, Chapter
Monday,        • Development in                drafts          12, Toddlerhood and
June 29           Toddlerhood, Early and       returned        Early Childhood and
Asynchronous      Middle Childhood                             Chapter 13, Middle
                    o Attachment                               Childhood
                    o Impact of parenting
                                                                                     10


Class 1      • Adolescent development                 •  Hutchison, Chapter
Tuesday,       o Identity                                14, Adolescence
June 30        o Relationships                        • Canvas: Hepworth, et
ZOOM           o Risks and decision                      al., Planning and
                   making                                intervention
             • Goals and interventions                   strategies
Class 16     • Development in young                  • Hutchison, Chapter
Wednesday      adulthood                                15, Young and Middle
July 1             o Relationships                      Adulthood
ZOOM               o Career choices                     Canvas: Hepworth, et
                   o Lifestyle choices                  al., Chapter 19, The
             • Client evaluation                        final phase, Evaluation
Thursday,    • Lab Day/Work on Case     • Discussion
July 2         Analysis                   peer
NO ZOOM                                   responses
CLASS                                     due 7/3
Class 17     • Development in middle    • Final case
Monday,        adulthood                  analysis
July 6             o Taking on new        due
Asynchronous           roles
                   o Mental health and
                       health
             • Myth of midlife crisis
Class 18     • Development in late                   •  Hutchison, Chapter
Tuesday        adulthood                                16, Late adulthood
July 7             o Income
ZOOM               o Spirituality and
                       religion
                   o Health/mental
                       health
                   o Loss and grief
                   o Elder abuse
Class 19     • Film – Application of    • Discussion
Wednesday,     human behavior theories    post 5 (no
July 8         and concepts (Final exam   peer
Asynchronous   based on this film)        responses
                                          this week)
Class 20     • Integrating HBSE and     • Take home
Thursday,      practice                   exam due
July 9       • Future directions          Saturday,
ZOOM         • Celebration and closure    7/11
                                                                              11


X.      BIBLIOGRAPHY.
 Almack, K., Seymour, J., & Bellamy, G. (2010). Exploring the impact of sexual orientation on experiences
   and concerns about end-of-life care and on bereavement for lesbian, gay and bisexual older people.
   Sociology, 44(5), 908–924.
 Ainspan, N.D., Penk, W., & Kearney, L.K. (2018). Psychosocial approaches to improving the military-to-
   civilian transition process. Psychological Services 15(2), 129-134.
 Alaggia, R., Regehr, C., & Jenney, A. (2012). Risky business: An ecological analysis of intimate partner
   violence disclosure. Research on Social Work Practice 22(3), 301-312.
 Ambrosino, R.A., Ambrosino, R. J., Heffernan, J. & Shuttlesworth, G. (2016). Social work and social
   welfare: An introduction (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
 Arthur, D. P. (2015). Social work practice with LGBT elders at end-of-life: Developing practice evaluation
   and clinical skills through a cultural perspective. Journal of Social Work in End-of-Life & Palliative Care,
   11(2), 178–201.
 Ayon, C. (2016). Talking to Latino children about race, inequality, and discrimination: Raising families in an
   anti- immigrant political environment. Journal for the Society of Social Work and Research, 7 (3), 449-
   477.
 Bent-Godley, T. (2011). The ultimate betrayal: A renewed look at intimate partner violence. Washington,
   D.C: NASW.
 Berk, L.E. (2014). Development through the lifespan (6th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
 Blundo, R. (2010). Engaging men in clinical practice: A solution-focused and strengths-based model.
   Families in Society 91(3), 307-312.
 Bronfenbrenner Life Course Center at Cornell University,
   http://www.human.cornell.edu/che/BLCC/index.cfm
 Brown, Brene’ (2017). Braving the wilderness: The quest for true belonging and the courage to stand alone.
   NY: Random House.
 Carter, M.J. & Fuller, C. (2016). Symbols, meaning, and action: The past, present and future of symbolic
   interactionism. Current Sociology 64(6), 931-961.
 Cartwright, C. M., Hughes, M., & Lienert, T. (2012). End-of-life care for gay, lesbian, bisexual and
   transgender people. Culture, Health & Sexuality: An International Journal for Research, Intervention and
   Care, 14(5), 537–548.
 Casado, B.L., Hong, M., & Harrington, D. (2010). Measuring migratory grief and loss associated with the
   experience of immigration. Research on Social Work Practice, 20(6), p. 611-620.
 Chen, B. (2017). Parent-adolescent attachment and academic adjustment: The mediating role of self-worth.
   Journal of Child & Family Studies 26(8), 2070-2076.
 Coates, T. (2015). Between the world and me. NY: Spiegal & Grau.
 Cook, L.B., Kim, G., Morgan, K., Chen, C., Nillni, A., et al. (2016). Measuring geographic “hot spots” of
   racial-ethnic disparities: An application to mental health care. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
   Underserved 27 (2), 663-684.
 Corcoran, K. & Roberts, A.R. (Eds.) (2015). Social workers’ desk reference (3rd ed.). NY: Oxford University
   Press.
 Cordaro, M. (2012). Pet loss and disenfranchised grief: Implications for mental health counseling practice.
   Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 34(4), 283-294.
 Crede, M., Tynan, M.C., & Harms, P.D. (2016) Much ado about grit: A meta-analytic synthesis of the grit
   literature. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
 Deblinger, E., Mannarino, A. P., Cohen, J. A., Runyon, M. K., & Steer, R. A. (2011). Trauma-focused
   cognitive behavioral therapy for children: Impact of the trauma narrative and treatment length. Depression
   and Anxiety, 28, 67-75.
 DeLuca, S., Blosnich, J., Hentshel, El, & Amen, S. (2016). Mental health care utilization: How race, ethnicity
   and veteran status are associated with seeking help. Community Mental Health Journal 2 (52), 174-179.
 DeLuca, S., Clampet-Lundquist, S., & Edin, K. (2016). Coming of age in the other America. NY: Russell
   Sage Foundation.
 Doley, R., Bell, R., Watt, B., & Simpson, H. (2015). Grandparents raising grandchildren: Investigating
   factors associated with distress among custodial grandparent. Journal of Family Studies,21(2), 101-119.
                                                                                                              12


Edin, K. & Shaefer, L. (2016). Two dollars a day: Living on almost nothing in America. Boston: Houghton
  Mifflin Harcourt.
Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Hoy-Ellis, C. P., Goldsen, J., Emlet, C. A., & Hooyman, N. R. (2014). Creating a
  vision for the future: Key competencies and strategies for culturally competent practice with lesbian, gay,
  bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) older adults in the health and human services. Journal of Gerontological
  Social Work, 57(2–4), 80–107.
Furman, R., Ackerman, A. R., Loya, M., Jones, S., & Egi, N. (2012). The criminalization of immigration:
  Value conflicts for the social work profession. Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare, 39(1), 169–185.
Gardiner, H. & Kosmitzki, C. (2011). Lives across cultures: Cross-cultural human development (6th ed.).
  Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Pearson Education.
Genaidy, A., Huston, R., Dionysiou, D., & Karwowski, W. (2017). A system-of-systems framework for
  improved human, ecologic and economic well-being. Sustainability, 9(4), 616.
Goodcase, E. T. & Love, H. A. (2017). From despair to integrity: Using narrative therapy for older
  individuals in Erikson’s last stage of identity development. Clinical Social Work Journal, 45(4), p. 354-
  363.
Greenfield, E. A. (2012). Using ecological frameworks to advance a field of research, practice, and policy on
  aging-in-place initiatives. The Gerontologist, 52(1), 1-12.
Guo, W. & Tsui, M. (2010). From resilience to resistance: A reconstruction of the strengths perspective in
  social work practice. International Social Work 53(2), 233-245.
Harris, N.B. (2018). The deepest well: healing the long-term effects of childhood adversity. Boston:
  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Hash, K. M., & Rogers, A. (2013). Clinical practice with older LGBT clients: Overcoming lifelong
  stigma through strength and resilience. Clinical Social Work Journal, 41(3), 249-257.
Hepola, S. (2015). Blackout: Remembering the things I drank to forget. NY: Grand Central Publishing.
Hepworth, D., Rooney, R., Rooney, G. & Strom-Gottfried, K. (2013). Direct social work practice:
  Theory and skills. Belmont, CA: Brooks /Cole Cengage Learning.
Holmes, S. (2013). Fresh fruit, broken bodies: Migrant farmworkers in the United States. Berkeley, CA:
  University of California.
Hutchison, E.D. (2016). Essentials of human behavior in the social environment: Integrating person,
  environment, and the life course (2nd ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.
Ikonomopoulos, J., Smith, R. L., & Schmidt, C. (2015). Integrating narrative therapy within rehabilitative
  programming for incarcerated adolescents. Journaling of Counseling & Development, 93, 460-470.
Jani, J., & Okundaye, J. (2014). The culturagram: An educational tool to enhance practice competence with
  diverse populations. Journal of Baccalaureate Social Work, 19, 53-63.
Jerkins, M. (2018). This will be my undoing: Living at the intersection of black, female, and feminist in
  (white) America. NY: Harper.
Kim, J. (2017). “You can't run into a burning building without getting burned yourself”: An ecological
  systems perspective of parents choosing out-of-home care for an intercountry adopted child. Families in
  Society: Journal of Contemporary Social Services, 98(3), 169-177.
Juarez, G., Branin, J. J., & Rosales, M. (2014). Perceptions of QOL among caregivers of Mexican ancestry of
  adults with advanced cancer. Quality of Life Research, 24(7), 1729-1740.
Kim, Y.J., Moon, S.S., & Kim, M.J. (2011). Physical and psycho-social predictors of adolescents’ suicide
  behaviors. Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal 28(6), 421-438.
Koehn, S., Neysmith, S., Kobayash, K., & Khamisa, H. (2013). Revealing the shape of knowledge using an
  intersectionality lens: Results of a scoping review on the health and health care of ethnocultural minority
  adults. Aging and Society, 33(3), 437-464.
Kum, S. (2017). Gay, gray, black, and blue: An examination of some of the challenges faced by older
  LGBTQ people of color. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Mental Health, 21(3), 228–239.
Larsen, J. L., Clauss-Ehlers, C. S., & Cosden, M. A. (2015). An exploration of army wives’ responses to
  spousal deployment: Stressors and protective factors. Couple and Family Psychology: Research and
  Practice, 4(4), 212-228.
McGoldrick, M., Carter, B., Garcia-Preto, N. (2011). The expanded family life cycle: Individual, family, and
  social perspectives (4rd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
                                                                                                              13


McKeown, A. (2014). Attachment, personality and female perpetrators of intimate partner violence. Journal
  of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology, 25(5), 556-573.
Mereish, E. H., & Poteat, V. P. (2015). A relational model of sexual minority mental and physical health: The
  negative effects of shame on relationships, loneliness, and health. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 62(3),
  425-437.
Mock, J. (2014). Redefining realness: My path to womanhood, identity, love & so much more. NY: Atria.
Moore, J., & Jenkins, P. (2012). ‘Coming out’ in therapy? Perceived risks and benefits of self-disclosure of
  sexual orientation by gay and lesbian therapists to straight clients. Counselling & Psychotherapy Research,
  12(4), 308-315.
Nazario, S. (2007, 2014). Enrique’s Journey. NY: Random House.
Neblett, E.W., Hammond, W.P., Seaton, E. & Townsend, T. (2010). Underlying mechanisms in the
  relationship between Africentric worldview and depressive symptoms. Journal of Counseling Psychology
  57 (1), 105-113.
Newman, B. & Newman, P. (2015). Development through life: A psychosocial approach (12th ed.). Stamford,
  CT: Cengage Learning.
Nicholson, N.R. (2012) A review of social isolation: An important but underassessed condition in older
  adults. Primary Prevention 33: 137.
Nicola, W. (2017). Living “illegally”: On the phenomenology of an undocumented immigrant. Clinical Social
  Work Journal, 45(4), p. 293-300.
Ornelas, J., Martins, P., Zilhao, M.T., & Duarte, T. (2014). Housing First: An ecological approach to
  promoting community integration. European Journal of Homelessness 8(1), 2028.
Orth, U., Trzesniewski, K., & Robins, R. (2010). Self-esteem development from young adulthood to old age:
  A cohort-sequential longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 98(4), 645-658.
Ortiz, R. & Sibinga, E. (2017). The role of mindfulness in reducing the adverse effects of childhood stress
  and trauma. Children 4(3), 16.
Page, A. D., & Peacock, J. R. (2013). Negotiating identities in a heteronormative context. Journal of
  Homosexuality, 60(4), 639-654.
Perry, B. D. (2009). Examining child maltreatment through a neurodevelopmental lens: Clinical applications
  of the neurosequential model of therapeutics. Journal of Loss and Trauma, 14(4), 240-255.
Pistella, J., Salvati, M., Ioverno, S., Laghi, F., & Baiocco, R. (2016). Coming-Out to family members and
  internalized sexual stigma in bisexual, lesbian and gay people. Journal of Child & Family Studies, 25(12),
  3694-3701.
Riggs, S. (2010). Childhood emotional abuse and the attachment system across the life cycle: What theory
  and research tell us. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma 19(1), 5-51.
Riggs, S. & Riggs, D. (2011). Risk and resilience in military families experiencing deployment: The role of
  the family attachment network. Journal of Family Psychology, 25(5), 675-687.
Robinson, D., Papaj, A., Blumer, M.C. (2011). The clinical deployment of therapeutic frameworks and
  genogram questions to serve the servicewomen. Journal of Feminist Family Therapy,23, 263-284.
Rosling, H. 2018). Factfulness: Ten reasons we’re wrong about the world – and why things are better than
  you think. NY: Flatiron Books.
Roth, A. (2018). Insane: America’s criminal treatment of mental illness. NY: Basic Books.
Ruggiano, N. & Edvardsson, D. (2013). Person-centeredness in home- and community-based long-term care:
  Current challenges and new directions. Social Work in Health Care 52(9), 846-861.
Sable, P. (2013). The pet connection: An attachment perspective. Clinical Social Work Journal, 41(1), 93-99.
Saleeby, D. (2013). The strengths perspective in social work practice (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson
  Education.
Sandberg, S. & Grant, A. (2017). Option B: Facing adversity, building resilience, and finding joy. NY:
  Alfred Knopf.
Scherrer, K. (2013). Culturally competent practice with bisexual individuals. Clinical Social Work Journal,
  41(3), 238-248.
 Schwartz, R. (2013). Moving from acceptance toward transformation with internal family systems therapy
  (IFS). Journal of Clinical Psychology 69(8), 805-816.
                                                                                                             14


 Seccombe, K. (2014). So you think I drive a Cadillac? Welfare recipients’ perspectives on the system and
  its reform (4th ed) Boston: Pearson.
Sedlovskaya, A., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Eibach, R. P., LaFmance, M., Romem-Canyas, R., & Camp, N. P.
  (2013). Internalizing the closet: Concealment heightens the cognitive distinction between public and private
  selves. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 104(4), 695-715.
Shonkoff, J.P. & Garner, A.S. (2012). The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and toxic stress.
  Pediatrics 129(1) e232-246.
Singh, A. A., & Moss, L. (2016). Using relational-cultural theory in LGBTQQ counseling: Addressing
  heterosexism and enhancing relational competencies. Journal of Counseling & Development, 94(4), 398-
  404.
Sloman, L. & Taylor, P. (2015). Impact of child maltreatment on attachment and social rank systems:
  Introducing an integrated theory. Trauma, Violence & Abuse 17(2), 172-185.
Sorkin, D., Murphy, M., Nguyen, H., Biegler, K. (2016). Barriers to mental health care for an ethnically and
  racially diverse sample of older adults. Journal of American Geriatric Society, 64(10), p. 2138-2143.
Steelman, S. M. (2016). Externalizing identities: An integration of narrative therapy and queer theory.
  Journal of Family Psychotherapy, 27(1), 79-84.
Stinehart, M. A., Scott, D. A., & Barfield, H. G. (2012). Reactive attachment disorder in adopted and foster
  care children: Implications for mental health professionals. Family Journal, 20(4), 355-360.
Vaughn, M., DeLisi, M. & Matto, H. (2014). Human behavior: A cell to society approach. Hoboken, NJ:
  Wiley.
Wadsworth, S. M., Cardin, J., Christ, S., Willerton, E., O'Grady, A. F., Topp, D., & ... Mustillo, S. (2016).
  Accumulation of risk and promotive factors among young children in US military families. American
  Journal of Community Psychology, 57(1/2), 190-202.
Walker, M. D., Hernandez, A. M., & Davey, M. (2012). Childhood sexual abuse and adult sexual identity
  formation: Intersection of gender, race, and sexual orientation. The American Journal of Family Therapy,
  40(5), 385–398.
Warner, D. F., & Brown, T. H. (2011). Understanding how race/ethnicity and gender define age-trajectories
  of disability: An intersectionality approach. Social Science & Medicine, 72(8), 1236-1248.
Wiles, J.L., Wild, K., Kerse, N., & Allen, R.E. (2012). Resilience from the point of view of older people:
  ‘There’s still life beyond a funny knee.’ Social Science & Medicine 74, 416-424.
Witten, T. M. (2017). Health and well-being of transgender elders. Annual Review of Gerontology and
  Geriatrics, 37, 27–41.
Yuma-Guerrero, P.J., Lawson, K.A., Velasquez, M.M., von Sternberg, K., Maxson, T., & Garcia, N. (2012).
  Screening, brief intervention, and referral for alcohol use in adolescents: A systematic review. Pediatrics
  130(1). 115-122.
Zayas, L.H., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Yoon, H., and Natera-Rey, G. (2015). The distress of citizen-children with
  detained and deported parents. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 24 (11), 3213-3223.
Zeanah, C. H., Chesher, T., & Boris, N. W. (2016). Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of
  children and adolescents with reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement
  disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 55(11), 990-1003.
                                                                                                              15


                                               APPENDIX
                    ASSIGNMENT EXPECTATIONS AND GUIDELINES
    .
I.           DISCUSSION FORUMS - 40% of final grade (8% per week)
Each week the instructor will post asynchronous PowerPoint slides and other materials to be
reviewed in addition to assigned readings. After reviewing materials, students will submit a
response (estimated one page single spaced) on the Canvas discussion board link to a series of
prompts no later than Wednesday (6/10, 6/17, 6/24, 7/1, and 7/8) by 11:59 p.m. They will then
respond to at least two peers’ postings (1/3 to ½ page) no later than Friday of that week (6/12,
6/19, 6/26, and 7/3 - no peer responses are due in week 5) by 11:59 p.m. Students can respond to
either an initial peer’s post or a response to an initial post, expanding discussion and critical
thinking in subsequent posts. Students will receive up to 8 points each week for their postings;
points will be determined by thoughtful responses to prompts that demonstrate critical thinking as
well as integration of readings and asynchronous course materials. Please include your postings
directly on the discussion board link rather than submitting them in a word document.
II.      CASE ANALYSIS – 35% of final grade (15% for draft due June 22; 20% for final
         submission due July 6)
Students are required to complete a written case analysis focusing on how to engage, assess, intervene, and
evaluate practice with an individual, a family, a group, an organization, or a community. This is a common
assignment for students in all sections of HBSE to assess how well they master competencies 6.1, 7.2, 8.2,
and 9.2 of the Council on Social Work Education’s Education Policy and Accreditation Process (EPAS).
Results are used to evaluate the School’s curriculum as part of its process to maintain CSWE accreditation.
This assignment assesses the following competencies:
 CSWE Competency                                                       Mastery Assessed by Completion
                                                                       of
 6.1 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Parts 1 and 2, submitted in
 environment, person-in-environment, and other multidisciplinary Installment I
 theoretical frameworks to engage with clients and constituencies.
 7.2 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Part 3, submitted in Installment I
 environment, person-in-environment, and other interdisciplinary
 theoretical frameworks in the analysis of assessment data from
 clients and constituencies.
 8.2 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Part 4, submitted in final analysis
 environment, person-in- environment, and other interdisciplinary
 theoretical frameworks in interventions with clients and
 constituencies.
 9.2 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Part 5, submitted in final analysis
 environment, person in environment, and other interdisciplinary
 theoretical frameworks in evaluating practice with individuals,
 families, and groups
The objectives of this assignment are:
    • To apply critical thinking to the engagement, problem identification, assessment, planning,
         intervention, and evaluation for a case situation.
    • To practice using evidence-based resources to guide case interventions.
    • To apply a theoretical framework(s) to a case and presenting problem.
    • To gain experience writing a formal case analysis using APA format.
This analysis will be submitted in two parts: 1) a draft of installment 1 of your case analysis
                                                                                                           16


(introduction, engagement of the client, problem identification, and assessment of the case)
due Monday, June 22; and 2) a final case analysis paper incorporating changes to the first
part of your paper based on feedback received and a continuation of your analysis (goals and
intervention strategies and evaluation) due Monday, July 6. Both assignments should be
submitted as word documents on Canvas.
Your case analysis should be written using one of the following cases in the Hutchison text: 2.1
(Intergenerational stresses in the McKinley family), 9.1 (Leticia Renteria), 10.3 (The Suarez
family after September 11, 2001), 11.3 (Sarah’s teen dad), 12.2 (Terri’s terrible temper), 13.3
(Manuel Vega), 14.1 (David’s coming out process), 16.2 (Margaret Davis stays at home). Students
will select cases during the first week of the course. Your analysis should be approximately 8 full
double-spaced, 12-point font, pages in length (excluding cover and reference pages) and must
adhere to APA 7th edition guidelines. This analysis should be supported with a minimum of 5
peer-reviewed, refereed journal articles published within the past ten years (unless you are citing
the original author of a theory or an important historic citation). Do not use any websites as one of
your references unless the reference is a peer reviewed, refereed journal article unless you are
using the website to provide current demographic information.
A. CASE ANALYSIS – INSTALLMENT I
Installment I must be posted on Canvas no later than Monday, June 22 at 11:59 p.m. and
will count 15% toward your final grade. It will cover parts 1, 2, and 3 of the case analysis
requirements with a minimum of four sources (including 3 peer-reviewed articles and the
Hutchison text), cited appropriately in the body of your document and on your reference page.
• Part 1a - Relevant Background Information:
        o Briefly summarize the case, giving identifying information about the targeted
            client/client system, which can be an individual, family, group, organization, or
            community and why you chose that system as the client (use third person; cite text).
        o Include information about the client/client system (for example, if an individual, age,
            race/ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation/gender identity, religion if relevant, current
            living situation, presenting problem.)
        o Include detailed, relevant facts related only to the targeted client system you chose.
            This information should be grounded in the available case information and not based
            on unwritten assumptions, stereotypes, or biased opinions. The information should
            help explain the behavior of the client system in its total environment.
        o Suggested length ½-1 page
• Part 1b - Problem Statement:
        o Give a specific and concisely written formulation of the problem to guide your analysis
            and problem-solving.
        o Suggested length: One short paragraph
• Part 2 - Engagement of the Client in the Case:
        o Briefly describe how the client (or client system) is being engaged or not being
            engaged in addressing the problem the client (or client system) is facing. It is
            important to engage the client and develop a relationship so the client will be willing to
            seek and receive help.
        o Be sure to describe the engagement strategies such as empathy, reflection, and
            interpersonal skills a social worker could use with the targeted client system in the
            case. Remember that the targeted system can be an individual, family, group,
            organization, or community.
                                                                                                      17


       o Use third person throughout your paper. Here, for example, you could say “The social
           worker could engage the client by….”, not “I will……”.
       o (Suggested length ½ page)
•  Part 3 - Assessment of the Case:
       o After reviewing the background information, determine the major factors that are
           significant (for example, type of problem identified, age, race/ethnicity, gender
           identity, sexual orientation, ability/disability, citizenship status, access to economic and
           other resources). Then, using the UT library or Google scholar search systems, identify
           at least 3 peer reviewed journal articles published within the last ten years that will help
           with your assessment of this case (understanding what you think is going on and why).
           These articles can then serve as the major source of supportive information in this
           section of your case analysis.
       o Organize the information data from the case study and describe a single problem that
           the targeted client system is facing in the case. (1 paragraph).
       o Identify and discuss the biopsychosocial and cultural factors that contributed to this
           problem. Summarize the various environmental contextual factors that relate to the
           case (e.g., individual, family, peers, school/employment, neighborhood, community;
           biological, cultural, economic, political/legal, ethical). Do not reiterate the facts of the
           case, but describe the contextual issues surrounding the case objectively. (You can
           incorporate information from your literature review/journal articles here.)
       o Choose one theoretical framework covered in this course that guided your assessment
           of the problem of the targeted client system. Explain the theory/framework(s) and then
           show how it is relevant to the problems and core issues of this case. Be sure you
           include a source; you can incorporate information from your literature review/journal
           articles here as well.
       o Suggested length 3 ½ pages; assessment and contextual discussion should be about 2-2
           1/2 pages; theory discussion should be about 1 page
•  Reference Page
       o Cite all sources used in this installment following APA format.
B. FINAL CASE ANALYSIS
Your final case analysis must be posted on Canvas no later than Monday, July 6, at 11:59
p.m. and will count 20% toward your final grade. It will include your revisions of parts I, 2,
and 3, as well as parts 4 and 5 of the case analysis (including at least 3 peer-reviewed articles
that focus on intervention strategies relevant to your case study).
• Cover page and abstract
• Parts 1, 2, and 3 revised
• Part 4 - Intervention Strategies:
       o Based on your assessment of the case, develop intervention goals and select appropriate
           intervention strategies that you and the client/client system would collaborate on to
           address the problem(s)/achieve the goals you have identified.
       o Describe how the intervention strategies will be implemented. Be sure the strategies
           relate to the identified problem and are consistent with your assessment of the case.
           Strategies should be distinct and feasible/realistic. Note briefly the advantages/
           disadvantages of each strategy selected.
       o Be sure to use a theoretical framework to guide the intervention selection and
           implementation. One theoretical framework can be used for all intervention strategies.
                                                                                                      18


           (It can be either the same framework used in your assessment section or a different
           framework.)
        o Incorporate at least 3 different references from refereed journal articles supporting the
           intervention(s) chosen to address the problem(s).
        o Suggested length 2-3 pages
•  Part 5 - Evaluation of Practice:
        o Select and describe an appropriate method to evaluate the interventions selected. In
           other words, explain how you would know if the intervention(s) you chose was/were
           effective in addressing the problem.
        o Be sure to use your selected theoretical framework to guide the evaluation of the
           intervention selected and implemented.
        o Suggested length ½ page
•  References (incorporate sources from your first installment)
Grading of the case analysis will be based on the following:
   Installment I
   • Introduction (20 points)
   • Engagement of the client (20 points)
   • Assessment of the case (40 points)
           o Described single problem targeted client system is facing in the case (1 paragraph)
                (5 points)
           o Identified and discussed biopsychosocial and cultural factors that have contributed
                to the problem; used at least 3 appropriate peer reviewed journal articles published
                no earlier than 2000 to provide supportive documentation of assessment of the
                problem described and associated factors that have contributed to the problem (25
                points)
           o Discussed one appropriate theoretical framework that guided assessment of targeted
                client system with appropriate citation (10 points)
   • Writing quality and style, including appropriate use of references (20 points)
   Final Case Assessment
   • Attention to feedback received on installment I (10 points)
   • Intervention strategies (50 points)
           o Provided clear intervention goal(s) and strategies to address the problem (15 points)
           o Described how they would be implemented (15 points)
           o Used theoretical framework to guide discussion (5 points)
           o Incorporated at least 3 references from referee journal articles to support decision-
                making (5 points)
           o Strategies were appropriate and derived from assessment of case (10 points)
   • Evaluation (20 points)
   • Writing quality and style, including appropriate use and formatting of references (20
        points)
   III. TAKE-HOME EXAM 15% of final grade due Saturday, July 11
   Students will complete a take-home exam (short-answer essay) at the end of the semester,
   which will require application of concepts and theoretical frameworks covered in the course to
   a film which can be accessed via Netflix or Amazon. Exams should be submitted on Canvas in
   a word document.
                                                                                                   19
