     AFR372C: RACE, GENDER AND SURVEILLANCE
                            (Cross-listed with AMS321/SOC322V/WGS322)
                                              Cultural Diversity Flag
                                          Ethics and Leadership Flag
                                                      Fall 2019
                                        The University of Texas at Austin
                                       Tuesday and Thursday 9:30 – 11am
                                                     RLP 0.130
 Dr. Simone Browne
 Department of African and African Diaspora Studies
 Email: sbrowne@austin.utexas.edu
                                          COURSE DESCRIPTION
 Race, Gender and Surveillance will provide an overview of theories in the emerging field of Surveillance
 Studies, with a focus on race and gender. We will examine transformations in social control and the
 distributions of power in U.S. and global contexts, with a focus on populations within the African diaspora. As
 such, this is a Black Studies course. Course topics include: the Trans-Atlantic slave trade; prisons and
 punishment; reality television; social media; anti-surveillance fashion; airports; biometrics and drones.
 Students will be encouraged to develop critical reading, writing and analytical skills. Through the use of films,
 videos and other visual media students will be challenged to better understand how surveillance practices
 inform modern life.
 Your participation grade will be based upon your informed participation and not solely on your attendance. You
 are expected to contribute informed opinions based on a close reading of the course materials and
 engagement with the themes of the course. Sharing your personal opinions, while important, will not solely
 constitute informed discussion.
 Students who acquire six or more unexcused absences will receive a failing grade. Excessive tardiness will
 be counted as an absence. Leaving class early, without first informing the professor, will also be counted
 as an absence.
 Students registered in this course as a PASS/FAIL must complete all required assignments.
                                               REQUIRED TEXTS
Patrisse Khan-Cullors and Asha Bandele. When They Call You a Terrorist: A Black Lives Matter Memoir (2018)
All other required readings, videos and texts will be posted to Canvas or will be available electronically through
the UT Library or can be downloaded from the internet under a Creative Commons license. Please check the
Canvas site regularly for updates.
                                          WEEK 1: INTRODUCTION
 August 29
 Course Requirements and Expectations, Questionnaire, Review Syllabus and Assignments, Q&A.
                                WEEK 2: A MANIFESTO ON SURVEILLANCE
 September 3
 RESEARCH TEAM IN-CLASS SPEED PROJECT
 Simone Browne. 2015. ‘Introduction, and Other Dark Matters’ (pp.1-24) in Dark Matters: On the Surveillance
 of Blackness.


                                                                                                           2
Nicole Shephard. 2016. ‘5 reasons why surveillance is a feminist issue’.
Jenna Wortham. 2018. et al. ‘Letters’ in The End of Trust: An Investigation of Surveillance in the Digital Age
(available to download under a CC license. Link on Canvas)
Sara Wachter-Boettcher. 2018. ‘Everything Happens So Much’ in The End of Trust.
Thenmozhi Soundararajan. 2018. ‘A More Visionary Movement’ in The End of Trust.
September 5
‘Chapter One’ (Pp. 31-50) in Dark Matters.
Suggested Reading: The 1619 Project. New York Times Magazine (link on Canvas).
                   WEEK 3: SURVEILLANCE DURING SLAVERY + ITS AFTERLIFE
September 10
Christian Parenti. 2003. ‘Antebellum ID: Genealogies of Identification and Registration’ in The Soft Cage:
Surveillance in America From Slave Passes to the War on Terror.
‘Chapter One’ (Pp. 51-62) and ‘Chapter Three’ (Pp.89-108) in Dark Matters.
September 12
Tressie McMillan Cottom. 2019. ‘In the Name of Beauty’ in Thick and Other Essays.
Malkia Cyril. 2018. ‘Watching the Black Body’ in The End of Trust.
                          WEEK 4: PANOPTICISM, SOUSVEILLANCE + CCTV
September 17
Lorna A Rhodes. 1998. ‘Panoptical Intimacies’
Michel Foucault. 2007 (1977). ‘Panopticism’ in The Surveillance Studies Reader
Steve Mann et al. 2018. ‘Sousveillance’ in Surveillance Studies: A Reader.
September 19
Christian Parenti. 2003. ‘The Accumulation of Bodies, Part I: Identification and Photography’ ‘The
Accumulation of Bodies, Part II: Early Biometrics’ in The Soft Cage
Shawn Michell Smith. 2018. ‘The Mugshot: A Brief History’ in Prison Nation.
Chantel Tattoli. 2018. ‘The Surprising History of (and Future) of Fingerprints’ in The Paris Review.
                            WEEK 5: SURVEILLANCE-BASED REALITY TV
September 24
SURVEILLANCE OBSERVATION DUE
Christian Parenti. 2003. ‘Voyeurism and Security Culture’ in The Soft Cage
Kristen J. Walker. 2015. ‘They Gon’ Think You Loud Regardless: Ratchetness, Reality Television, and Black
Womanhood’
September 26
RESEARCH TEAM IN-CLASS SPEED PROJECT
                          WEEK 6: “Once you’re in the system, you’re in forever”
October 1
Christian Parenti. 2003. ‘The Benevolent Gaze: Dossiers and the Helping Professions’ in The Soft Cage.
                                                       2


                                                                                                       3
Johnnie Tillmon. 1972. ‘Welfare is a Women's Issue’. Ms. Magazine.
Excerpts from Welfare (1975) will be screened in class.
October 3
Virginia Eubanks. 2015. Automating Inequality: How High-Tech Tools Profile, Police and Punish the Poor
(excerpts)
Virginia Eubanks interview in The End of Trust.
Madison Van Oort. 2019. ‘Employing the Carceral Imaginary: An Ethnography of Worker Surveillance in the
Retail Industry’ in Captivating Technology: Race, Carceral Technoscience and the Liberatory Imagination in
Everyday Life.
                                  WEEK 7: BIOMETRIC TECHNOLOGY
October 8
Lorna Roth. 2018. ‘Making Skin Visible through Liberatory Design’ in Captivating Technology.
October 10
FILM REVIEW DUE
Toby Beauchamp. 2019. ‘Bathrooms, Borders and Biometrics’ in Going Stealth: Transgender Politics and U.S.
Surveillance Practices.
                           WEEK 8: WHEN THEY CALL YOU A TERRORIST
October 15
TEST ONE (TAKE HOME) DISTRIBUTED IN CLASS
Patrisse Khan-Cullors and Asha Bandele. 2018. When They Call You a Terrorist: A Black Lives Matter Memoir
October 17
No Class Scheduled
                                            WEEK 9: BORDERS
October 22
TEST ONE DUE AT THE BEGINNING OF CLASS
Bryce Clayton Newell et al. 2017. ‘Sensors, Cameras, and the New ‘Normal’ in Clandestine Migration: How
Undocumented Migrants Experience Surveillance at the U.S.-Mexico Border’.
Toby Beauchamp. 2019. ‘Flying Under the Radar’ in Going Stealth: Transgender Politics and U.S.
Surveillance Practices.
October 24
Lisa Parks. 2018. ‘Searching: Screening Practices as US Airport Security Checkpoints’ in Rethinking Media
Coverage: Vertical Mediation and the War on Terror.
Saher Selod. 2018. 'Flying While Muslim: State Surveillance of Muslim Americans in U.S Airport’ in Forever
Suspect.
                                   WEEK 10: CARCERAL CAPITALISM
October 29
Anthony Ryan Hatch. 2019. ‘Billions Served: Prison Food Regimes, Nutritional Punishment, and
Gastronomical Resistance’ in Captivating Technology.
Andrea Miller. 2019. ‘Shadows of War, Traces of Policing’ in Captivating Technology.
Jackie Wang. 2018. Carceral Capitalism (excerpts).
October 31
RESEARCH TEAM IN-CLASS SPEED PROJECT
                                                      3


                                                                                                      4
Edward F. Loomis. 2018. ‘A Compendium of Law Enforcement Surveillance Tools’ in The End of Trust.
Hamid Khan et al. 2018. ‘Should Law Enforcement Use Surveillance’ in The End of Trust.
                                       WEEK 11: ART + RESISTANCE
November 5
micha cárdenas. 2017. ‘Dark Shimmers: The Rhythm of Necropolitical Affect in Digital Media’ in Trap
Door: Trans Cultural Production and the Politics of Visibility.
Torin Monahan. 2018. ‘Ways of Being Seen: Surveillance Art and the Interpellation of Viewing Subjects’.
November 7
No class scheduled.
                              WEEK 12: SURVEILLANCE AFTER SNOWDEN
November 12
CURRENT EVENT ANALYSIS DUE
David Lyon. 2015. ‘Snowden Storm’ and ‘Menacing Metadata’ in Surveillance After Snowden.
Laura Poitrus. 2016. ‘Berlin Journal’ in Astro Noise.
Citizenfour will be screen in class
November 14
Soraya Okunda. ‘The Postcards We Send: Tips on Staying Vigilant in the Information Age’ in The End of
Trust.
Continue screening Citzenfour
                                       WEEK 13: DIGITAL DEFENSE
November 19
TBA
November 21
TBA
Take-home Final Test distributed in class. DUE Thursday December 5TH.
                                         WEEK 14: SOCIAL MEDIA
November 26
RESEARCH TEAM IN-CLASS SPEED PROJECT
Sarah T. Roberts. 2019. Behind the Screen: Content Moderation in the Shadow of Social Media (excerpts).
Casey Newton. 2019. ‘The Trauma Floor: The Secret Lives of Facebook Moderators in America’ in Verge.
November 28
THANKSGIVNG
                                          WEEK 15: FINAL WEEK
December 3
Wrap-Up, Course Evaluation.
December 5
Final Test Due
                                         COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Your grade in this course will be based on:
Participation and Attendance                       5%
Surveillance Observation                          10%
                                                      4


                                                                                                             5
Film Review                                          15%
Test One                                             20%
Current Event Analysis                               10%
9/3 In-Class Speed Project                            5%
9/26 In-Class Speed Project                           5%
10/31 In-Class Speed Project                          5%
11/26 In-Class Speed Project                          5%
Final Test                                           20%
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the above rubric. To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute,
and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through
83.999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+. I reserve the right to distribute unannounced
quizzes on the reading or lecture material. Any missed points on these quizzes will be deducted from your
participation grade. Quizzes may not be made-up if you are absent.
GRADING SCHEME
    A:    100-94
    A-:     93-90
    B+:    89-88
    B:     87-83
    B-:   82-80
    C+    79-78
    C:    77-73
    C-:   72-70
    D+:   69-68
    D:    67-63
    D-:   62-60
    F:    59-0
Students who acquire six or more unexcused absences will receive a failing grade. Attendance will be taken for
each class by way of in-class assignments or sign-in sheet.
Please note that this is an upper level undergraduate course and your success in this course depends on close
reading and engagement with the texts (readings, films, audio recordings, videoclips, videogames and weblinks
posted to Canvas), as well as active participation in class discussions. You will be responsible for checking the
Canvas course site regularly for class work, additional texts, updates to the syllabus and announcements.
Class participation will be based on attendance and meaningful participation in class discussions and written
responses. Meaningful participation is taken to be active listening and notetaking; analytic engagement with the
texts, not vague commentary or generalizations. You are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the
readings.
Over the course of the semester you will be ask to respond, in writing, to texts discussed during the lecture.
These assignments will form a part of your participation grade. Some may be handed out in advance to
complete before the due date.
Religious Holy Days
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class schedules. If you miss an assignment due to the observance
of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time
after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your
instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a
religious holy day.
                                                          5


                                                                                                            6
Grading Policy
Papers must be submitted in hard copy to the professor or TA in class. Email submissions will not be accepted.
Your papers must be stapled together, typed, double-spaced in 12-point font (Times New Roman). Follow a
style guide for citations and your bibliography. Please keep copies of your papers.
Late assignments will be subject to a per day late penalty and will not be accepted one week after the due date.
Extensions will be granted only in exceptional circumstances.
PLEASE NOTE: If you feel that there is a problem with your grade on one of the assignments, you must write
one paragraph explaining the error. Then, please hand in your paragraph of explanation in addition to the
original assignment to your TA for grade reconsideration. You must allow at least one week for grade
reconsideration. Re-grading can only be done by this method. Grade changes cannot be discussed over email.
Please do not approach the TA or professor during class time to discuss grade changes.
Academic Integrity
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University Code of Academic Integrity. Any work
submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student’s own work. Please see The Office
of the Dean of Students’ Standard of Academic Integrity http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
as well as the link to A Guide to Avoiding Plagiarism on the same webpage.
Accommodations For Students With Disabilities
In compliance with the UT Austin policy and equal access laws, I am available to discuss appropriate academic
accommodations that may be required for students with disabilities. If accommodation are necessary, you are
encouraged to this discuss this with me as soon as possible. Requests for academic accommodations are to be
made during the first three weeks of the semester, except for unusual circumstances, so appropriate
arrangements can be made. Students are encouraged to register with Student Disability Services to verify their
eligibility for appropriate accommodations.
                                                 ASSIGNMENTS
Surveillance Observation
Due on SEPTEMBER 24th. Details regarding this assignment will be distributed in class
Film Analysis
DUE ON OCTOBER 10th.
Taking popular culture as pedagogical, consider the lessons that popular culture offers about the role of
surveillance in society. As well, you could comment on the limits of this medium (film) as means of
theorizing surveillance. Please write a typed, four page analysis of one of the following films: Get Out, Sorry
to Bother You, Naz & Maalik, Sleep Dealer, Brother From Another Planet, Django Unchained, Enemy of the
State, Ex-Machina, and THX1138. Alternately, you are can choose to analyze the “Black Museum” or the
“Arkangel” episodes from the series Black Mirror. More details on the requirements for this assignment will
be discussed in class.
Current Event Analysis
Due on NOVEMBER 12th. Details regarding this assignment will be distributed in class.
Test One
Due on OCTOBER 22nd.
Final Test
A take home Final Test will be distributed in class on NOVEMBER 21st. You must hand in your test on
DECEMBER 5th.
                                                        6
