                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                                  Steve Hicks School of Social Work
Course Number: SW 387R36                        Professor: Joan Asseff, LCSW
Unique Number: 88755                                            Pronouns: she, her, hers
Semester: Summer 2019                           Email address: jasseff@utexas.edu
Meeting Time/Place: T & TH 2:00-4:30            Preferred Phone: 512-627-5008
                          SSW 2.122             Office Hours: Tuesdays 11:30-12:30 pm
Office: SSW 3.124C                                              and by appointment
                            SOCIAL WORK IN HEALTH CARE
I.       STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This elective practice course is designed to explore aspects of social work practice in healthcare
settings with a biopsychosocial and family-centered perspective. The foundation of the course is
social work values and ethical decision-making process as illuminated in the NASW code of
ethics. Practice issues to be explored include: the subjective experience and reactions to living
with illness, change and adaptation, grief and loss, trauma and it’s connection to pain and chronic
conditions, values and ethical dilemmas, economic justice and access issues in health care,
disenfranchised populations and cultural humility and awareness. The complexities of health care
social will be examined in various settings including: inpatient, outpatient, clinics, home care
agencies, hospice and community-based centers. The current shifting role of social work in the
interdisciplinary medical setting will be discussed. Students will be encouraged to think about
their roles in facilitating health and wellness to individuals, families and communities. The role
of individual differences (i.e. gender, race/ethnicity, spirituality, etc.) and societal/cultural beliefs
in relation to situations involving illness will be highlighted. Skill development will focus upon
all phases of the helping process, including attention to the unique aspects of termination with
clients coping with illness. Examination of personal attitudes and experiences involving grief and
loss will facilitate increased self-awareness.
II.      STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
Demonstrate an understanding of the historical significance of social work in medical settings and
explore the current range of opportunities for practice.
Demonstrate an understanding of contemporary health care issues related to societal, political and
organizational changes in health care.
Demonstrate an understanding of the impact and meaning of illness, life-threatening conditions,
grief and bereavement for children, adults and families.
Demonstrate an understanding of the common psychosocial and spiritual challenges faced by
individuals, families and communities confronting illness.


Demonstrate an understanding of the cultural factors at work in the clinical interface with
individuals in medical settings.
Demonstrate an understanding of the Adult Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study and the link
between childhood trauma and the risk of chronic health conditions, including chronic pain.
Demonstrate an understanding of the health care issues as they relate to cultural diversity, social
justice, and disenfranchised populations.
Demonstrate an understanding of the nature of illness, its multidimensional aspects and the
interrelationship between environmental, social, psychological, and biological factors in its cause,
course and outcome.
Demonstrate an understanding of the clinical dimensions of clinical practice in the context of
health care and multidisciplinary practice.
Develop a reflective awareness of the practitioner’s experiences of health and illness and the
importance of selfcare.
III.     TEACHING METHODS
This course is designed to include a variety of teaching methodologies to achieve the expectation
of student mastery of theoretically-grounded advanced practice skill competencies in the group
work method, with emphasis on children, adolescents, and families. Learning activities may
include readings, writings, discussions, lectures, guest speakers, social media, in-class group
activities, student presentations, self-reflection, community experience, and experiential exercises.
IV.      REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
Required Text
Allen, K.M. & Spitzer, W.J. (2016). Social Work Practice in Healthcare: Advanced
            Approaches and Emerging Trends. Sage.
All additional readings will be available on Canvas.
V.       COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Class Attendance and Contribution                                                     10 pts
Class contribution grade will be determined in two ways:
         First, due to the format and content of the course, regular and punctual attendance is
         imperative. The class experience is co-constructed and students are expected to attend
         class regularly and to participate in an interactive framework between collegiate students
         and professor. Students are expected to complete the readings prior to class and should
         be well prepared to participate in discussions and experiential learning assignments.
         Failure to attend class and demonstrate thorough comprehension of the readings will be


     considered in assigning the final grade. Punctuality is an important professional practice.
     Class will begin promptly at 2:00 pm. Students will be allowed one unexcused
     absence. If a student misses more than the allotted excused absence, the professor
     reserves the right to lower that student’s grade by one point for each class missed beyond
     the one allowed.
     Second, to support informed class interaction, students will be divided into small groups
     with each group asked to prepare two or three questions from the readings for at least one
     class during the semester. The questions should address some issue or concern raised by
     the readings for that week that may be of special interest to the students or perhaps an
     issue that seems unclear. The questions need to be typed and double spaced, and the
     small group will present the question and lead a brief class discussion concerning the
     issue during the scheduled portion of their assigned class. The questions will then be
     turned in to the instructor. Grades on a scale of 1-10 will be given for the questions and
     will be determined by both the quality of the questions, and the ability to elicit informed
     involvement of the class.
     All three of these aspects of class contribution: attendance and punctuality, questions
     prepared for class and on-going participation and interactions during class will factor into
     the 10 points for attendance and contribution.
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale                                               30 pts
     The purpose of this assignment is for students to engage in active learning of suicide
     assessments. It is vital that all social workers in the health care field have the skill to
     assess patients for suicidality and optimize healthcare resources by directing people to the
     right level of care. Students will participate in an online training on learning to assess for
     suicide ideations by familiarizing themselves with the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating
     Scale (CSSRS). The CSSR Scale is a tool used in healthcare settings to assess the
     severity of suicidality and better identify those at risk. Students will complete two online
     trainings and write a one-page paper reflecting on their experience using the scale and
     answer the following question: Is the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale culturally
     sensitive? Please explain your answer.
     Instructions:
     Browse the website http://cssrs.columbia.edu.
     After browsing around website to get familiar with the CSSRS, click on ‘Training’ and
     then ‘Training for Communities and Healthcare’.
     Scroll all the way down to the bottom of the page where there is a link for ‘certificates’.
     Click on ‘Training Campus’.
     Please follow instructions to register for the website.
     Please complete the following two trainings and print or screen shot your certificate:
     RFMG-Z01-Administration Training for the C-SSRS-Screener Version and RFMH-101-
     The Suicide Scale C-SSR-English-USA.


        Write a one-page reflection paper on your experience with the training in addition to
        answering the question: Is the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale culturally
        sensitive? Please explain your answer.
        Important: Please turn copies of the certificate to receive credit for the assignment
        along with your one-page, double spaced reflection paper.
Ethnographic Interview                                                                40 pts
        Social work in health care often involves the care and treatment of individuals with
        chronic diseases. The purpose of the interview is to understand what it means to “live
        with” a chronic or serious physical illness from the perspective of the person, also known
        as the informant, who has a chronic or serious illness or is a primary caregiver of
        someone with a chronic/serious physical illness. In ethnography, since informants are
        living day-to-day with the illness, they are considered the “experts”, and you should
        approach the interview from the position of a naïve learner. It is important to let the
        informant teach you about his/her experience and to identify what he/she/they thinks is
        important for you to learn about the daily life of one who is living with a chronic,
        disabling or terminal illness.
Part A: The Interview
    Select an informant who is NOT related to you and is currently experiencing a chronic,
    disabling or terminal physical illness or is the primary caregiver or significant other of
    someone who has a chronic/serious physical illness.
    Unlike a clinical interview which focuses on gaining information for assessment and
    intervention, the ethnographic interview approach focuses on three main dimensions from the
    informant’s viewpoint:
        The meaning of the illness
        The types of strategies used to cope with the illness;
        The way in which the informant organizes his/her world in the context of the illness
    Confidentiality must be upheld and discussed with the informant before the interview occurs;
    assure the informant that her/his name will not be used in any way in your verbal or written
    work.
  Interviews are generally 1 to 2 hours long; you may take detailed handwritten notes during the
  session IF agreeable to the informant, BUT you may not tape record the interview. The
  interview should be fairly open yet focused enough so that you can develop an understanding
  of what it’s like to live with the person’s illness/disability/or terminal illness.
  Acquaint yourself with the informant’s illness PRIOR to the interview. Develop an
  interview guide to help you during the interview. The following are suggestions for what you
  might want to cover/include in your interview guide:
            How did the informant first notice that something was wrong or experience
            symptoms?
            What were the informant’s initial feelings/response to symptoms and/or diagnosis and
            what did those mean for the informant?


            How did the informant make sense of his/her illness (i.e., what kinds of
            explanations/theories about “why me?”)
            How does the informants culture, ethnicity, age, gender, race, socioeconomic class,
            sexual orientation, gender identity, philosophical or religious beliefs affect his/her
            illness experience?
            How does she/he cope with the illness on a daily basis?
            What is the impact of the illness and of receiving medical treatment oneself, family
            life, work, career plans, social relationships, etc.?
            What is his/her experience of accessing health care and of interactions with health
            care providers?
Part B: Written assignment of the Interview
Summarize the informant’s experience of being chronically ill as you
uncovered/discovered/understood it from your interview. Write a 5 page paper (using APA 6th
edition), including at least 3 direct quotes from the informant, and 3 relevant citations from the
social work literature (1996-2015) that addresses ALL the questions below:
        1. What is your understanding of the condition/illness/disease of the informant?
                 a. List sources you utilized to gain that understanding.
        2. Discuss the impact on the psychosocial life of the informant from his/her viewpoint.
        How does she/he cope with the illness/what strategies does he/she use to cope with/adapt
        to the illness?
        3. What was the most compelling thing you learned about the informant’s experience
        from an insider’s perspective? How will you incorporate this learning in your practice as
        a professional social worker?
        4. In retrospect, in general, how well do you think you elicited information from the
        informant about his/her illness experience/role as caregiver? Looking back, what areas do
        you wish you had covered in the interview but did not?
        5. How “connected” did you feel to the informant and why, and what part of the
        interview was the most difficult for you to “stay with” and why?
        6. How was the health care service delivery system/provider/agency/managed care
        system barriers and/or resources for the informant and/or family? Analyze how these
        systems enhanced, challenged, or were neutral influences on the well-being of the
        consumer and family.
        7. Attach your interview guide to your paper and submit both in to the professor.
A Real World Challenge Assignment:                                                    20 points
Reducing Health Disparities in Your Community
(Assignment adapted from Teaching Tolerance www.tolerance.org)
        The goal of this assignment is to increase student awareness of how local or statewide
        solution-focused ideas can make a positive impact on an identified health disparity.
        Teams will be formed within the cohort to research and choose a health disparity for their
        classroom presentation. The challenge involves convincing fellow classmates (in their
        role as community members) to consider the solution proposed by the group to reduce the
        identified health disparity. Possible areas include, but are not limited to, HIV/AIDS,
        cancer, obesity, access to healthcare, infant birth weight, maternal mortality, infant


      mortality, life expectancy, depression, environmental disparities, suicide rate and heart
      disease. This will be achieved by demonstrating its impact on both specific groups and
      the community as a whole. Research the related statistics for at least 2 socially
      disadvantaged groups. Examine the impact on the groups and the community as a whole.
      Think about the specific populations your group has researched and what could
      realistically work. You many also need to research what has been done before.
      PROJECT DATES:
      June 18th – project groups need to be determined and should have 4-5 members.
      June 20th – In order to avoid duplicate areas of research, groups need to email Professor
      Sparks their top 2 health disparity topics they wish to investigate and propose a solution
      for. Project proposals will be confirmed by June 23rd.
      July 31st – final presentations are due. The format of the presentation is entirely up to the
      group. Powerpoints are not required and creativity is encouraged. Presentations should
      be a total of 20 minutes, including time for questions and answers. Proposals should
      include:
                   • Statistics to support your case about the health disparity
                   • A clear explanation of the impact to the people and community affected
                   • A workable solution, idea or program to reduce or end the health disparity
VI.   GRADES
      Grading Scale
      Attendance and Contribution                           10
      Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale                30
      Ethnographic Interview                                40
      Health Disparity Assignment                           20
      TOTAL                                                100 %
  The following scale will be used to determine your final letter grade:
               94.0 and above         A
               90.0 to 93.999         A-
               87.0 to 89.999         B+
               84.0 to 86.999         B
               80.0 to 83.999         B-
               77.0 to 79.999         C+
               74.0 to 76.999         C
               70.0 to 73.999         C-
               67.0 to 69.999         D+
               64.0 to 66.999         D
               60.0 to 63.999         D-
               Below 60.0             F


VII. CLASS POLICIES
Class Participation: Students are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in an
interactive framework between collegiate students, professor and invited guest speakers.
Students are expected to complete the readings prior to class and should be well prepared to
participate in discussions and experiential learning assignments. Failure to attend class and
demonstrate through discussions that one has comprehended (or attempted to understand) the
readings will be considered in assigning the final grade.
Attendance: Punctuality is one of the many important standards of professional behavior. Class
will begin promptly at 11:30 and end at 2:30. A student is considered absent if they arrive more
than 10 minutes late to class, leave early, or are unable to come to class. Absences may result in
a reduction by one letter grade. If a student is going to be absent, efforts should be made to
contact the professor in advance. Students are responsible for any material missed due to
absence.
Late Assignments: Except in the case of extended emergencies, and then only with the
permission of the professor, late assignments will not be accepted without penalty. Students
are expected to turn in all required assignments on the agreed upon due date to Canvas by the
beginning of class. Assignments turned in after class begins will be considered late. If
accepted, late assignments will be assessed point penalties at the rate of three (3) points each
day late. If the due date is a problem, the student can see the professor and negotiate another
due date well in advance.
Writing Assignments: The ability to write in a professional manner is very important for social
workers, particularly in settings where they work as members of interdisciplinary teams. Written
work must be typed, edited for grammatical, spelling and typographical errors. Work will be
graded based on the American Psychological Association (APA – 5th edition) guidelines for
references and citations, unless otherwise stated in the guidelines for the assignment.
Class Performance: If students have concerns about their class performance, the professor is
more than willing to work with them to help improve their understanding of the class material of
the assignments prior to the end of the semester. Final grades assigned in the course are not
negotiable.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for


class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities,
religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect
to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social
Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did
not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment
we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas
expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with
civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.


Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit:http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the
Education Amendments of 1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a
learning environment that is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, interpersonal
violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be
informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX
Coordinator and/or the Title IX Liaison for the SHSSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty
and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to obtain information. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found
at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.


CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone
who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
        • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember
        that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
        • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
        week of class.
        • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
        • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
        Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.


IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
Other methods of teaching, such as TED talks and videos will be added onto Canvas
throughout the semester. Students are expected to check the Canvas modules for
additionally assigned material.
***Please note that all assignments will be posted on Canvas with requirements and
instructions.
   Date               Topic             Assignment Due                     Readings
                                                          Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
  June 6   Overview of course                                work practice in health care:
           syllabus, assignments,                           Advanced approaches and emerging
           expectations, etc.                               trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
                                                            Publishing. (Pages 7-25 and 46-62).
           NASW Health Care                               (It is not necessary to read the case
           Standards                                      studies.)
           What IS healthcare social                      NASW Healthcare Standards pages 5-
           work?                                          16
           Recognizing Social
 June 11   Determinants of Health                         Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
                                                             work practice in health care:
           Recognizing Health                               Advanced approaches and emerging
           Disparities                                      trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
                                                            Publishing. (Pages 69-79).
           Interventions
                                                          National Academies of Sciences,
           Healthcare Social Work                             Engineering, and Medicine (2017).
           Theories                                           Communities in action: Pathways to
                                                              health equity. Washington, D.C: The
                                                              National Academies Press. Doi:
                                                              10.177226/24624. (pages57-88;
                                                              99-164).
                                                          Video:
                                                          “Unnatural Causes: In Sickness and In
                                                          Wealth”
 June 13   Evidence Informed                              NASW Healthcare pages 22-24
           Interventions Related To:
               • Working with                             Rice, S. (2014). Hospitals often ignore
                  diverse patients                             policies on using qualified medical


            •   How to use an                              interpreters. Modern Healthcare.
                interpreter                                Retrieved from: http://www.modern
            •   How to use cultural                         healthcare.com/article/2014-
                inquiry, humility                           830/MAGAZINE/308309945.
                and spirituality
                                                       Weinstein-Moser, E. (2008). Spirituality
        The Influence of                                   in social work – the journey from
        Spirituality in Healthcare                        fringe to mainstream. Social Work
                                                          Today, vol. 8(2), pg.32. Retrieved
                                                          from: www.socialworktoday.com/
                                                          archive/marapr2008p32.shtml.
                                                       Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
June 18 Evidence Informed Care of   Select Project       work practice in health care:
        Children and Families:      Groups for A        Advanced approaches and emerging
        • Perinatal Care            Real World          trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
        • Practice Issues in the    Challenge           Publishing. (Pages 315 – 324, 350 –
                Care of Children    Assignment          351).
                and Families
        • Assessment
        • History Gathering
        • How to Incorporate
                Effective Family
                Involvement
        • Child Abuse, Rights of
                Minors
        The Value of
        Interprofessional
        Simulations in Healthcare
        Education
June 20 Health Care Issues for      Project Groups     Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
        Young Adults                for A Real World     work practice in health care:
                                    Challenge           Advanced approaches and emerging
        Suicide Assessments and     Assignment          trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
        Planning                    should email        Publishing. (Pages 358 - 377).
                                    their top 2 health
        Substance Use and Abuse     disparity topics   Posner, K., Brown, G.K., Stanley, B., et
                                    to Professor         al (2011). The Columbia-Suicide
                                    Asseff for           Severity Rating Scale: Initial validity
                                    confirmation.        and internal consistency findings from
                                                         three multisite studies with
                                                         adolescents and adults. American
                                                        Journal of Psychiatry, 168 (12), 1266-


                                                    1277.
June 25 Motivational Interviewing Columbia Suicide Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
                                   Severity Rating   work practice in health care:
        Crisis Intervention       Scale Assignment  Advanced approaches and emerging
                                       Due          trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
                                                    Publishing. (Pages 82 – 86 and 362 –
                                                    365).
                                                   Emmons, K. (2001). Motivational
                                                     Interviewing in Health Care Settings:
                                                     Opportunities and limitations.
                                                     American Journal of Preventative
                                                     Medicine, 20(1), 68-74.
                                                   Video:
                                                   “Unnatural Causes: when the Bough
                                                   Breaks”
June 27 Hospital Based Social                      Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
        Work Practice/Emergency                      work practice in health care:
        Department Social Work                      Advanced approaches and emerging
        Interventions                               trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
        • Care coordination                         Publishing. (Pages 223 – 234).
        • Biopsychosocial
                assessments                        Moody, H. (2004). Hospital Discharge
        • Discharge planning                        Planning. Journal of Gerontological
        • Interdisciplinary teams                   Social Work, 43 (1), 107-118.
 July 2 Social Work Intervention                   Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
        in Primary Care                              work practice in health care:
                                                    Advanced approaches and emerging
        Social Work Intervention                    trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
        with Chronic Health                         Publishing. (Pages 175 – 208).
                                                   Video:
                                                   “Unnatural Causes: Bad Sugar”
 July 4 NO CLASS-HOLIDAY


 July 9 Palliative Care                          Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
                                                   work practice in health care:
        Home Health                               Advanced approaches and emerging
                                                  trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
        End of Life Care (Hospice)                Publishing. (Pages 239 – 257).
        Communicating with                       Barros, C. (2012). Notes for the new
        Seriously Ill Patients                     hospice social worker, Journal of
                                                   Social Work in End-of-Life &
                                                   Palliative Care, 8(3), pages 207-210.
                                                 Davenport, L. & Schopp, G. (2011).
                                                   Breaking bad news: Communication
                                                   skills for difficult conversations.
                                                   JAAPA: Journal of the American
                                                   Academy of Physician Assistants, 24
                                                  (2), 46-50.
July 11 Gerontological Health Care               Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
                                   Ethnographic    work practice in health care:
        Dementia                   Interview due  Advanced approaches and emerging
                                                  trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
                                                  Publishing. (Pages 287 – 311).
        Self Determination in
July 16 Health Care                              Braun, K.L, Pietsch, J.H., & Blanchette,
        • Advance Care Planning                    P.L. (2000). Cultural Issues in
                – Honoring Choices                 End-of-Life Decision Making, Los
        • Do Not Resuscitate                       Angeles, CA: Sage Publication.
                Orders                             Chapter 4, pages 37-54.
        • Guardianships
        • HIPAA 1996 – Health                    Dingfield & Kayser. (2017). Integrating
                Information                         Advance Care Planning into
                Portability &                       Practice. Chest, 151 (6), 1387-1393.
                Accountability Act
        • Social Work Practice on                Drolet, Marwaha, Hyatt, Blazar, &
                an Ethics                           Lifchez. (2017). Electronic
                Committee                           Communication of Protected Health
                                                    Information: Privacy, Security
                                                    and HIPAA Compliance. Journal of
                                                    Hand Surgery, 42 (6),411-416.


                                                              Video:
                                                              “Honoring Choices”
            Social Work Practice in                           Zimmerman, S., Connolly,R., Zlotnik,
 July 18    Long Term Care                                        J.L., Bernklug, M., & Cohen, L.
            • Assisted Living                                     (2012). Psychosocial care in nursing
            • Skilled Nursing Facility                            homes in the era of the MDS 3.0:
            • Social Security,                                    Perspectives of the experts. Journal
                    Disability,                                   of Gerontological Social Work, 55
                    Medicare and                                  (5), pages 444-461.
                    Medicaid
                                         Reducing Health      No assigned readings.
 July 23    Reducing Health Disparity    Disparity
            Presentations                Presentations
                                         Due
                                                              Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
 July 25    Evidence Informed                                    work practice in health care:
            Interventions in                                    Advanced approaches and emerging
            Public/Community Health                             trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
            and Population Health                               Publishing. (Pages 259 – 283).
            Management
                                                              Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social
            Social Work Practice in                              work practice in health care:
            Integrated Behavioral                               Advanced approaches and emerging
            Health                                              trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
                                                                Publishing. (Pages 439 –459).
            Mental Health First Aid
            The Future of Social Work
            Healthcare
 July 30    Telehealth – Preparing for                        Healthcare Simulation
            the Future
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Allen, K. & Spitzer, W. (2016). Social work practice in health care: Advanced approaches and
        emerging trends. Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publishing.
Barros, C. (2012). Notes for the new hospice social worker, Journal of Social Work in End-of-
       Life & Palliative Care, 8(3), pages 207-210.
Braun, K.L, Pietsch, J.H., & Blanchette, P.L. (2000). Cultural Issues in End-of-Life Decision


         Making, Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publication. Chapter 4, pages 37-54.
Davenport, L. & Schopp, G. (2011). Breaking bad news: Communication skills for difficult
         conversations. JAAPA: Journal of the American Academy of Physician Assistants, 24
         (2), 46-50.
Dingfield & Kayser. (2017). Integrating Advance Care Planning into Practice. Chest, 151 (6),
         1387-1393.
Drolet, Marwaha, Hyatt, Blazar, & Lifchez. (2017). Electronic Communication of Protected
         Health Information: Privacy, Security and HIPAA Compliance. Journal of Hand
         Surgery, 42 (6),411-416.
Emmons, K. (2001). Motivational Interviewing in Health Care Settings: Opportunities and
         limitations. American Journal of Preventative Medicine, 20(1), 68-74.
Moody, H. (2004). Hospital Discharge Planning. Journal of Gerontological Social Work, 43 (1),
         107-118.
NASW Healthcare Standards. Retrieved from: https://www.socialworkers.org/LinkClick.
         aspx?fileticket=fFnsRHX-4HE%3D&portalid=0.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2017). Communities in action:
        Pathways to health equity. Washington, D.C: The National Academies Press. Doi:
        10.177226/24624, pages 57-88; 99-164.
Posner, K., Brown, G.K., Stanley, B., et al (2011). The Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale:
        Initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with
        adolescents and adults. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168 (12), 1266-1277.
Rice, S. (2014). Hospitals often ignore policies on using qualified medical interpreters. Modern
         Healthcare. Retrieved from: http://www.modern
        healthcare.com/article/2014-830/MAGAZINE/308309945.
Weinstein-Moser, E. (2008). Spirituality in social work – the journey from fringe to mainstream.
        Social Work Today, vol. 8(2), pg.32. Retrieved from: www.socialworktoday.com/
        archive/marapr2008p32.shtml.
Zimmerman, S., Connolly,R., Zlotnik, J.L., Bernklug, M., & Cohen, L. (2012). Psychosocial care
         in nursing homes in the era of the MDS 3.0: Perspectives of the experts. Journal of
         Gerontological Social Work, 55 (5), pages 444-461.
