                        Race, Immigration and Family
AAS 310 Fall 2018                                          Instructor: Natassja Bindu Gunasena
MWF 1:00 -2:00PM                                          Office Hrs: F 10:00-1:00pm BUR 562
CMA 5.190                                                 natassja.gunasena@gmail.com
Course Description​: What do we mean when we say “family”? Whom do we include - and
exclude - from our understandings of kinship, community and country? How do race, gender and
sexuality shape the ways we belong to our families, both blood and chosen? This course will
engage these questions by focusing on media and writings by and about south asian families and
communities, with a particular focus on Indian and Sri Lankan voices. Throughout the semester,
we will interrogate how and why people choose to define “family” and consider what it means to
arrive at a definition by ourselves, for ourselves.
Objectives:
    1) Introduce students to the linkages between nationalism and gender
    2) Establish how gendered nationalisms intersect with race and sexuality
    3) Consider how diasporic affiliations and anti-blackness shape south asians’
        understandings of themselves


    4) Think critically about the ways that sexuality and gender impact power structures and
        relationships in families
    5) Reflect on our own identities and families in the context of race, gender, nationality,
        sexuality and immigration status.
Required Texts:
    1) Shailja Patel, ​Migritude
    2) Gaiutra Bahadur, ​Coolie Woman
    3) Shyam Selvadurai, F   ​ unny Boy
Online Readings: ​Weekly readings will be uploaded to the course Canvas page by the instructor
Any changes/ additions to the readings listed below will be communicated to you by the
instructor in a timely manner either in class or via email. ​Please keep abreast of email updates
and messages and don’t hesitate to contact me if you need more information.
Unit I: Family, Gender and Nationalism
Week 1:
Wednesday, August 29th​: Introductions/ Review of Syllabus
Friday, August 31st: ​Kumari Jayawardene and Malathi De Alwis, ​Embodied Violence:
Communalising Women’s Sexuality in South Asia​, “Introduction”
Week 2:
Monday, September 3rd: LABOR DAY HOLIDAY
Wednesday, September 5th:​ ​McClintock, Anne. ​Imperial leather: Race, gender, and sexuality
in the colonial contest​. “Chapter 1: The Lay of the Land: Genealogies of Imperialism.”
Friday, September 7th:​ ​McClintock, Anne. ​Imperial leather: Race, gender, and sexuality in the
colonial contest​. “Chapter 1: The Lay of the Land: Genealogies of Imperialism.”


Week 3:
Monday, September 10th:​ Film viewing: ​Before the Rains​, dir Santosh Sivan
Wednesday, September 12th: ​Film viewing: ​Before the Rains​, dir Santosh Sivan
Friday, September 14th: Discussion:​ ​Before the Rains​, dir Santosh Sivan
Week 4:
Monday, September 17th: ​Kalpana Kannabiran, “Rape and the Construction of Communal
Identity”
Sudha G. Tilak, ​“‘Bruised Goddesses’ Hurt Indian Feminists”
Wednesday, September 19th​: ​Gayatri Gopinath, ​Impossible Desires: Queer Diasporas and
South Asian Public Cultures, ​“Bollywood/Hollywood: Queer Cinematic Representation and the
Perils of Translation”
Friday, September 21st​: ​ ​Gayatri Gopinath, ​Impossible Desires: Queer Diasporas and South
Asian Public Cultures, ​“Bollywood/Hollywood: Queer Cinematic Representation and the Perils
of Translation”
Week 5:
Monday, September 24th: ​Film viewing: ​Monsoon Wedding,​ dir Mira Nair
Wednesday, September 26th: ​Film viewing: ​Monsoon Wedding,​ dir Mira Nair
Friday, September 28th: Discussion:​ ​Monsoon Wedding,​ dir Mira Nair
Unit II: Family, Gender and Race
Week 6:
Monday, October 1st​:​ ​Vijay Prashad, ​The Karma of Brown Folk​, “Of Antiblack Racism” and
“Of Solidarity and Other Desires”


Wednesday, October 3rd: ​Sana Aiyar, “Anticolonial Homelands Across the Indian Ocean: The
Politics of the Indian Diaspora in Kenya”
Friday, October 5th: ​Shihan de Silva Jayasuriya, ​African Identity in Asia: Cultural Effects of
Forced Migration​, “Chapter 2: The African Presence in Asia” and “Dispersal of Africans Across
the Indian Ocean”
[Film Review Due by 5 pm]
Week 7:
Monday, October 8th:​ Shailja Patel, ​Migritude, ​Part 1
Wednesday, October 10th: ​ Shailja Patel, ​Migritude, ​Part 2
Friday, October 12th: ​Shailja Patel, ​Migritude, ​Part 3
Bonnie Zare and Asfar Mohammed,“Burn the Sari or Save the Sari? Dress as a Form of Action
in Two Feminist Poems.”
Week 8:
Monday, October 15th: ​Nitasha Sharma, ​Hip Hop Desis: South Asian Americans, Blackness
and a Global Race Consciousness​, “Making Race: Desi Racial Identities, South Asian and Black
Relations and Racialized Hip-Hop.”
Wednesday, October 17th: ​Nitasha Sharma, ​Hip Hop Desis: South Asian Americans,
Blackness and a Global Race Consciousness​, “Flipping the Gender Script: Gender and Sexuality
in South Asian and Hip Hop America.”
Friday, October 19th: ​Web Series Viewing, ​Brown Girls​, created by: Fatimah Asghar
Week 9:
Monday, October 22nd: ​Film viewing,​ Mississippi Masala​, dir Mira Nair


Wednesday, October 24th: ​Film viewing,​ Mississippi Masala​, dir Mira Nair
Friday, October 26th: Discussion:​ ​Mississippi Masala​, dir Mira Nair
Week 10:
Monday, October 29th: ​Gaiutra Bahadur, ​Coolie Woman: the Odyssey of Indenture, ​“Preface:
the C-Word” and “Part One. Embarking”
Wednesday, November 31st: ​Gaiutra Bahadur, ​Coolie Woman: the Odyssey of Indenture,
“Part Two. Exploring: The Women’s Quarters, Into Dark Waters” and “Her Middle Passage”
Friday, November 2nd: ​Gaiutra Bahadur, ​Coolie Woman: the Odyssey of Indenture,
“Color Plates”, “Beautiful Woman Without a Nose” and “Surviving History”
Unit III: Family, Gender and Sexuality
Week 11:
Monday, November 5th : ​Film Viewing, ​Fire​, dir. Deepa Mehta
Wednesday, November 7th: ​Film Viewing, ​Fire​, dir. Deepa Mehta
Friday, November 9th: Discussion:​ ​Fire​, dir. Deepa Mehta
Week 12:
Monday, November 12th: ​Web Series Viewing, ​The Other Love Story​, dir. Roopa Rao
Wednesday, November 14th: ​Web Series Viewing, ​The Other Love Story​, dir. Roopa Rao
Friday, November 16th: Discussion: ​The Other Love Story​, dir. Roopa Rao
[Film Review due by 5 pm]
Week 14:


Monday, November 19th: NO CLASS
*THANKSGIVING BREAK*
Week 13:
Monday, November 26th: ​ ​Shyam Selvadurai, ​Funny Boy
Wednesday, November 28th: ​Shyam Selvadurai, ​Funny Boy
Friday, November 30th: ​Shyam Selvadurai, ​Funny Boy
[Film Review due by 5 pm]
Week 15:
Monday, December 3rd: ​Family Narrative: Workshop Part 1
Wednesday, December 5th: ​Family Narrative: Workshop Part 2
Friday, December 7th: ​Writing Day ​NO CLASS
Week 16:
Monday, December 10: ​Wrap Up/ Final Paper Due
****
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Class Participation:
This is a seminar style class, which means that everyone is expected to read ​all ​material prior to


class and actively participate in discussions. The topics of our discussions will be determined
mostly by the readings for that day, but your intellectual, social and personal interests will also
guide them. The expectations for this course are that you attend class, discuss assigned readings,
art, films or relevant cultural texts, listen actively during discussion, initiate discussion topics,
and complete all in class writing exercises and in class learning activities. ​Keeping up with the
reading material is crucial to success in this course.
In a successful learning community, we will all be learners and teachers at some point. Here are
some suggestions for creating greater opportunities for participation:
     ● As you read and make notes on your readings keep a list of running questions you would
         like to ask. Listen carefully for openings to bring them into discussion or ask them of me
         outside of class (office hours are perfect for this).
     ● Even if you are uncomfortable in a large group setting, take the lead during small group
         discussions. You may find others have similar questions, which you can then bring back
         to the larger discussion.
     ● If you do not understand what someone has said, ask for clarification from the speaker.
         or, if you do not know how the person arrived at their conclusion, ask them to explain
         their thought process, reasoning or argument more fully.
     ● If you disagree with someone’s point, but do not want to confront them, or state an
         opposing view, try to determine the underlying assumptions of what they have said and
         ask a question about the assumption.
     ● If you feel you have been particularly silent on a certain subject, try putting your ideas
         down on paper. We have a course discussion board on Canvas, which is exactly the place
         to pose questions, add analysis and continue discussions if you feel you better engage via
         writing.
Please be mindful of respecting your peers in the following ways:
     ●   Listen actively when someone is speaking
     ●   Avoid talking when a peer is speaking
     ●   Refrain from interrupting or cutting people off
     ●   DO ask questions, with due respect and sensitivity
Laptops, tablets and electronic reading devices are allowed in class at the instructor’s discretion.
If you appear distracted by your device, I will ask you to put it away in order to more fully
participate in the discussion.
Assignments:


Reading Responses: ​Once a week, students will post a short response to a reading of their
choice on the course Canvas page. Your response should be a ​minimum of 100 words​. 3 times
throughout the semester you will also post a response to one of your classmates. This exercise is
intended to make you comfortable with engaging theoretical concepts, ask questions and foster
learning community with your peers. Do use this forum as a space to air your questions,
concerns, doubts and ideas.
Film Reviews: ​Students will submit a short analysis of 3 of the films viewed in class (one
review for each film). Your review should discuss how each film depicts femininity and female
sexuality, as well as how it approaches (or whether it does so at all) the issues of race,
class/caste, immigration, family, diaspora and nation. Please refrain from summarizing the plot
of the film or narrating the story, instead look closely and thoughtfully at a relevant theme. You
must cite at least two class readings to support your analysis. ​2-3 pages, double-spaced, 12pt
font.
Family Narrative: ​For this cumulative assignment, students will draw on key themes and
discussions from throughout the semester to craft a ​5-8 page​ narrative about how family has
shaped their identity. In your narrative you must situate you and your family as subjects
constituted by race, gender, sexuality and nationality; that is, your narrative must examine how
these and other factors shape your family history and your own status in your family. Your style
can be creative or academic or both. You must cite a MINIMUM of ​3 class readings in your
narrative​.
Grading Breakdown
Weekly Reading Responses: 10%
Attendance and Participation: 10%
Film Review 1: 15%
Film Review 2: 15%
Film Review 3: 15%
Topic Paper: 35%
Course Policies and Expectations:


Attendance: ​You are expected to attend every class session unless previously discussed with me
or specified as a no-class day on the syllabus. If your absence is medical-related, please furnish a
doctor’s note to ensure you don’t lose attendance points.
Respectful Learning: ​In this course we will often cover difficult and sensitive topics, and I ask
that you come to class willing to listen and engage your peers. There are no debates in this class,
only dialogue and discussion from which we will all hopefully come away enriched and
informed. What I mean by this is that your goal for class discussion should not be to “win”
arguments but to deepen the conversation, ask questions and consider things from various
perspectives. Not only the frequency but the manner of your engagement with class discussion
will be counted towards your participation grade.
Late Work:​ Late work will not receive a grade unless you have previously approached me about
difficulty completing the assignment and we have negotiated an acceptable timeframe for
submission.
Special Accommodations: ​Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471- 6259 (voice) or
512- 410- 6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations.
Other Accommodations: ​College is a stressful and challenging environment, and I am
sympathetic to the fact that various unforeseen obstacles might hinder your ability to meet course
requirements including but not limited to: mental illness, trauma, physical/ chronic illness and
financial difficulty. To this end I am (within reason) willing to provide flexibility around
deadlines and assignments, ​if​ you approach me within a suitable time-frame. By this I mean, if
you approach me the day before an assignment is due, or a few days before the end of the
semester, I will not be able to help you with unfinished work or lost points.
Communication and Requirements:​ Email is the best way to contact me outside of class.You
are expected to read the syllabus for assignment dates and other course relevant information.
Any changes to the syllabus will be announced in class and via Canvas, so please make sure to
keep up with your email notifications. I will try to respond to all emails within two business
days, unless the the information is already available on the syllabus.
Academic Dishonesty: ​This includes cheating on assignments, plagiarizing (misrepresenting as
your own work any work that has been written by another author), and submitting the same
paper or substantially similar paper to meet the requirements of more than one course without the


approval of all the instructors concerned. The instructor will report such dishonesty. It is grounds
for failure in the course.
Non- native English Speakers and Writers:​ If you need some extra assistance with the reading
and writing assignments, please contact me early in the term.
