                          WGS F305: Introduction to Women’s and Gender Studies (84330)
                     Dr. Susan Somers-Willett | The University of Texas at Austin, Summer I 2019
E-mail: susan@susansw.com                                                     Office hours: After class & by appt.
Class information: GDC 1.406, M-F 1-2:15pm                                    Course website available on Canvas
Course Description and Goals
Women’s and Gender Studies is an interdisciplinary field that asks critical questions about the relationships
between sex, gender, society, and our own experiences as political acts. In this course, students will come to
understand key differences between sex, gender, and sexuality; define feminism both broadly and personally,
particularly in relationship to race, class, and other intersectional aspects of identity; learn about queer and
trans histories and experiences; explore women’s experiences and labor in international contexts; and
investigate the body and its representation as a way to uncover gender norms and expectations. Students will
also discuss and present on recent social controversies as moments that reveal and critique the cultural codes of
gender. An emphasis will be placed on self-identified women, LGBTQA+ individuals, and people of color. This
course carries a cultural diversity flag.
As a result of this course, students will learn to:
     • Differentiate key concepts in the field of gender studies such as sex, gender identity, gender expression,
         and sexuality
     • Define and use the vocabulary of the field of gender studies (e.g., non-binary, intersectional, feminist,
         transgender, cisgender, queer, social construction, difference, “Other,” etc.)
     • Identify intersectional aspects of identity such as race, class, ethnicity, sexuality, age, ability, and analyze
         how they intersect with gender
     • Recognize and critically examine gender privilege
     • Apply the critical lenses of gender studies to local and/or international contexts and controversies
     • Think and act in self-reflexive ways that make power visible
     • Become advocates and allies for people who identify as women, queer, transgender, and others with
         less privilege and power than ourselves
In addition, students will cultivate the following skills as part of the course:
     • Collaboration: To think and work collaboratively though group presentations and class discussions
     • Critical thinking: To complicate the definitions and concepts of the discipline, placing power in its
         context
     • Self-reflection: To understand and recognize privilege and disadvantage in ways that make power visible
     • Cultural diversity: To think and speak about gender and intersectional identities in current, inclusive,
         complex, and nuanced ways
     • Advocacy and allyship: To act in ways that make a difference by, with, and for others
Required Texts—you are required to bring texts to class
L. Ayu Sarasawati, Barbara Shaw, and Heather Rellihan, Eds. Introduction to Women’s and Gender Studies:
         Interdisciplinary Approaches. New York: Oxford UP, 2017. (On reserve at PCL, Library Use Only)
Critical essays and articles available on Canvas
Grading
40% Quizzes                                 25% Final
20% Group Presentation                      15% Participation and attendance
                                                            1


Quizzes
Throughout the semester, quizzes will be given on the course readings and themes for each unit. These quizzes
are designed to test your understanding of the reading, your knowledge of key terms and concepts in the field,
and your ability to apply these concepts by example. The quizzes take a variety of forms, including multiple
choice to short answer and brief essay questions. Make-up quizzes will not be given.
Final Exam
A final exam will be given to assess your progress in the course and is comprehensive in its content. Like the
quizzes, the exam will entail a mix of multiple choice, short answer, and expanded short essay responses. Make-
up exams will not be given.
Group Presentations
Students are responsible for developing a short, 10-minute presentation with a small group outside of class. The
presentation should cover a current issue, question, or controversy of your choice relating to a topic related to
the course material, followed by an informal 5-minute class discussion. Groups will be formed at the start of the
semester according to the following topics:
     •   Issues in Transgender rights
     •   Issues in Gay/Lesbian/Queer rights
     •   Issues in Contemporary Feminist Activism
     •   Issues in Gender and the Body
As a group, you will choose a specific issue to research relating to these topics (such as bathroom bills targeting
transgender people, queer adoption rights, women’s fair trade labor in Third-world countries, fat activism in gay
communities, etc.). Additional instructions and group sign-ups to come.
Attendance and Participation
Attendance and participation are required in this course, and both will affect your grade. Missing more than two
classes constitutes missing a significant part of the course and will affect your final grade. Should you miss class,
you are responsible for meeting all assignment deadlines, contacting a member of class in to keep up with
readings and assignments, and notifying the instructor in advance of your absence if possible. Exceptions will be
made only in instances of religious holidays or emergencies documented through the Dean of Students.
Information for Students with Disabilities
Both the university and I are committed to keeping this classroom and course material accessible. If you have a
disability that limits your access to the course and its assignments, please inform me at the beginning of the
semester in office hours. In the case where a class assignment is not accessible, an alternative assignment
requiring the exercise of equal skill and knowledge can be arranged in collaboration with the Services for
Students with Disabilities Office (http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability).
Academic Integrity & Student Conduct
Academic dishonesty is defined by the university as “cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records,
misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not
limited to, submission of essentially the same written assignment for two classes without the prior permission of
the instructor), or the attempt to commit such an act.” (See Section 11-402(d) of the Institutional Rules on
Student Services and Activities for the University's official definition of plagiarism.) Plagiarism will not be
tolerated in this classroom, and students engaging in academic dishonesty will be reported to the Dean of
Students and punished to the full extent of university policy. For more on plagiarism and how to avoid it, visit
the Dean of Students’ website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php.
As a student at the university, you are also bound to the student honor code and institutional rules regarding
student conduct, including abiding by “all city, state, and federal laws and statutes and all regulations of the
                                                           2


success and to ensure that each University student graduates ready to contribute to society as an ethical
citizen.” Please review the entire university policy at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/conduct.php and
keep these policies in mind when carrying out your class projects.
Grading Policies
Final grades will be determined according to the following rubric, and plus/minus grades will be
assigned for the final grade. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
A (94-100); A- (90-93); B+ (87-89); B (84-86); B- (80-83); C+ (77-79); C (74-76); C- (70-73); D+ (67-69); D (64-66);
D- (60-63); F (0-59).
The purpose of having a full range of grades (A through F) is to represent true levels of academic achievement.
Although I’m sure everyone would like to make As or Bs on their class assignments, chances are that not
everyone will receive them. When receiving graded assignments, it may help to keep in mind these general
descriptions student achievement:
         F – Represents failure (or no credit) and means that work was either completed at a level not
                 worthy of credit, or not completed at all.
         D – Achievement worthy of credit, but which does not meet assignment/course requirements
                 fully.
         C – Achievement that meets the assignment/course requirements in every respect and shows
                 adequate understanding and application of the course material.
         B – Achievement significantly above the level necessary to meet assignment/course
                 requirements. Such work demonstrates good application of instructional material and
                 makes some successful and original connections beyond it.
         A – Achievement that is outstanding and unique relative to the assignment/course
                 requirements. Such work demonstrates clear and accurate independent thought and
                 goes well beyond the application of instructional material to make new scholarly
                 connections and understandings. The student’s voice is polished and clearly original.
Confidentiality and Title IX
Please know that narratives you submit will remain confidential between me and you, though you may also
choose to share it with others. Please also know that I am a mandatory reporter under the university’s Title IX
regulations, and if you write about instances of interpersonal violence, intimidation, suicidal ideation, or
harassment in a way that is specific to other UT students, staff, faculty, or the campus itself, or if it is clear the
incident you mention is affecting your educational experience, I may also be obligated to report it to the Title IX
Office so that the university can connect you to the appropriate campus resources and support you.
For more, about this policy, please go to: http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/vav_reportingoptions.html
UT also has a number of resources for students who have experienced interpersonal violence or harassment
that do not require reporting under Title IX. They are:
     • licensed mental health practitioners (i.e. licensed clinical social workers, licensed counselors,
         psychologists, psychiatrists) at the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC)
     • licensed medical staff (i.e. nurses and doctors) at University Health Services (UHS)
     • students working as Peer Supporters at the Interpersonal Violence Peer Support Center (IVPS)
     • trained professional staff working as Advocates at the Dean of Students’ Office
                                                           3


If you have experienced interpersonal violence or harassment and would like to speak to someone
confidentially, UT’s Voices Against Violence (VAV) is a great place to start, and they can connect you to the
above confidential resources. Please visit https://cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/vav_about.html to learn more, or watch
this 3-minute video: https://youtu.be/WDx1krVKSF4.
Student Resources:
• Center for Women’s and Gender Studies: www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/cwgs, WWH 401
• Gender & Sexuality Center: www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/gsc, SAC 2.112
• GSC Women’s Mentor Program: www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/gsc/programs.php#woment
• Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu
• Voices Against Violence: https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/index.html, SSB ground floor
• UT Counseling and Mental Health Center: https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/index.html, SSB
• Behavior Concerns Advice line: 512-232-5050, https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line
• Dean of Students Interpersonal Violence Peer Support and Advocacy:
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/advocacysupport.php, SSB ground floor
• Services for Students with Disabilities: www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd, SSB 4.104
• Using MLA, APA, and Chicago Manual of Style Formats: www.lib.utexas.edu/refsites/style_manuals.html,
     https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/section/2
• BookWoman: www.ebookwoman.com 5501 N. Lamar Blvd.
• MonkeyWrench Books: www.monkeywrenchbooks.org, 110 E. North Loop
• Resistencia Books: www.resistenciabooks.org, 1801-A South First St.
                                                          4


                       WGS F305: Introduction to Women’s and Gender Studies (84330)
                  Dr. Susan Somers-Willett | The University of Texas at Austin, Summer I 2019
                                         SYLLABUS (subject to change)
WEEK 1: Intro & Defining Sex and Gender
Key Terms: sex assigned at birth, gender, non-binary, essentialism, social constructionism, cisgender,
transgender, genderqueer, femininity, masculinity, patriarchy, oppression
Th 6/6      Review of syllabus and introductions
F 6/7       • Saraswati et al, “Mapping the Field” (IWGS 2-11, 18-19)
            • GLSEN, “Guidelines for Respectful Discussion” (Canvas)
            • GSC, “LGBTQA Definitions” (Canvas)
WEEK 2: Defining Sex and Gender
Key terms: gay, lesbian, bisexual, pansexual, asexual, queer, romantic attraction, polyamory,
heteronormativity, compulsory heterosexuality, sexual violence, rape culture, bystander intervention,
consent
M 6/10      • Julia Serano, “Coming to Terms with Transgenderism and Transsexuality” (Canvas)
            • Anne Fausto-Sterling, “The Five Sexes Revisited” (IWGS 32-37)
            • Barker and Scheele, “Queer Biology” (Canvas)
            Break into presentation groups & brainstorm topics
Tu 6/11     • Allan Johnson, “Patriarchy, The System: An It, Not a He, a Them, or an Us” (IWGS 23-31)
            • C.J. Pascoe, “Making Masculinity: Adolescence, Identity, and High School” (IWGS 43-52)
            • Marilyn Frye, “Oppression” (IWGS 67-72)
            • Rebecca Solnit, “If I Were a Man” (Canvas)
W 6/12      Form Presentation Groups
            Quiz 1
Th 6/13     • Adrienne Rich, “Compulsory Heterosexuality and the Lesbian Existence” (Canvas) CW:
                brief mention of conversion therapy and sexual violence
            • Barker and Scheele, “Rich’s Compulsory Heterosexuality” (Canvas)
F 6/14      Work on group presentations on your own
WEEK 3: Sexuality and Relationships / Feminisms and Their Histories
Key terms: feminism, first wave, second wave, third wave, fourth wave, suffrage, abolition, Equal Rights
Amendment, The Feminine Mystique, domestic labor, radical feminism, Roe v. Wade, Stonewall riots,
Mestiza consciousness, TERF, intersectionality
M 6/17      • Hari Ziyad, “3 Differences Between the Terms ‘Gay’ and ‘Queer’ — and Why It Matters”
                (Canvas)
            • Ashley Currier and Thérèse Migraine-George, “Queer/African Identities: Questions,
                Limits, Challenges” (IWGS 77-81)
            • GSC, “Non-Monosexual Identity Definitions” (Canvas)
            • Barker and Scheele, “Non-Monogamy” (Canvas)
Tu 6/18     • Saraswati et al, “Gendered Violence” (IWGS 219-222)
            Visit from Voices Against Violence: Defining Consent
W 6/19      Quiz 2
Th 6/20     • Rory Dicker, “Feminism’s Legacy” (Canvas)
            • bell hooks, “Feminist Politics: Where We Stand” (IWGS 20-22)
F 6/21      • Saraswati et al, “Historical Perspectives in Women’s and Gender Studies” (IWGS 98-119)
            • Tina Vasquez, “It’s Time to End the Long History of Feminism Failing Transgender
                Women” (IWGS 197-200)
            • bell hooks, “Men: Comrades in Struggle” (IWGS 165-172)
                                                        5


WEEK 4: Feminisms / Privilege and Allyship
Key terms: ally, solidarity, privilege
M 6/24      • Audre Lorde, “There Is No Hierarchy of Oppressions” (IWGS 76)
            • Saraswati et al, “Mapping the Field” (IWGS 11-16)
            • Kimberlé Crenshaw, “Why Intersectionality Can’t Wait” (Canvas)
Tu 6/25     In Focus: Black Feminisms
            • Audre Lorde, “Age, Race, Class, and Sex: Women Redefining Difference” (Canvas)
            • The Combahee River Collective, “A Black Feminist Statement” (IWGS 157-163)
            • Mia McKenzie, “On Defending Beyoncé” (Canvas)
            In class viewing: Beyoncé, “Formation”
W 6/26      Quiz 3
Th 6/27     • Peggy McIntosh, “White Privilege, Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack” (IWGS 72-75)
            • Julia Serano, “Dismantling Cissexual Privilege” (Canvas)
            • Mia McKenzie, “8 Ways Not to Be an Ally” and “No More Allies” (Canvas)
            • GSC, “Cisgender and Heterosexual Privilege” and “Monosexual Privilege Checklist”
                 (Canvas)
            Ally Project Assigned
F 6/28      The body and disabilities
            • Rachel Cohen-Rottenberg, “10 Answers to Common Questions about Ableist Language”
                 (Canvas)
            • Gillian Giles, “You Do Not Exist to Be Used” (Canvas)
            • Rosemarie Garland-Thompson, “The Politics of Staring” (TW: Images of people with
                 disabilities that some may find offensive, presented in a manner of critique) (Canvas)
WEEK 5: Mapping the Body
Key terms: fat, disability, invisible and visible disabilities, people with disabilities, neurodivergent, ableism,
body-pos, transition, top surgery, bottom surgery, passing
M 7/1       The body and weight
            • Roxane Gay, Hunger (excerpts) CW: sexual assault, disordered eating, fat shaming
                 (Canvas)
            • Lindy West, “Here’s What It Feels Like to Be a Fat Person on a Plane” (Canvas)
            • Caleb Luna, "On Being Fat, Brown, Femme, Ugly, and Unlovable" (Canvas)
Tu 7/2      Trans bodies
            • Saraswati et al, “Epistemologies of Bodies” (IWGS 346-362)
            • Julia Serano, “Before and After: Class and Body Transformations” (Canvas)
W 7/3       Quiz 4
Th 7/4      UNIVERSITY HOLIDAY
F 7/5       Prepare for group presentations on your own
WEEK 6: Presentations and Final
M 7/8       Group Presentations
Tu 7/9      Final Review
            Course Evaluations
W 7/10      Final Exam
Th 7/11     Ally Project due on Canvas (no class meeting)
                                                             6
