                                                   “La Semilla Sembrada” by Nivia Gonzalez
  MAS 374 (40593) (AMS 370, WGS 340)                                        TEJANA CULTURAL STUDIES
  Syllabus                                                                  Fall 2018
  burning in my blood
  in the blood of women like me who are the
  children of silent mothers who still dream of freedom still are
  haunted by longing running between working and caretaking
  what terrible force their longing still exerts volcanoes
  of longing hurricanes of longing deserts of longing
  to create to be
  free to speak their truths and own their own bodies their own
                                                                   voices
                               —ire’ne lara silva, “i come from women illiterate and rough-skinned”
Instructor: Dr. Lilia Raquel Rosas
COURSE DESCRIPTION
With the publication of Entre Guadalupe y Malinche, editors Inés Hernández-Ávila and Norma Elia Cantú
solidify their mandate to legitimize Tejan@/x Studies as an arena worthy of ongoing research, study, and
comprehension. Furthermore, they center the narratives of Tejanas as a necessary part of the conversation
to understand this emergent field of inquiry and integral to Chicana Studies. In this course, we investigate
the history of Tejanas to reaffirm and reclaim their place and role in the histories of Native Americans,
woman, Chican@/xs, Greater Mexico, and the United States. We will further explore how
transfronterizismo and transregionalism complicate this history. Last, we will contemplate how their stories
are fundamental to illuminating the struggles, resistance, and liberation of Chicanas, xicanindias, mestizas,
and afromexicanas from precontact to decolonization.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will improve their analytical abilities through reading, writing, researching and discussing class
materials. As a course within the curriculum of MALS, students will learn about the nuances of Mexican
American and Latina/o experience, and, specifically women of Texas-Mexican earth. Ultimately, they will
learn to think critically about the field of emerging field of Tejan@/x Studies and they will be able to:


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                           Fall 2018                                                      2
1. Be familiar and analyze the significant forces, events, and persons relevant to historical struggles over
    equality, identity, and social justice in the histories of Tejanas.
2. Use and prioritize the analytical lenses of gender and sexuality, along with race and class, to understand
    the identity formations, subjectivities, and the multiple oppressions confronted by Tejanas.
3. Recognize the importance transfronterizismo and transregionalism in shaping a diverse and pluralistic
    Tejana experience.
This course carries 3-flags:
Cultural Diversity in the United States: Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect
a substantia portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
Writing: Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic
discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. Students should
therefore expect a substantial portion of his/her grade to come from your written work.
Independent Inquiry: This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent investigation
and presentation of your own work.
COMMUNICATION & CLASSROOM SUCCESS
Please feel free to email me since this is the best and most effective way to contact me. I check it frequently,
so email me whenever you have questions or concerns. I also strongly encourage you to talk to me during
office hours, before or after class, or make an appointment with me if you have any questions, comments,
or other issues.
In my experience, students who stop by to talk, email, or communicate frequently, attend class regularly,
complete the assigned readings, and participate in the classroom discussion and all assignments tend to be
more successful in the class. Similarly, I will email you regularly with reminders, instructions, and late
breaking information. Last, if I ever cancel class, email and Canvas is how you will know it, so please check
both daily.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Assigned books and course materials (available at University Coop Bookstore) to purchase or rent:
                    Acosta, Teresa Palomo and                            Hernández-Ávila, Inés and Norma
    Required:
                             Ruthe Winegarten. Las                               Elia Cantú, eds. Entre
                             Tejanas: 300 Years of                               Guadalupe y Malinche: Tejanas
                             History. Austin:                                    in Literature and Art. Austin:
                             University of Texas                                 University of Texas Press,
                             Press, 2003.                                        2016.


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                            Fall 2018                                                      3
                     González, Gabriela. Redeeming                          Pérez, Emma. Forgetting the Alamo, or,
                             La Raza: Transborder                                   Blood Memory: A Novel.
                             Modernity, Race,                                       Austin: University of Texas
                             Respectability, and Rights.                            Press, 2009.
                             New York: Oxford
                             University, 2018.
Additional articles and chapter excerpts will be made available on CANVAS or via an online link. Readings
and handouts distributed in class and/or via Canvas during the course of the semester will become also
part of your required readings.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Attendance: Attendance is required and repeated absences will be noted by detrimentally impacting your
participation grade. When missing class, you must provide a valid reason for your absence with appropriate
documentation. This policy does not include absences due to university-related activities (sports,
conferences), or to serious medical issues (severe illness or death in the immediate family), which are
excused and not deducted (with documentation). Three (3) or more unexcused or “no contact “absences
will result in the overall grade reduction of full letter grade (10%).
Class Participation: Come prepared and on time to class. This includes that you bring the appropriate
reading(s) and course materials, and complete the assigned reading. Make sure when you read, you
read actively. Consider questions such as the following while you read, which may also help with your
regular journaling assignment: What is the argument or purpose of this work or chapter? What kind of
issue(s) are the authors addressing? Why is this reading significant? How can I highlight a significant point(s)
in the class discussion through a specific example(s)? What questions or issues does the reading cause me
to reflect about in my own understanding?
Assignments will include:
Participation: Be ready to discuss and engage in class actively. This is explained more fully under
“Attendance” and “Class Participation,” in the syllabus (see above).
Reading Journal: You also will be responsible for maintaining a reading journal throughout the semester
that you will create and keep up on Canvas. This will be a place to reflect on select assigned reading for
that class day/week and offer your thoughts for class colleagues to consider as well. The purpose of the
journal is to cultivate a practice of active, critical, and evaluative reading, which ultimately will be beneficial
in your development as a researcher and writer.
Research Proposal and Bibliography: In the 3-4 page proposal, you will identify and discuss your proposed
topic and argument for your semester-long final research paper, which will allow you to delve more deeply
into a topic addressed in class or tackle an arena, which needs closer consideration or intrigues your interest.
Additionally, you will provide a detailed bibliography with 10-12 sources.
Primary Document Analysis: Through a primary document analysis, students will evaluate the critical
significance and application of a designated primary source(s). Some questions considered will
include: What is the purpose of the source. What was the author's message or argument? What was
he/she/they trying to get across? Is the message explicit, or are there implicit messages as well? How does
the author try to get the message across? What methods does he/she/they use? What do you know about
the author? Who constituted the intended audience? Was this source meant for one person's eyes, or for
the public? How does that affect the source?


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                          Fall 2018                                                     4
Rough Draft of Final Paper: In this 8-10 page preliminary paper, you will provide a draft of your final
research paper. This paper will be an opportunity to uncover/recover an area of the Tejana histories, which
needs further investigation.
Oral Presentation: Your in-class presentation will be an opportunity for you to highlight the most salient
elements of your research conducted for the final paper. You may also have an opportunity to create a
social media site to further illustrate your research.
Final Paper: In this final 10-12 page original paper, you will pursue a semester-long rigorous inquiry on a
previously identified topic where you develop and write an analytical research paper to illuminate the
Tejana experience.
The grade distribution for each requirement/assignment will be as follows and none are negotiable:
      •   Attendance and Participation                         15%
      •   Reading Journal                                      10%
      •   Research Proposal and Bibliography                   5%
      •   Primary Document Analysis                            10%
      •   Rough Draft of Final Paper                           10%
      •   Oral Presentation                                    20%
      •   Final Paper                                          30%
Class Expectations: Learning Principle: This course uses the principle of collaborative learning or seminar
format. In other words, I believe the classroom is a place of mutual respect and shared learning. In addition,
it is a place where everyone’s informed or well-thought comments will be valued. This means we are here
to learn from each other. I expect you to participate by listening, making comments, responding to your
classmates, and asking questions. In turn, I will facilitate, direct, summarize, and clarify the discussion.
Participation means more than just coming to class and hoping that you can get the answers from the
instructor or the students who talk a lot. Collaborative learning means that it is your responsibility to share
your own considered perspective on the assigned reading, assignment, or topic. In turn, the class will be
structured to make sure that your views will enhance our understanding of the purpose of each class
discussion.
Common Courtesy: Overall, you are also expected to conduct yourself appropriately by turning off your
cell phones and other electronic devices or safely securing them in a pocket, purse, backpack, or book bag
with the ringer/tones turned off. Texting or “secret surfing/chatting” on computers (other devices) in our
classroom (Facebook, Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest, Instagram, Snapchat, WhatsApp, Hulu, Netflix, etc.) is
also not allowed. While these may seem like minor infractions, they contribute to a disrespectful and
unprofessional classroom environment that interferes with the work all of us are trying to accomplish
together.
COURSE POLICIES
Statement on Learning Success: Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations
because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we will develop strategies to meet both your needs
and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
through UT Austin. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or
Center if you would like.


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                         Fall 2018                                                      5
Grading: The final course grade will be assigned based on the completion of the course requirements
within the semester and will adhere the following grading scale:
            Grade           Cutoff
            A               94%
            A-              90%
            B+              87%
            B               84%
            B-              80%
            C+              77%
            C               74%
            C-              70%
            D               65%
            F               <65%
Assignment Guidelines and Late Work: I will distribute detailed guidelines as we approach certain assignments
such as the proposal, essays, paper, and presentations. All assigned work is due on the due date, and is
submitted via Canvas.
Please do not count on uploading/submitting your assignments via Canvas right before the class meeting
time. Inevitably, the computer labs are crowded or servers fail when you are in such a rush, and these are
not valid excuses for late assignments.
Late assignments will be penalized one-half grade (5 points) if turned in within 48 hours of the due date,
and one full grade (10 points) if turned in within one calendar week of the due date. After that, they will
be penalized 15 points everyday. I also reserve the right to grade these papers until the end of the semester.
Late papers will only be accepted without penalty if you negotiate an alternative due date with me at
least 48 hours prior to the due date and turn in the paper within a week of the original deadline. Likewise,
it is up to my discretion to decide which circumstances constitute the need for an alternative due date.
Otherwise, late papers will be penalized according to the aforementioned guidelines.
Student Rights & Responsibilities:
      • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
      • You have a right to respect.
      • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
      • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
      • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
      • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
          learning environment.
      • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
          isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
         teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. •
         Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
         and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                            Fall 2018                                                    6
     •    You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
          excluded.
     •    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
          these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to
individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name.
I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and
by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may
make appropriate changes to my records.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity: Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words
or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor
Code         which          can        be       found       at      the        following        web      address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students: Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes
students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if
you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you
discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these
discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or
1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating
well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle.
You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the
college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often
helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety       or       depression,       we       strongly     encourage        you       to     seek    support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                        Fall 2018                                                    7
The Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use
the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome
to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Other resources include:
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
          become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Emergency Evacuation: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ state:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
          week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
          found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                         Fall 2018                                                   8
                                             COURSE SCHEDULE
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive
the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
 Date                          Topics/Items Due
                               WEEK ONE: RE-IMAGINING TEJANA HISTORY
 Wednesday, 29 August          Introductions and Course Syllabus
                               WEEK TWO: RE-IMAGINING TEJANA HISTORY
 Monday, 3 September           Labor Day: No Classes
                               • Reading: Aurora Levins Morales, “The Historian as Curandera”:
                               http://www.auroralevinsmorales.com/uploads/4/2/9/2/4292077/the_hi
                               storian_as_curandera.pdf (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 5 September • Reading: Yolanda Chávez Leyva, “‘There Is Great Good in Returning’: A
                               Testimonio from the Borderlands,” Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies 24,
                               no. 2/3 (2003), pp. 1-9:
                               http://www.jstor.org.ezproxy.stedwards.edu/stable/3347343 (Canvas)
                               Inés Hernández-Ávila, “Introduction: Women of Texas-Mexican Earth,”
                               in Entre Guadalupe y Malinche, pp. 1-18
                               Emma Perez, “Between Manifest Destiny and Women’s Rights:
                               Decolonizing Chicana History,” in Entre Guadalupe y Malinche, pp. 115-125
                               Reading Journal Due
                              WEEK THREE: INDIGENIETY Y TIERRA NATAL
 Monday, 10 September          • Reading: Acosta and Winegarten, Las Tejanas, Chapter 1: “Native
                               Women, Mestizas, and Colonists”
                               Marisa Muñoz, “River as Lifeblood, River as Border: The Irreconcilable
                               Discrepancies of Colonial Occupation From/With/On/Of the Frontera,”
                               in Indigenous and Decolonizing Studies in Education: Mapping the Long View,
                               pp. 62-81 (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 12 September • Reading: Susana Renteria Almanza, “Reflections of La Madre Tierra,” in
                               Entre Guadalupe y Malinche, pp. 70-75
                               Patrisia Gonzales, “The Pyramids I Call Home,” in Entre Guadalupe y
                               Malinche, pp. 100-105
                               Inés Hernández-Ávila, “Tejana Intonations/Nez Perce Heartbeat: Notes
                               on Identity and Culture,” a/b: Auto/Biography Studies, 7.2 (1992), pp. 292-
                               307, DOI: 10.1080/08989575.1992.10815027 (Canvas)
                               Research Proposal & Bibliography Due
                                WEEK FOUR: CONQUEST & COLONIZATION
 Monday, 17 September          • Reading: Acosta and Winegarten, Las Tejanas, Chapter 2: “The Status of
                               Women in the Colonial Period”
                               Juliana Barr, “Indian Women Who ‘Carry Gallantry Still Further Than the
                               Men’: A Barometer of Power in Eighteenth-Century Texas,” in Texas
                               Women: Their Histories, Their Lives, pp. 5-29:
                               http://www.jstor.org.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/stable/j.ctt175758p.7
                               (Canvas)


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                  Fall 2018                                                       9
 Wednesday, 19 September • Reading: Acosta and Winegarten, Las Tejanas, Chapter 3: “From the
                         Republic of Texas to 1900” (Canvas)
                         Teresa Palomo Acosta, “Forgiving Stephen F. Austin and the Old Three
                         Hundred,” in Entre Guadalupe y Malinche, pp. 336
                         Reading Journal Due
               WEEK FIVE: MIGRATIONS & TRANSLOCATIONS WITHIN MODERNITY
 Monday, 24 September    • Reading: González, Transborder Modernity, Race, Respectability, and Rights,
                         Chapter 1: “Social Change, Cultural Redemption, and Social Stability”
                          González, Transborder Modernity, Race, Respectability, and Rights, Chapter 2:
                         “Masons, Magonistas, and Maternalists”
 Wednesday, 26 September • Reading: González, Transborder Modernity, Race, Respectability, and Rights,
                         Chapter 3: “Crossing Borders to Rebirth the Nation”
                         González, Transborder Modernity, Race, Respectability, and Rights, Chapter 4:
                         “All for Country and Home”
                         Reading Journal Due
                WEEK SIX: MIGRATIONS & TRANSLOCATIONS WITHIN MODERNITY
 Monday, 1 October       •Reading: González, Transborder Modernity, Race, Respectability, and Rights,
                         Chapter 5: “La Pasionaria (The Passionate One)”
                         González, Chapter 6: “Struggling Against Jaime Crow”
 Wednesday, 3 October    • Reading: Cynthia E. Orozco, No Mexicans, Women, or Dogs Allowed,
                         Chapter 8: “No Women Allowed?” (Canvas)
                         Paulita Huerta Garza, “Viva la libertad: Mensaje a las mujeres/Long Live
                         Liberty: A Message to Women,” in Entre Guadalupe y Malinche, pp. 337-338
                         Primary Document Analysis Due
                    WEEK SEVEN: EMPOWERING COMMUNITIES IN JUAN CROW
 Monday, 8 October       • Reading: Jennifer R. Najera, Borderlands of Race, Chapter 1: “The
                         Borderlands of Race and Rights” (Canvas)
                         Najera, Borderlands of Race, Chapter 2: “Establishing a Culture of
                         Segregation” (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 10 October   • Reading: Najera, Borderlands of Race, Chapter 3: “Formal and Informal
                         Mexican Education within the Context of Segregation” (Canvas)
                         Najera, Borderlands of Race, Chapter 4: “An Accommodated Form of
                         Segregation” (Canvas)
                         Reading Journal Due
  WEEK EIGHT: EMPOWERING COMMUNITIES IN JUAN CROW/ARTICULATIONS & MIGRATIONS
 Monday, 15 October      • Reading: Najera, Borderlands of Race, Chapter 5: “Troubling the Culture of
                         School Segregation” (Canvas)
                         Najera, Borderlands of Race, Chapter 6: “Surgiendo de la Base” (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 17 October   • Reading: Antonia I. Castañeda, “‘Que Se Pudieran Defender (So You
                         Could Defend Yourselves)’ Chicanas, Regional History, and National
                         Discourses,” in Three Decades of Engendering History, pp. 295-330 (Canvas)
                         Castañeda, “Language and Other Lethal Weapons Cultural Politics and the
                         Rites of Children as Translators of Culture,” in Three Decades of Engendering
                         History, pp. 331-348 (Canvas)
                         Rosa-Linda Fregoso, “A Ghost of a Mexican Past (Excerpt)” in Entre
                         Guadalupe y Malinche, pp. 343-348


MAS 374 (40593): ROSAS                    Fall 2018                                                  10
      WEEK NINE: REVOLUTIONS & RADICAL TRANSFORMATIONS/ QUEERING TEJAZTLÁN
 Monday, 22 October         • Reading: Acosta and Winegarten, Las Tejanas, Chapter 10: “Politics, the
                            Chicano Movement, and Tejana Feminism” (Canvas)
                            Deborah R. Vargas, Dissonant Divas in Chicana Music, Chapter 5: “Giving Us
                            That Brown Soul” (Canvas)
 Wednesday, 24 October      • Reading: Pérez, Forgetting the Alamo, Chapters 1-5:
                            https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                            com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=3443421#
                            Reading Journal Due
                                 WEEK TEN: QUEERING TEJAZTLÁN
 Monday, 29 October         • Reading: Pérez, Forgetting the Alamo, Chapters 6-11:
                            https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                            com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=3443421#
 Wednesday, 31 October      • Reading: Pérez, Forgetting the Alamo, Chapters 12-17:
                            https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                            com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=3443421#
                            Reading Journal Due
                               WEEK ELEVEN: QUEERING TEJAZTLÁN
 Monday, 5 November         • Reading: Pérez, Forgetting the Alamo, Chapters 18-23:
                            https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                            com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=3443421#
 Wednesday, 7 November • Reading: Pérez, Forgetting the Alamo, Chapters 24-Epilogue:
                            https://ebookcentral-proquest-
                            com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/lib/utxa/detail.action?docID=3443421#
                            Rough Draft of Final Paper Due
                                   WEEK TWELVE: RECONQUISTA
 Monday, 12 November        • Reading: Brown, three-headed serpent:
                            http://www.arianabrown.com/merch.html
 Wednesday, 14 November • Reading: Brown, three-headed serpent:
                            http://www.arianabrown.com/merch.html
                            Gloria Anzaldúa, “Border Arte: Nepantla, el Lugar de la Frontera” in Entre
                            Guadalupe y Malinche, pp. 23-32
                            Reading Journal Due
                                          WEEK THIRTEEN
 Monday, 19 November        No Classes Meet
 Wednesday, 21 November Thanksgiving Break: No Classes Meet
                                          WEEK FOURTEEN:
 Monday, 26 November        Writing Day
 Wednesday, 28 December Writing Day
                                            WEEK FIFTEEN
 Monday, 3 December         Oral Presentations Preparation Day
 Wednesday, 5 December Oral Presentations
                                           WEEK SIXTEEN
 Monday, 10 December        Oral Presentations
  Final Exam: __________________
              Final Paper Due
              Reading Journals Due
