Intermediate Environmental Design Studio
Architecture of the City
Professor Simon Atkinson
South Central: New Opportunities for a Living and Learning Design Community in the Heart
of Austin, Texas
There are two parts to this document:
1. An overall description of the projects.
2. The formal University course requirements.
Introduction
The quality of life of persons living in cities is one of the greatest challenges in our facing the
future. People require safe, walkable, pollution-free neighborhoods that, at the same time, are
both visually stimulating and ecologically sensitive. Also, we can gain advantage through
compact cities offering proximity to local grocery, school, transit, work, and the rich array of
culture that cities offer.
However, it is important to note that many Americans have been hesitant to adopt the central
city, seen by them to be places of crime, outworn buildings, a general ugliness of surface
parking lots, and occupied by people “not like us”. Change is taking place as the “millennials”
and “baby boomers” are seeking “pockets” and whole districts where they are readapting city
lifestyles. Isn’t it time to design for a more inclusive, and integrated city, - “the city adopted”,
where everyone feels they belong, and where we live in balance with nature, and in houses that
are environmentally sustainable, and add to a quality of life? At the same time, we face the
serious issue of lower income families being displaced, and thus unable to take advantage of
the city, as they simply are not affordable.
The Challenge
The Texas School for the Deaf occupies an “island” site south of East Bouldin Creek and flanked
by South First Street and South Congress Avenue. They have an urgent need to house teachers,
staff, parents of students in the school, and at the same time areas of the campus offer
opportunity to establish a vibrant and distinctive edge.
To the north is the inaccessible East Creek, which the City would dearly love to open as a public
amenity. At South First Street and Barton Springs Road is the 505 Block of the City of Austin.
These northern sites will form the basis to the design of a new community linked to Lady Bird
Lake to the north, South First Street, South Congress Avenue, and the facilities of the School for
the Deaf.
The School will extend, share part of its facilities, and integrate into a new city fabric of urban
housing, city places with a mix of uses, and greenways.
                                                                                                     1


                                                             ➤
                                              !"#$%&'$"())   N
                                                *+&',-)
                                                                 2000 ft
             9:9)*$%,)
 )3$'-%)
*&"%+
                             .&/0',--)!1,2)
           *4+&&5)6&')%+,)
               7,86)
                                                                       2


Five teams of three students will produce a strategy and design for “South Central”. This then
leads to individual designs for carefully conceived urban housing and mixed use projects.
GOALS
-     To examine the fabric of the city;
-     To consider how people live in, move about in, and gain benefit from city life;
-     To look at how design can influence the way we “navigate” city in our daily lives;
-     To map the problems and issues facing cities;
-     To design public place to further social contact, culture, and the ecology of city;
-     To design a district that has a distinct identity, and as such becomes a meaningful addition
      to the understanding of city;
-     To design homes, work places, and amenities that are in close association, and at an
      appropriate city density;
-     To design the resilient city where architecture addresses the forces of nature, and
      simultaneously aims to be net positive;
-     To develop communication skills in section, section axonometric, model, and perspective
      to represent an urban architecture, and qualities of place.
This studio, as can be seen from the goals statement, aims to take you into new territory where
we address buildings with a mix of uses, the grouping and assembling of buildings and places,
and also the architecture of landscape and ecology. Furthermore, a good proportion of your
investigations and design work will be based in small teams.
Project 1: The Architecture of House and the City
This will be achieved by close consideration of the work of architects, key writers, and
landscape architects working at the scale of the city, and case studies of both city districts that
work, and new city interventions.
There are two parts to this study: one, an urban house case study, the other to study and
represent one of the five boundary areas to the site.
Project 2: The Architecture of Place
The design of a public place bringing a new landscape of identity. Emphasis is placed on
“gathering’, and how a democratic and distinguished place can bring hope to an area, as well as
acting as a catalyst to new enterprises. The context is characterized by existing structures,
surface car parking, and also buildings of limited significance.
Your challenge is: to reposition and restructure the existing parking on the site; to establish a
new place identity, including the design of supporting structures and amenities; and through
graphic communication and model to clearly represent the qualities of a new city place.
Overall, you are aiming to bring a new cultural opportunity to the city, as well as homes and
amenities.
                                                                                                    3


Project 3: The Architecture of Home, City Block and Street
Our aim is to design buildings where people will wish to live for a long time, in less space, but
with greater comfort. Here, access to sunlight, open space, local amenities, work and school are
each of vital importance.
Your challenge is: to design a small district in the inner city. You will then design a city block, its
adjacent streets and landscape, as a place of enduring quality. The building will incorporate a
range of house types, work places and local amenities. Through graphic communication and
models, to demonstrate the spatial qualities of home in association with access, open space,
street, and associated work areas and places.
Project 1 is a team project.
Project 2 will be a team project which will lead into an individual design within the context of
the team proposal.
Project 3 will be a team-based district design setting the framework for an individual design of
urban homes, and city block, including detail of uses, and adjacent street environment.
Teams are expected to consist of three members
Indicative Readings
Beatley, T. Biophilic Cities
Bentley, I. Responsive Environments
Carmona, M. Public Places, Urban Spaces: the Dimensions of Urban Design
Cooper Marcus, C. People Places
Gosling, D. Gordon Cullen
Jacobs, J. The Death and Life of Great American Cities
Mostafavi, M. The Life of Cities
Mostafavi, M. and Douherty. Ecological Urbanism
Towers, G. Introduction to Urban Housing Design
Whyte, W. City: Rediscovering the Center
Timetable
Project 1        Jan 23 - Feb 6
Project 2        Feb 6 - Mar 4
Project 3        Part A Mar 4 - Apr 5
                 Part B Apr 5 - May 8
                                                                                                       4


ARC 520E INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO II: ENVIRONMENTAL                                   Spring 2019
MWF 1pm-5pm
Professor Simon Atkinson
SUT 3.130B
Office Hours: By Appointment
 simonatkinson@austin.utexas.edu
PREREQUISITES
ARC 320D, ARC/ARI 221K, and ARC 415K with a grade of at least C in each.
CURRICULUM FLAG
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage students in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing a student
with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to
the student’s major. At least one-third of the grade will be based on independent investigation
and presentation of one’s own work.
INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO
Students pursuing the Bachelor of Architecture must complete four Intermediate Design
Studios during their second and third years. Building on the Foundation Design Studios taken
during the first year, the goal of the Intermediate Studios is to prepare students for Advanced
Design Studios in their fourth and fifth years.
Each Intermediate Studio will be structured around one of four broad themes of inquiry
(Operational, Environmental, Integration, and Speculation) and will offer a critical framework
and vocabularies for design and development into key issues emphasized in the theme.
Intermediate Studios will also serve as a platform to prepare students for the range of offerings
of the Advanced Studios (e.g. Comprehensive, Urban Design, Landscape Architecture, etc.).
Intermediate Studios will follow a similar structure, but each instructor will individually
determine the scope and design problem for each studio.
THEME: ENVIRONMENT
This studio emphasizes architecture as a response to context: architecture and landscape
architecture in the city and in nature, urban issues, housing, making place. This studio should
take advantage that students are concurrently enrolled in or have already completed the
course Site Design.
STUDIO STRUCTURE
Assignment #1: Research and Analysis (2 weeks)
15% of final grade
Students will work in teams.
This will be achieved by close consideration of the work of key writers, architects, and
landscape architects working at the scale of the city, and case studies of both city districts that
work, and new city interventions. Your task will be to diagram, working in a team, a potential
                                                                                                    5


approach to a neighborhood district, its role, and potential relationship to adjacent areas,
and the city as a whole.
Your task will be to diagram a potential additional district integrated into the master plan, while
at the same time suggesting revisions to existing plan proposals.
Assignment #2: (3.5 weeks)
20% of final grade
Students will work in teams.
The design of a public place bringing a new landscape of identity. Emphasis is placed on
“gathering’, and how a democratic and distinguished place can bring hope to an area, as well as
acting as a catalyst to new enterprises. The context is characterized by both outstanding
historic structures, surface car parking, and also buildings of limited significance.
Your challenge is: to reposition and restructure the existing parking on the site; to establish a
new place identity, including the design of supporting structures and amenities; and through
graphic communication and model to clearly represent the qualities of a new city place.
Overall, you are aiming to bring new cultural and housing opportunity to the city.
Assignment #3: Main project (9 weeks);
65% of final grade
Students will work individually, with designs framed within a team context.
Our aim is to design buildings where people will wish to live for a long time, in less space, but
with greater comfort. Here, access to sunlight, open space, local amenities, work and school are
each of vital importance. Your challenge is: to design a small district in the inner city. You will
then design a city block, its adjacent streets and landscape, as a place of enduring quality. The
building(s) will incorporate a range of house types, work places, education/community facilities,
local amenities, and green space. Graphic communication and models will demonstrate the
spatial qualities of home in association with access, open space, street, and associated work
areas and places.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will be exposed to a series of learning goals several times and from different angles
over the four Intermediate Studio sequence. The goal is that similar issues are repeated from
studio to studio but from different angles, allowing students to find, within the diversity of the
topics, a “common thread” as they go through the sequence of the four studios. The level of
expectation will grow as students go from being introduced to an issue, to becoming competent
at it. Some issues would be only mentioned in passing in one studio but will be studied in more
depth in another.
     •  Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and
        space, both exterior and interior; building envelope
     •  Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of
        materiality, structures, construction, and environmental system
     •  Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant
        contextual; environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project
                                                                                                    6


    •   Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents;
        research skills
    •   Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of
        media strategy and level of skill displayed
    •   Basic grasp of accessibility and egress
    •   Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all
        activities of the studio
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning
encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio
offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals,
which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the
public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members,
and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and
spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where
project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and
commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental
mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the
design conversations taken place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc).
Students are encouraged to participate and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS
students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (three per semester by lead
practitioners from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio that
follow are important for the holistic education of intellectually engaged students and
participation will have an impact on students’ grades (see below).
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion
of each grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades
are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the
discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal
weight:
    Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
                                                                                                  7


        •   The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant
            method of inquiry
        •   The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software,
            sketch drawing and models, etc.) in the development of the design
        •   Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go
            beyond what is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration
            of the design?
    Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge
    introduced in companion courses.
        • A strong and clearly stated design objective
        • Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of
            programmatic elements – and sectional development
        • Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as
            demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures
            and construction, structural and environmental system integration, building
            materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
        • Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness,
            floor plates, and assembly
    Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and
    finesse in the final design presentation.
        • Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media
            strategy and level of skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the
            design process; technical documentation
    Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group
    discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a
degree in the School of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C-
will not satisfy degree requirements.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-           Excellent
               Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual
               language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
               concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
               complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-        Above Average
               Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
               completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in
                                                                                                  8


              effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
              demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C          Average
              Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not
              pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor
              Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
              presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the
              required competence and knowledge base.
F             Fail
              Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
              acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive
              unexcused absences.
X             Excused Incomplete
              Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
              completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It
              may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an
              agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the
              second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to
              the School of Architecture policy.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3)
unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter
grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written
documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one
(1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or
absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or
absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A
student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence
and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student
                                                                                                     9


is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your
way, there are options available for help:
    • In-house CARE counselor (see below)
    • For immediate support
            o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
            o CMHC Crisis Line:
                24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    • Free services at CMHC:
            o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
            o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
            o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
            o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health
support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty
and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her.
Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
                                                                                                  10


https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of
the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the
careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other
substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is
accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio
without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your
studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and
reuse to reduce material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue
bins or any other containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system
for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication
coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology
Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the
Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls
can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts
and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
    • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
    • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and
        building they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one
        used when entering the building.
                                                                                                   11


    •  Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
       the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
       class instructors.
    • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin
       Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
       Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                                                                  12
