                                                                                            1
AMS 370 (31165)                                                 Spring 2019
The Beats and American Culture, 1945-90
Instructor: Jeffrey Meikle
Class: Wed. 6:30-9:30 pm, Burdine 436A
Office hours: Wed. 2:30-4:30, or by appt., Burdine 424
Contact info: meikle@mail.utexas.edu, 512-232-2166
Flags: Independent Inquiry; Writing
Historians and literary critics have long debated the significance—both literary and
cultural—of such Beat Generation writers as Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg, and William
Burroughs. Their novels and poems revealed the underside of a post-World War II
generation that rewarded conformity and careerism. The Beats were not so much in
protest against the status quo as oblivious to it. However, their writings served as a
subversive call to the cultural and political radicals of the counterculture and the New
Left during the 1960s and later. This seminar addresses the impact and significance of
the Beat literary movement by examining several classics of Beat writing and tracing
their influence on popular art and culture from the 1960s through the 1980s. First we
will examine the social and political background from which a Beat subculture emerged
during the late 1940s and early 1950s. Next we will assess several key texts both as
literary works and as documents of social and cultural history from the 1940s through
the early 1960s. Then, using an interdisciplinary approach, we will ask whether a Beat
aesthetic spread from literature to other areas of cultural production. Finally, we will
examine survivals, influences, and appropriations of Beat or neo-Beat modes of
expression in popular arts from the 1960s through the 1980s. This course has a
significant writing component, including a final paper on a single Beat or neo-Beat figure
or phenomenon. In a sense, the course is an exploration of alternative cultures during
the last half of the 20th century.
The instructor will present a brief historical overview of the period and offer a series of
themes for discussion but for the most part will serve as a moderator of discussion.
Students are encouraged to act as cultural observers and critics.
Because a successful seminar depends on lively, informed discussions, students are
expected to complete assigned readings before class meetings, to attend regularly, and
to participate actively in class. Written work includes four 2-page essays (10% of final
grade each), a long essay of at least 10 pages (30%), and an in-class essay (15%). Each
student is responsible for attendance and frequent class participation (15%). Daily
quizzes will contribute to the class participation grade. Attendance is especially
important because we meet only once a week. Thus one absence is the equivalent of
missing three sessions of a class that meets MWF. Three unexcused absences will lead to
a reduction of the earned course grade by one full letter; four or more unexcused
absences will lead to automatic failure of the course, no matter what one's earned
average might be. Overall evaluation is based on originality and clarity of thought and
expression, both written and oral. The plus and minus grading system is in effect. The
course is flagged for writing and independent inquiry.


                                                                                           2
This course requires considerable reading. If that worries you, then it may not be for
you. Required reading includes the following ten books and a course pack of articles
available from the Texas Union Copy Center, UNB 2.214, 512-475-6675. Be sure to
bring physical copies of assigned readings to each meeting. We will be referring to
specific pages and you will be expected to follow along.
Required books:
Jack Kerouac, On the Road
Allen Ginsberg, Howl
Jack Kerouac, Lonesome Traveler
Joyce Johnson, Minor Characters
William Burroughs, Naked Lunch
Bob Dylan, Chronicles, Volume 1
Tom Wolfe, The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test
Allen Ginsberg, The Fall of America
Hunter Thompson, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas
Gary Snyder, Turtle Island
If you will miss a class for religious observance, please notify the instructor at least a
week in advance.
You are expected to abide by the University Code of Conduct and the Student Honor
Code, which are both stated here:
"The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community."
"As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of
the University and uphold academic integrity."
If you have any uncertainty as to what constitutes intellectual dishonesty, please see
the official eleven-point definition at http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/. Intellectual
dishonesty will not be tolerated and is grounds for course failure.
Upon request the University provides appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean
of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY. If you know you will be requesting an
accommodation, please submit your letter during the first two weeks of the semester.
Please attend to the following statement from the Office of Campus Safety and Security
regarding emergencies: "Occupants of buildings on the UT campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each
classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not
be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in
evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the
event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors."


                                                                                           3
                                        Schedule
(Note: an asterisk * indicates a book is available at the Co-op; other readings are in the
course pack.)
Jan. 23       Organization and introduction
Jan. 30       Defining the Beat experience
              Postwar malaise: organization man, lonely crowd, and feminine mystique
                   Ann Charters, “What Was the Beat Generation?” Beat Down to Your
                       Soul (2001)
                   Anatole Broyard, “A Portrait of the Hipster,” Partisan Review (1948)
                   John Clellon Holmes, “This Is the Beat Generation,” New York Times
                       (November 1952)
                   Jack Kerouac, “On the Origins of a Generation,” Playboy (June 1959)
Feb. 6        In search of America
                 *Jack Kerouac, On the Road (1957)
                   Gilbert Millstein, review of On the Road, New York Times, September 5,
                       1957
                   John Clellon Holmes, “The Great Rememberer” (1966), from
                       Representative Men (1988)
                   Jack Kerouac, On the Road: The Original Scroll (1951; pub. 2007),
                        brief selection
                   FIRST 2-PAGE ESSAY DUE BEFORE CLASS
Feb. 13       The problematic of race: the Beats and Black America
              Crosscurrents: Jazz, Abstract Expressionism, and Beat aesthetics
                   Jack Kerouac, ”The Beginning of Bop,” Escapade (April 1959)
                   Norman Podhoretz, “The Know-Nothing Bohemians,” Partisan Review
                       (Spring 1958)
                   Norman Mailer, “The White Negro,” Dissent (Spring 1957)
Feb. 20       Allen Ginsberg’s poetics of the hydrogen jukebox
              Kerouac’s spontaneous bop prosody
                  *Allen Ginsberg, Howl and Other Poems (1956)
                  *Jack Kerouac, Lonesome Traveler (1960)
                   Jack Kerouac, “Essentials of Spontaneous Prose,” Black Mountain
                       Review (Autumn 1957)
                   Jack Kerouac, “Belief & Technique for Modern Prose,” Evergreen
                        Review (Spring 1959)
                   SECOND 2-PAGE ESSAY DUE BEFORE CLASS


                                                                                    4
Feb. 27      Girls who wore black: women and the Beats
                * Joyce Johnson, Minor Characters
                  “Panel Discussion with Women Writers of the Beat Generation”
                      (1996), in Beat Down to Your Soul, ed. Ann Charters (2001)
March 6      Beat cinema
             Emergence of a “Beat Generation”: from subculture to pop culture
                 Paul O’Neil, “The Only Rebellion Around,” Life (November 30, 1959)
                 THIRD 2-PAGE ESSAY DUE BEFORE CLASS
March 13      William Burroughs and the old weird America
                *William Burroughs, Naked Lunch (1959)
                 Ann Douglas, “’Punching a Hole in the Big Lie’: The Achievement of
                     William S. Burroughs,” introduction to Word Virus: The William
                     Burroughs Reader (1998)
                 William Burroughs, from Junky (1953)
SPRING BREAK
March 27     Out on Highway 61: Bob Dylan as latter-day Beat
                *Bob Dylan, Chronicles: Volume One (2004)
April 3      Further along the road: Ken Kesey and the psychedelic experience
                *Tom Wolfe, The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test (1968
                  FOURTH 2-PAGE ESSAY DUE BEFORE CLASS
April 10     Ginsberg’s road from Beat poet to antiwar activist
             The road movie…a Beat genre?
                *Allen Ginsberg, The Fall of America (1972)
April 17     Gonzo journalism and the end of the road
                *Hunter Thompson, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas (1971)
April 24     Some of the Dharma: Beats and eco-consciousness
                *Gary Snyder, Turtle Island (1974)
                  Jack Kerouac, from Some of the Dharma (written 1954-55)
                  Jack Kerouac, from Dharma Bums (1958)


                                                                           5
May 1 Tom Waits, Jim Jarmusch, Laurie Anderson, and neo-Beat romanticism
          Jay Jacobs, from Wild Years (2000)
          Mark Roland, “Tom Waits Is Flying Upside Down (On Purpose),”
             Musician (October 1987)
          Jim Jarmusch, “Tom Waits Meets Jim Jarmusch,” Straight No Chaser
          John Leland, “Do Geeks Dream of HTML Sheep?” Hip: The History
             (2004)
          FINAL PAPER DUE BEFORE CLASS
May 8 IN-CLASS ESSAY
