                           School Psychology Program - Practicum (Level I)
                                    Psychoeducational Assessment
                                     EDP N383D/Unique # 74290
                                        Summer 2019, SZB 284
                                  Wednesdays/Thursdays 9:00-12:00
                                  9 Week Session – June 6 to July 30
Instructor: Jessica O'Bleness, Ph.D.
Email: jessica.obleness@austin.utexas.edu
Office and Hours: SZB 254D, by appointment
Prerequisites: Evidence of proficient administration of individually administered cognitive
abilities tests (including WJ-IV, WISC-V, and DAS-2) and achievement tests (WJ-IV, WIAT-
III).
This course is designed to provide basic theoretical, empirical, and applied knowledge of
assessment as practiced by school psychologists. By the end of this class, students should have
basic competence, knowledge and skills to conduct professional-quality psychoeducational
assessments and to communicate results to other relevant parties (including the child, parents,
and teachers) in written and oral form. In addition, students will be able to provide meaningful,
empirically supported, and realistic recommendations to address any areas of concern that result
from the assessment. This course will also introduce the use of cross-battery assessment to
identify specific learning disabilities and integrate academic tests presented in the class
Academic Assessment and Interventions. Additional topics related to assessment such as
intellectual disabilities, autism, and additional intellectual tests may be covered if time allows for
them.
This is a practicum course with a didactic component. You will have 3 hours of class time which
includes practicing assessment skills and supervision. You will have outside class readings.
Additional case supervision will also be scheduled with the instructor outside of class time when
needed. By the end of the class, you will spend approximately 10-15 direct hours with your
client, and at least that many hours in scoring, conceptualizing and report writing.
Interviewing, testing, and feedback sessions will generally occur during class time given
students’ busy summer schedules. Some students may be asked to start class early on the
interview day in order to accommodate the large class size. In that case these students will be
released from class early. The instructor attempts to overlap the scheduling of these testing
sessions across cases. Thus, if the majority of the class is testing during a class day no didactics
will occur that day. Students not having face-to-face time can spend the time observing other
cases, preparing for their cases, or participating in supervision activities, but they must be doing
something related to this class. DO NO underestimate the value of observing your peers. If less
than half of the class is using a particular class day for client sessions, it will be the instructor’s
discretion to hold didactics. When this occurs, the class will be recorded or made up with the
students not in attendance due to client sessions. The majority of testing will occur in June, while
report writing and feedback sessions will occur in July. The topics of dyslexia and Attention
Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder will also be covered early in the summer session, since these are
                                                                                                        1


the common referral question for our cases this summer.
COURSE OBJECTIVES:
    Ø To provide guided practice interviewing parents and other professionals for the purpose
        of obtaining information relevant to the assessment of a student with educational
        challenges. Careful interviewing and review of any materials provided by the parent or
        school, and consultation with the instructor, will provide the information necessary for
        the formulation of an assessment plan.
    Ø To provide guided practice in the choice, administration, and interpretation of diagnostic
        tools such as the following: intelligence tests, achievement and diagnostic tests, behavior
        surveys and inventories, CBM probes, and adaptive behavior rating scales.
    Ø To provide guided practice in the verbal and written communication of test results,
        diagnostic impressions and conclusions, and interventions strategies suggested by
        obtained assessment results.
NASP Standards Addressed:
        Students will:
                2.1 Be competent in using data-based decision making and accountability in their
                professional practice
                2.4 Be cognizant of effective instructional practices and those practices that
                facilitate the development of cognitive/academic skills
                2.5 Demonstrate understanding of student diversity in development and learning
                2.7 Be able to provide or contribute to prevention and intervention programs that
                promote the mental health and physical well-being of students
                2.10 Demonstrate knowledge of the history and foundation of their profession, of
                various service models, of relevant public policy development, and of ethical,
                professional and legal standards
                2.11 Are able to use information sources and technology, relevant to their work,
                in ways that enhance or safeguard the quality of services.
REQUIRED BOOKS:
    1. Dombrowski, S. (2015). Psychoeducational Assessment and Report Writing. New York:
        Springer
    1. Flanagan, D. P. & Ortiz, S. (2013). Essentials of Cross-Battery Assessment, 2nd ed. New
        York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
You should have the Flanagan book from previous courses with Dr. Keith. It is also available
online through the UT library. Many of the books you already purchased from Dr. Keith’s class
can be used for this course. Additional outside readings may be necessary based on individual
client needs and presenting concerns. Additional Journal Articles and Book Chapters will be
provided on CANVAS, and the required readings are noted on the Syllabus schedule.
COURSE EXPECTATIONS:
1. You will be assigned a partner to complete all coursework this semester. You and your partner
will be assigned to 2 cases to complete together. You will have to cooperatively complete this
                                                                                                    2


case, thus determine who will complete which component and review each other’s work. For
example, one person will complete the parent interview and WIAT-III while the other completes
the WISC-5. Partners will submit most assignments together, with the exception of the two self
reflection papers, which will be completed independently. Working with a partner can be
challenging, but it is a good exercise as this field often requires working with and depending on
other professionals. This opportunity will help you learn about your strengths and weakness in
knowledge, clinical skills, and interpersonal skills.
2. You will be expected to participate in ongoing supervision with the instructor. It is your
responsibility to begin developing appropriate behaviors as a supervisee. These behaviors
include, but are not limited to the following: be prepared with any assignments, bring the case
file and other necessary documents, have questions ready, and TAKE NOTES!
3. You are responsible for confirming the appointments with the parent. You are also responsible
for scheduling the assessments and notifying the instructor of all of these dates/times. Preferred
dates for testing are during class time. Finally, you will be responsible for arranging and
confirming the feedback session with the parents. Unless arranged with the instructor, all
assessments should be conducted during normal office hours. Again, you always have class time
to complete these tasks, but you can arrange to do some tasks on another day if the instructor is
available to be present. All work for cases should be divided as equally as possible.
4. The requirements for each case will vary slightly based on the referral questions, but expect
each case to include, generally:
        a. Parent(s) and student interviews
        b. Intellectual/cognitive assessment and other assessments as needed
        c. Behavior and emotional functioning screening (using questionnaires/rating scales)
        d. Academic achievement assessment
        e. School records provided by parents and/or information from teacher
5. You will provide case management for your case. A folder will be provided to you and your
partner. You will be responsible in keeping your case folder organized and up-to-date with data
as well as contact and hour logs. Case management may include school contacts, contacts with
any medical personnel, follow-through on recommendations, and repeated parent contacts. As
you begin to form hypotheses concerning the locus of a child’s problem, you will also need to
learn about and research relevant disorders and likely interventions; some of this learning will
have occurred in the course Academic Assessment and Intervention. As appropriate you will be
asked to secure references for additional services that may be needed for your case (i.e., speech
and language assessment, OT assessment, therapy, family support, etc.). Release of
Information form will be used to contact teachers.
6. You will prepare a written report documenting various data, your findings, and
recommendations. A report template and sample reports will be provided on CANVAS. You will
prepare and provide a feedback session to the parents and child.
7. You are responsible for video recording all session with clients including interviews, testing,
and feedbacks. You must provide these videos to the instructor within 24 hours of recording.
                                                                                                   3


This can be done via uploading to UT Box, a DVD, or flashdrive. All videos must be handled
carefully in order to maintain privacy and confidentiality and will be destroyed by the instructor
3 months after the end of the course.
ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADES
Students will be expected to regularly access and to communicate through emails, UT Box, and
CANVAS. In order to provide appropriate supervision and ongoing communication/feedback,
the case is divided into specific assignments. Assignments details and examples are provided on
CANVAS and students will generally submit planning or reflection assignments to CANVAS.
Please see the document Assessment Checklist for detailed list of requirements for case and to
assist in tracking your progress. Report drafts and score reports will be submitted to UT Box.
The instructor will create a file for you and your partner to use on UT Box.
NOTE: Most assignments and report drafts should be turned in electronically using a class
password to protect the document. Passwords will be given in class. Refrain from using
identifying information in all preliminary drafts and assignments. Until the final draft use the
following strategy: Charlie Brown = Cxx Bxx, Mrs. Fields = Mrs. Fxx.
Summary Of Assignments And Points Awarded:
• ASSIGNMENTS RELATED TO CASE:
      Additional Interview Questions (Parent, Child) (10 points each) CANVAS
      Interview Self-Critique (50 points) CANVAS
      Observation Plan (10 points) CANVAS
      Teacher Interview Plan (10 points) CANVAS
      Assessment Plan (10 points) CANVAS
      Protocol Review (50 points-cognitive, 50 points- achievement) UTBOX-score reports,
      ENVELOPE-protocols
      Drafts (reason for referral/background history; 15 points) UT BOX
      Conceptualization Summary (40 points) CANVAS
      Completed Rough Draft and Final Report (100 points) UT BOX
      Feedback Plan and Handouts (30 points) UT BOX
      Feedback Self-Critique (50 points) CANVAS
      Peer observation (25 points) CANVAS
• CASE PRESENTATION (50 points) CANVAS
• FINAL PORTFOLIO (See attached sheet for contents) (100 points)
• PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND ETHICAL BEHAVIOR (100 points)
TOTAL POSSIBLE POINTS: 700
Grading scale for all assignments:
A = Excellent, outstanding, thorough work. Genuine effort, attention to detail, and thoughtful
A- =Good, but not quite outstanding, such as some important conceptual area for improvement
that was available to the student via readings or slightly more attention to details.
B+ =Acceptable work at graduate level, but shows carelessness or lack of effort
B = Minimally acceptable, such as missing an important component, shows carelessness, missing
                                                                                                   4


deadlines or only minimal effort
B- or below = missing deadlines, needs substantial revision, and possibly remediation
Assignments Related to Case (Rubrics available on CANVAS):
    v Additional Interview Questions (Parent, Child): Prior to conducting your interview, you
       are required to submit an interview plan for each interview, covering referral questions,
       areas to cover, actual questions, and scripts for case process. The shell of the interview is
       provided for you, but you are required to finalize the script and include at least three new
       questions that are specific to your case.
    v Interview Self-Critique: 7 days after your initial interview, turn in a rating form along
       with your video tape of your initial interview with the client. The rating form will be
       provided, and the instructor will review the tape also and provide feedback. Behaviors to
       note will be provided based on practice activities in class prior to this assignment.
    v Hypotheses Chart: After you have completed the initial interview, you will complete
       chart with your hypotheses about the case. We will start this in class, but you may need to
       use some time outside of class to complete.
    v Draft 1 - reason for referral and background history. You will complete this section of the
       report within 7 days of your initial interview and submit to UT Box for instructor
       feedback.
    v Observation Plan: Since school is most likely not in session, you will create an
       observation plan based on what you wish you could observe. You are required to submit
       an observation plan detailing what classes/activities you would like to observe, and
       observation techniques you would likely use if you had the opportunity to observe in the
       school setting.
    v Teacher Interview Plan: Similar to the Observation Plan you will discuss what type of
       things you would like to follow-up with the teacher if you had the opportunity to
       interview the teacher. You can do this as if you were interviewing prior to the assessment
       in order to assist in your assessment plan or after you have completed testing and want to
       ask questions based on your test results.
    v Assessment Plan: Prior to starting assessment, you are required to submit an assessment
       plan documenting, age/grade of client, referral question(s), and test plans
    v Protocol Review: Following testing it is your responsibility to correctly score protocols
       and promptly submit to the instructor within one week of testing (e.g., finished WJ-IV
       Cog). KEEP IN MIND YOU MAY NOT HAVE A WEEK BETWEEN SESSIONS and
       will have a tighter timeline in order to determine what additional tests you need to give.
       You will receive up to 50 points for your cognitive protocol (WJCogIV, DAS2, or
       WISCV) and up to 50 points for your achievement protocol (WJAchIV, WIAT-III). Any
       additional tests that are completed must also be reviewed by the instructor. Deductions
       are made due to errors (e.g., not completing basal, scoring, etc.). If you make note of
       error on post-it sticky note less deductions will be made. CHECK YOU PARTNER’S
       WORK, IT IS YOUR GRADE, TOO!
    v Graphic Organizers: After completing the cognitive battery (e.g., WJ-IV Cog, WISC-V)
       you will complete a graphic organizer provided on CANVAS to show the test results.
    v Conceptualization Summary: Upon completing the assessment you are to complete a
       conceptualization summary that includes tables and graphic organizers to review testing
       data and integrate information. This should assist you in report writing.
                                                                                                    5


     v Rough Draft Report: You must turn in a rough draft that includes all information except
        recommendations for feedback and corrections. Do not be surprised if you have multiple
        rounds of edits and significant changes. For most of you this is the first time you have
        written a document like this report. Expect changes and corrections; however, given the
        time constraints on this course and your other summer courses a template will be
        provided and significant edits will be provided to you in the form of track changes.
     v Final Report: Students must provide feedback to clients in a timely manner, and students
        must complete a final report by the last class day in order to receive credit for this course,
        but all final drafts are expected by 7/31 without penalty. Students who come across
        unforeseen delays in testing will be accommodated fairly. Students must provide written
        and oral feedback in a timely manner to their clients in order to receive credit for this
        course. Grades will be based on quality of the initial rough draft and responsiveness to
        instructor feedback about the report, as well as professionalism in the language used in
        the report as well as in the feedback meeting and rapport with the client regarding the
        feedback.
     v Feedback Plan and Handout: Prior to conducting the parent and student feedback
        sessions, you are required to develop a feedback script and plan summarizing main points
        you will be covering and including any scripts to address material. You will also have
        handouts for parents to discuss findings. These must be approved prior to feedback
        meetings.
     v Feedback Self-Critique: Similar to the parent interview, you will review your video and
        rate your skills in the feedback meeting.
Case Presentations
With your partner, you will present the case to the class in a case conference format. The purpose
is to practice communicating essential client information to others in a brief manner similar to an
IEP meeting. The case presentation should be a brief (< 10 minute) verbal presentation that
includes important pieces of the referral information, test results, and summary. Consider using
graphics provided in feedback session.
Final Portfolio
At the completion of your case you will submit a file folder with all of you supporting case
document. Please see Checklist for Final Portfolio document on CANVAS. To be included in
your portfolio are hour logs. The folder will be provided for you.
Hour Logs
Keep a log of your client activity, supervision, meetings, and case discussions. You will keep a
weekly log of your progress and activities with this class, including peer supervision time, time
with client, parent phone calls, etc. You will receive training and see examples of this in the
class.
Professional Conduct and Ethical Behavior With Clients, Peers, And Supervisors
Professional and ethical guidelines will be addressed throughout the semester. You are expected
to follow them, and dilemmas and questions on ethics will be addressed throughout the class.
Feel free to ask about any ethical concern at any time. From now on your professional behavior
is a representation of your work, our program, and our profession. These cases are real people
                                                                                                     6


with real concerns.
You will be graded on the following professional and ethical conduct:
• Maintain prompt and courteous correspondence with clients. Prompt attention and maintaining
conscientiousness to all client-related work is essential, and assignments are expected on their
due dates. Late work is unprofessional.
• Prepare and practice all tests in advance to ensure a smooth administration with clients. Careful
attention to administration and scoring. Score and check all protocols prior to giving them to
another person to review them. Prompt and courteous use of shared test materials with other
students.
• Behaving in respectful, non-judgmental, professional manner to peers, supervisors, and with
any clients. Demonstrate cultural sensitivity.
         o Providing helpful and constructive peer feedback during supervision and in class
         o Demonstrate openness and responsiveness to feedback from peers and advanced peers,
         and instructor. Following instructions and advice from supervisors, asking
         constructive questions if anything is confusing or contradictory in readings or in
         supervision
         o Intellectual discussions and disagreement is welcome, along with skills in
         collaboration, respectful dialogue, and positive exchange of ideas, including
         constructive and supportive feedback to peers and the instructor.
• Dressing in professional attire for client-related interactions (casual dress for class and
campus supervision is fine)
• Genuine effort and attendance during instruction. Punctuality with clients and class.
• Carefully proofread all drafts prior to turning them in to peers or instructor. All drafts should be
your best effort, taking into account information you have available to you from other class
resources. A draft should reflect your best writing and most complete understanding without
additional feedback at the time. Peer supervisors should help with general writing and
proofreading!
• Come to class on time, turn in work on time, respond promptly (within one working day) to
professor and advanced peer emails, raise relevant questions during class, arrive to class
prepared, and participate in class discussions and role plays. Please limit side conversations.
Regular use of class CANVAS site for readings, handouts, announcements, and general
information is expected. Please be considerate and limit cell phone use for emergencies and
computer use to notes.
Please see the document Professional and Ethical Conduct Tracking Sheet on CANVAS to see
how grades will be determined for this subject. Points will be deducted for each infraction and
student will be notified. Additional grade deductions may occur for significant attendance issues
or not turning in the final report by the deadline.
Absence policy:
I do not have a rigid attendance policy as I believe my course is just one piece of your education
and life; however, if you miss a class, you will miss something potentially important. A
cumulative number of absences would likely affect your performance and your grade. Please
alert the instructor to discuss the situation as soon as possible any time you are absent. If you are
too ill to concentrate or participate, or are ill with something that is likely contagious, please take
                                                                                                      7


precautions to restore your own health and keep from spreading the illness to others (stay home
or wear mask to avoid spreading germs, for example).
TARA ROOM MANNERS:
1. Many students from different classes use the TARA rooms. Therefore it is important that we
do whatever we can to be respectful of and courteous to each other. There is frequently a sense
of urgency in scheduling the TARA rooms as everyone feels a time crunch at one point or
another. However, abiding by some simple rules and keeping a few important things in mind can
help significantly. Rooms will be reserved during our class time in June, but if you choose to use
a TARA room other times then it is your responsibility to reserve the room with Julie in SZB
504.
2. Making transitions from one group to another as easy as possible will be aided by
remembering to: (a) clean up after yourself and (b) put any moved furniture back the way you
found it. If the room you were assigned is messy or unclean, please report it to the instructor
immediately.
3. Noise carries. Be as quiet as possible with conversations. (Don't hesitate to remind anyone, we
need to help each other.)
4. Respect confidentiality. Never forget that we are working with people who have feelings about
themselves and their children. Therefore, do not speak in demeaning or derogatory terms about
those with whom you are working in the TARA rooms, in the Sanchez Building, or
ANYWHERE. Comments carry and you will be amazed just how many people know each other
in the growing city of Austin especially in the education community.
5. Food and drink are allowed in the clinic, but remember to clean up anything you bring in. We
have NO janitorial service in the clinic. Keep in mind this is not just your space and food smell
can linger.
ADDITIONAL NOTES FOR CLASS DISCUSSIONS:
• This course will have a lot of discussion time, so please be respectful of your peers and help me
create a safe and positive learning environment. Respect of other students’ views, experiences,
and questions is expected. I expect everyone to contribute at least to some degree, and for
everyone to be respectful of others’ contributions, even if opinions widely differ. I also expect all
of you to listen while others talk and for no one to dominate the talk or online discussion time.
Additional Information:
    v Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
        Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
        Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. Upon request,
        according to standard policies at The University of Texas, I will provide appropriate
        accommodations for qualified students with disabilities.
    v All students should abide by the UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics):
    v http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html). “The core values of The
        University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
        opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
        these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
        community.”
    v By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
                                                                                                    8


  prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
  examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
  will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
  the absence.
v Lectures may be recorded with instructor’s permission, but students do not have the
  instructor’s permission to release any sections of lecture on social media.
v The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
  Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
    •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
        to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
        announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
    •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
        occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
        entering the building.
    •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
        during the first week of class.
    •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    •   Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
    •   Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention
    •   Services office.
    •   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
    •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
        procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                               9
