             ANT 301 - Introduction to Biological Anthropology
INSTRUCTOR
Silvy van Kuijk
Office hours: Th 11:30am -1:00 pm
Office: SAC 4.116
E-mail: silvyvankuijk@utexas.edu
TEACHING ASSISTANT
Elsy Johanna Páez Crespo
Office hours: M 2:00 – 3:30 pm
Office: SAC 4.116
E-mail: johanna.paezc@utexas.edu
                                       1


COURSE DESCRIPTION
Biological anthropology (also called physical anthropology) is the study of the behavior,
ecology, and evolution of primates, including humans. As a scientific discipline,
research in biological anthropology is grounded in the scientific method. ANT 301 is
intended to provide an introduction to the field of biological anthropology and an
overview of its sub-disciplines. ANT 301 is also designed to provide the necessary
foundational knowledge needed for all upper division courses in biological anthropology.
The first week of class focus on living primate diversity and taxonomy. The remaining
lectures focus on four main topics: 1) micro- and macroevolution, 2) primate behavior
and ecology, 3) primate and human evolution, and 4) modern human variation.
Labs focus on the collection and analysis of quantitative data, and provide an
opportunity to explore key concepts, osteological material, and fossil material discussed
in lectures. Please be advised that you will be required to take measurements directly
from human skeletal material for some labs.
This course may be used to fulfill the natural science and technology (Part II)
component of the university core curriculum.
GOALS
    -   To give students an appreciation of the current state of knowledge in two or more
        areas of natural science and technology.
    -   To help students understand the methods, approaches, and theories that
        scientists use to answer questions about the natural world.
To meet these goals, students taking ANT 301 are expected to gain a detailed
understanding of biological evolution and adaptation (considered foundational
knowledge in all life sciences). Students are also introduced to a range of scientific
concepts and methods that are central to biological anthropology and related scientific
disciplines (e.g., biology, geology, and paleontology).
LECTURES AND LABS SCHEDULE
M-T-W-TH-F 10:00 am to 11:30 am at SAC 4.174.
To get to the classroom, take the elevators next to the food court up to the 4 th floor. The
door on your right immediately next to the elevator is our classroom.
TEXTBOOK
Boyd R, Silk J. 2018. How Humans Evolved, 8th edition. W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
ONLINE MATERIALS
Lab readings, lab quizzes, and lab exercises will be made available on Canvas
(http://canvas.utexas.edu). Please note that PowerPoint files will not be made available
on Canvas. If you miss a class lecture, it is your responsibility to obtain notes from a
fellow classmate.
                                             2


EVALUATION
Exam 1         = 35%                         Lab quizzes         1% each (x5) = 5%
Exam 2         = 35%                         Lab exercises       5% each (x5) = 25%
Exam 1 (35%). This exam will take place on June 20 during our regular class time.
Exam 1 will cover all of the course lectures and reading assignments that were
presented before that date. All of the questions will be in objective format (e.g., true or
false, multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short answers).
Exam 2 (35%). The final exam will take place on July 11 during our regular class period.
Exam 2 will cover all of the course lectures and reading assignments that were
presented from July 31st to the end of the semester. All of the questions will be in
objective format (e.g., true or false, multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short
answers).
Lab quizzes (5%). Throughout this semester, students will attend five lab sessions.
Before each lab session, students must complete a lab quiz on Canvas. These quizzes
draw directly from the lab readings and serve as a preparation for the corresponding lab
session. All of the questions in lab quizzes will be in objective format (true or false,
multiple choice, or matching). If a student does not complete a lab quiz before its
corresponding lab session, she or he will obtain no credit for such a lab quiz. Late lab
quizzes will not be accepted. Because there are five lab quizzes and each lab quiz is
worth 1% of the final grade, lab quizzes as a whole will count for 5% of the final grade.
Lab exercises (25%). During each lab session, students must complete a lab exercise.
These lab exercises must be completed in class and turned in before leaving the
classroom. Lab exercises are available on Canvas. You must download, print, and bring
your lab exercise to each lab session. If you turn in your lab exercise answers on
anything other than a printout of the lab exercise sheet that is posted on Canvas, you
will lose 5 percentage points on the assignment. Because there will be five lab sessions
and each lab exercise is worth 5% of the final grade, lab exercises as a whole will
account for 25% of the final grade.
ASSIGNMENT OF GRADES
A       93-100               B-     80 to 82.99           D+     67 to 69.99
A-      90 to 92.99          C+     77 to 79.99           D      63 to 66.99
B+      87 to 89.99          C      73 to 76.99           D-     60 to 62.99
B       83 to 86.99          C-     70 to 72.99           F      <60
Final grades are not negotiable. If you are struggling with this course, please seek help
from the course instructor or TA as soon as you are concerned with your performance.
We are here to help!
                                               3


COURSE SCHEDULE                                            Readings and/or
                                                           assignments
Week 1
Jun 06 (Th) Intro to Primates                              Ch. 5 (p. 109-118)
Jun 07 (F) Primate Diversity                               Ch. 5 (p. 118-125)
Week 2
Jun 10 (M)  Lab 1: Skeletal Anatomy and Primate Taxonomy   Lab 1 Reading
                                                           Lab1 quiz due
Jun 11 (Tu) Evolution I: Natural Selection and Adaptation  Ch. 1
Jun 12 (W)  Evolution II: Microevolution                   Ch. 2,3
Jun 13 (Th) Evolution III: Macroevolution                  Ch. 4 (p. 81-91)
Jun 14 (F)  Primate Behavior I: Socioecology               Ch. 5 (p.125-140)
Week 3
Jun 17 (M) Primate Behavior II: Sociobiology               Ch. 6
Jun 18 (Tu) Primate Behavior III: Cognition & Life History Ch. 7, 8
Jun 19 (W) Lab 2: Primate Behavior                         Lab 2 reading
                                                           Lab 2 quiz due
Jun 20 (Th) EXAM 1
Jun 21 (F) Primate Evolution I: Paleontological Methods    Ch. 4 (p. 91-105)
Week 4
Jun 24 (M) Primate Evolution II: Fossil Strepsirrhines     Ch. 9 (p. 211-218)
Jun 25 (Tu) Primate Evolution III: Fossil Haplorrhines     Ch. 9 (p. 218-230)
Jun 26 (W) Lab 3: Fossil Primates                          Lab 3 Reading
                                                           Lab 3 quiz due
Jun 27 (Th) Paleoanthropology I: Early Hominins            Ch. 10 (p. 233-243)
Jun 28 (F) Paleoanthropology II: Australopithecines        Ch. 10 (p. 244-258)
Week 5
Jul 1 (TM) Paleoanthropology III: Early Homo               Ch. 11
Jul 2 (Tu) Lab 4: Australopithecines                       Lab 4 reading
                                                           Lab 4 quiz due
Jul 3 (W)   Paleoanthropology IV: Late Homo                Ch. 12
Jul 4 (Th)  Paleoanthropology V: Modern Homo sapiens       Ch. 13
Jul 5 (F)   Modern Human Variation I                       Ch. 14 (p. 355-384)
Week 6
Jul 8 (M)   Lab 5: Genus Homo                              Lab 5 Reading
                                                           Lab 5 quiz due
Jul 9 (Tu)  The Biology of Sex                             Ainsworth, 2015
Jul 10 (W)  In-class office hours
Jul 11 (Th) EXAM 2
                                           4


INCLUSIVE LEARNING ENVIRONMENT STATEMENT
The best learning environment is one in which all members feel respected while being
productively challenged. I am dedicated to fostering an inclusive atmosphere, in which
all participants can contribute, explore, and challenge their own ideas as well as those
of others. Every participant has an active responsibility to foster a climate of openness,
and respect for diverse perspectives, questions, personal backgrounds, abilities, and
experiences.
Other Important Dates
June 7th, Friday: Last day of the official add/drop period for the first term; after this date
changes in registration may require the approval of the department chair and usually the
student’s dean.
June 26th, Wednesday: Last day a student may change registration in a second-term
class to or from the pass/fail or credit/no credit basis.
General Course Policies
Please attend all of the lectures and lab sessions. Punctuality is greatly appreciated.
Late arrivals and early departures are very disruptive. Please be polite and respectful.
Do not sleep, talk, or text in class. Please silence your cell phone and stow it away
during lectures and lab sessions. If you engage in disrespectful and disruptive behavior,
you may be asked to leave. You can take notes on your personal computer. However,
you cannot make audio or video recordings during lectures and lab sessions.
GUNS: While I cannot legally ban concealed guns from my classroom, I can exercise
my first amendment right to let you know that I would strongly prefer that you NOT bring
them into my classroom.
Lecture Exams Policies
Make-up exams will be given only when medical or family emergencies can be
documented. If you miss an exam due to an emergency, you must contact your
instructor as soon as possible and provide documentation within 5 days of the exam.
Lab Policies
Lab sessions will be held once a week during our regular class time. If you miss a lab
session due to illness, observance of religious holy day, or military service, you must
contact me within 24 hours from the start of such a lab session to notify me of your
absence. Then, you must provide documentation of your absence within 72 hours of this
time for your make-up request to be considered. If your request to make up the lab
session is approved, the lab exercise must be completed prior to the next lab session.
Please note that permission to make up a lab session will be considered on a case-by-
case basis. If a student fails to abide by the conditions stated above, the option to make
up the laboratory assignment will be revoked and the student will receive a score of 0.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. As members of this university, we
                                               5


must uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect towards
peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair
advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of essentially the same
written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor), or the
attempt to commit such an act. Any student found cheating on an exam or assignment
will receive a grade of zero for such an exam or assignment and will be referred to the
Dean’s office for further disciplinary action. Any attempt to alter a graded, returned
exam in order to improve the score is considered cheating and will result in an exam
grade of zero. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the university.
For a tutorial and information on plagiarism, please read:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
In addition, please read:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis/php
Finally, please read Section 11-802 in the General Information Catalog:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/app/gi09.appc03.html#subchapter-11-800-
student-standards-of-conduct
Documented Disability Statement
If you require special accommodations for exams (e.g., a reduced-distraction
environment or additional testing time), you must contact your course instructor and
teaching assistant in advance in order to discuss the necessary arrangements. There
will be no exceptions to this rule. Proof of qualification for accommodations from the
University of Texas at Austin Services with Disabilities (SSD) office must be provided.
Faculty is not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
letter from SSD.
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact SSD at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
A student is free not to use an approved accommodation. However, if a student opts out
of an accommodation for one exam and then decides to use it for another exam, it is the
responsibility of the student to make advanced arrangements with the course instructor.
                                              6


Religious Holy Days
Following university policies, you must notify the course instructor of your pending
absence at least 14 days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, I will provide you with an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to 6. As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007
academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate
student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer
student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows
good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and
assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please
be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the course instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instructions of the course instructor/teaching
assistant.
Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                               7
