HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
                           UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                    SYLLABUS HIS s322M
                             HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE
                                        SUMMER 2019
Instructor: Van Herd, M. Div., Ph.D.           Teaching Assistant: TBA
JES A321B                                      Department of History
512-692-9310                                   TBA
herd@austin.utexas.edu                         Contact: TBA
                                               tba@utexas.edu
Office hours: 2:30-3:50 RLM 7.114              Office hours: TBA
UTEACH Intern: TBA
Office Hours: TBA
Location: TBA
Contact:
Class Times: 1:00-2:20 PM
Labs: In Class
Class Meeting Place: RLM 7.114
Class Days: MTWTHF
Aun aprendo.—Phillip Melanchthon
Course Description:
History of Modern Science explores the intellectual, social, and cultural history and
philosophy of science and mathematics from the Renaissance to the present. It is a stand-
alone complement to HIS 329U Perspectives on Natural Science and Mathematics that is
primarily designed for pre-service STEM educators in UTeach College of Natural Sciences
but that is open to all those interested.
Few fields of human activity are more associated with the rise of the modern world,
specifically the modern Western world, than that human intellectual endeavor known as
“science.” This course examines the history, epistemology, and development of STEM2 in the
West through the conceptual framework from the Scientific Revolution in the 16th century to
the current day. While this course tracks major scientific and technological advances since
                                                                                            1


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
1700, its lens will be the history of mathematics and the history of quantum mechanics and
their centrality to modern science and technology.
As such, the readings and lessons explore the philosophical, historical, epistemological, and
metaphysical foundations of science, engineering, medicine, and mathematics. Moreover,
this course attempts to identify and analyze the goals of natural philosophers, scientists, and
mathematicians; that is, why did they think the knowledge they discovered and promulgated
was important? This course also investigates the methods deployed to establish the
credibility or authority of knowledge. Finally, the course focuses upon theoretical content of
theories or, what did humanity know at any given point in history?
Subsequently, we shall employ case studies of key figures in modern science each day in the
classroom. This will be of especial help as we examine the marriage of science, technology,
and engineering in the post-Newtonian era and the prodromal scientific events that heralded
the beginning of the 20th century.
As time permits, we shall also examine briefly the history of medicine and the history of
engineering as well as the history of science in key non-Western cultures, such as the
Needham Hypothesis as applied to Asia, and archaeoastronomy pertaining to Mesoamerica
as well as the Towers of Zimbabwe, to name a few.
Course Goals:
     1. To afford the student an overview of the history and philosophy of science and
        mathematics, for purposes of general education and to foster reflection on the
        student’s own reasons, goals, and major.
     2. To enable the student to employ this broader history and philosophical context in
        science and mathematics.
     3. To improve each student’s communication, research and information analysis skills.
     4. To foster scholarly autonomy.
     5. To advance STEM2 across the baccalaureate curriculum.
Teaching and Learning Strategies:
This course will use lecture, multimedia, class discussion, guest speakers, independent
reading, and small group activities. Assignments are process-oriented to afford the student
opportunities to demonstrate comprehension of background knowledge as well as the ability
to integrate scientific, philosophical, and historiographical content. It is the instructor’s aim
to foster an atmosphere of scholarly autonomy; hence, the European seminar model is the
regulative ideal upon which this course is based. In other words, this course is a team effort;
a team comprising the students, instructor, TA, and other Intern. Some of the sessions will
be developed and led by students.
Evaluation Methods:
Evaluation will be based on a combination of written and oral reports, labs, and exercises
designed to foster critical thinking and synthesis of course concepts.
Required Texts:
1. Capra, Fritjof. Learning from Leonardo: Decoding the Notebooks of a Genius. San Francisco:
        BK Currents, 2013. ISBN: 978-1609949891.
2. Dobbs, Betty Jo Teeter, and Margaret Jacob. Newton and the Culture of Newtonianism. New
        York: Humanity Books, 1994. ISBN-10: 1573925454 and ISBN-13: 978-1573925457.
                                                                                                  2


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
3. Gribbin, John. The Scientists: A History of Science Told through the Lives of Its Greatest
         Inventors. New York: Random House, 2004. ISBN: 9780812967883. Also available in
         Kindle.™
4. Kuhn, Thomas S. The Copernican Revolution. ANY edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         University, 1985. ISBN-13: 978-1567312171. Also available in GoogleBooks and
         Kindle.™ Please note that ANY edition is just fine for the purposes of the course. ☺
PROJECT OPTION for TExES Mathematics/Physical Science/Engineering 6–12 (274)
examinees and/or Mathematics Majors:
         Hawking, Stephen. God Created Integers: The Mathematical Breakthroughs that
         Changed History. New York: Running Press, 2007. Also available as Ebook PDF
         download.
The two (2) materials denoted with an asterisk are the foundational materials for the course
Some additional material will be distributed in class and perhaps on CANVAS. There may be
some materials placed on physical reserve in the Perry Castañeda and/or PMA Libraries from
time to time.
Course outline and conceptual background:
Section 1—Prolegomena: Why history and philosophy in the science and
mathematics classroom?
Here shall be explored the various meanings attributed to the terms “science” and
“revolution, and “mediaeval.” The student is to be equipped with the necessary conceptual
and lexical tools so as to be able to reflect historically upon these issues. This week will be
devoted to exploring the various definitions and philosophies of historiography as these
methods are applied to the history of STEM. In our first substantive session, we shall ask the
large, framing question of the identity of this subject. What is the subject of the history of
science? Does it include, for example, authoritative knowledge about the world that later
came to be seen as unscientific (such as magic, magia)? What about cultures that have had
sophisticated enterprises devoted to understanding the physical world which do not map
easily onto the Western concept of science? If we do include such entities as magic, what
should be included? And how do we address enterprises such as meteorology, that are
undoubtedly scientific in central respects yet depend on extensive engagement by a dispersed
laity? These questions not only define the limits of a field, but also implicitly position its
center and periphery, and suggest proper lines of approach.
Section 2— Methods and Reasoning in STEM2
One of the central concepts of the history of science has been that of the revolution. Whether
speaking of physical, chemical, or life sciences (of Copernicus, Newton, Lavoisier, or Darwin)
historians of science have routinely invoked the notion of scientific revolutions to capture the
radical importance of their subject. The concept of revolution is itself historical (it is indebted
to political upheavals since at least 1688); less obviously, it carries implications both positive
and negative. Here we shall look at what historians of science have meant when they have
talked of revolutions. Our example will be perhaps the canonical instance, namely the shift
from a geocentric to a heliocentric universe in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. We
examine Thomas Kuhn’s Structure of Scientific Revolutions and lectures in this course will
refer to the new, exhaustive discussion by Robert Westman. Background for this material,
while not assigned reading, can be found in Nicholas Jardine’s reflections on the role of
                                                                                                  3


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
historiography in establishing Copernicanism, and Peter Galison’s suggestive remarks on the
pitfalls of holism involved in talk of revolutions in general.
Here are some supplemental sources that may be of interest:
R. S. Westman, The Copernican Question: Prognostication, Skepticism, and Celestial Order
         (2010), chs. 2-3 (62-105).
N. Copernicus, Commentariolus. There are various translations available, of which a readily
         accessible one is Noel Swerdlow, “The Derivation and First Draft of Copernicus’s
         Planetary Theory: A Translation of the Commentariolus with Commentary,”
         Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 117:6 (December 1973), 423-512.
N. Jardine, The Birth of History and Philosophy of Science: Kepler’s ‘A Defence of Tycho
         Against Ursus’ with Essays on its Provenance and Significance (1988), 225-86.
P. Galison, Image and Logic: A Material Culture of Microphysics (1997), 781-810.
Section 3—Mathematics, Science, and Society
This unit will give us some background in understanding the nature, concept, and role of
commensurability and mathematics, both per se as well as applied to the modeling of the
physical and life sciences. We will focus on the flourishing of this notion since the 17th
century, philosophical and scientific attacks on the idea, and its persistence into the 21st
century.
Section 4—Technology, Engineering, and Medicine
Section 5— Part 5: Contemporary Debates and Historical Perspectives on STEM2
and Education
Here shall be examined the development and character of “information.” This includes, but is
not restricted to, what are often called the digital and network revolutions. These
transformations (such as popular computing, digital media, the Internet, networked wireless
communications, as well as open-source and open-access protocols) clearly affect all aspects
of the late-modern world. Although information is often thought of in terms of strictly
contemporary history – or even in terms that are expressly anti-historical – the technologies,
codes, conceptions, practices, communities, and commitments of information culture
possess deep and complex historical roots. In the end, it seems that historians have two
duties here, which exemplify the point made at the start of the course about recursive
historiography. One duty is to reveal the historical development of information in all its
complexity – to apply historiography to information itself. The other is to apply information
techniques to their own enterprise, so as to preserve and enhance historical research and
teaching. Historians of science may be unusually well placed to lead that dual endeavor. We
also consider briefly the work of such philosophers of science as Carl Hempel and Wesley
Salmon.
Here are some optional background reading suggestions:
Guldi, J. Roads to Power: Britain Invents the Infrastructure State (2011), 153-211.
Huchingson, James Edward. Pandemonium Tremendum: Chaos and Mystery in the Life of
         God. Cleveland: Pilgrim Press, 2001.
                                                                                              4


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
                                   ASSIGNMENTS                                  100 %
           Attendance                                                            15 %
           Semester Project (if group project, graded individually)              25 %
                Topic Proposal                                                    2.5 %
                Abstract                                                          2.5 %
                Presentation of Project                                            5 %
                Project                                                          15 %
           Other Written Assignments                                             15 %
                Annotated Bibliography (3 parts)                                   5%
                Wikipedia Article                                                  5%
                Descriptive Bibliography (Archives) Project                        5%
           Reading Comprehension/Reflection Quizzes                               25 %
           Group Labs (10@ 2 pts)                                                20 %
           Extra Credit Opportunities Announced Periodically                        
Participation and Attendance: 15%
Active and insightful attendance and engagement will be rewarded. Everyone is expected to
participate in discussions and in small group labs. Participation in discussion sections and
some peer editing will be included.
Lab Assignments: 20%
These are mostly plus-check-minus (and some graded) assignments that are designed to
improve comprehension and integration.
Reading Comprehension/Reflection Questions: 25%
For most days that you have a reading assignment due, you will respond to a set of brief
questions. Usually, these worksheets will be due the next class day, but some will be
submitted on Canvas as announced. Late assignments will receive half-credit. Some
questions will guide and assess your comprehension of historical material, others will be
open-ended reflections upon that material. Questions may draw on readings up to and
including those scheduled for the upcoming class day. Unless otherwise noted, you may
refer to course material for reference. Study collaboration is encouraged; however,
copying classmates’ responses is an Honor Code violation. This category also includes
occasional in-class writing, quizzes, activities, and peer reviews.
Written Assignments: Includes Wikipedia Article and Bibliographic Description papers.
Instructions to be given in class.
Semester Project: 25% (consists of the following elements)
        Annotated Bibliography: 5%
        A bibliography containing at least fifteen (15) quality sources on the topic of your
        lesson plan. Each entry on the form provided must include a summary of the content
        of the source and explaining its importance.
        Topic Proposal: 2.5 %
        Abstract: 2.5 %
        Research Project: 15%
 Possibility 1: Research Paper
 Possibility 2: Audiovisual Presentation
 Possibility 3: Working in pairs, you will prepare and revise one 5E Lesson Plan integrating
 a historical topic into a science or math lesson. These lessons are considered part of the
                                                                                             5


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
 course, and should focus on an interesting or important historical event, idea or method.
 The 5E Lesson Plans will be critical for providing the intellectual history component of the
 course—i.e. what scientists and mathematicians knew. Handouts, examples, assessment
 lists, etc. will explain the assignment and establish clear expectations.
 Possibility 4: Play or other creative work
 Possibility 5: Recreate an historical experiment or fabricate an historical scientific
 instrument.
         Project Presentation: 5% (If the paper or other non-public option is chosen, this
grade is folded into the research score.
EXTRA CREDIT ☺ OPPORTUNITIES
In addition to “surprise” extra credit opportunities to be announced at intervals during the
semester, students may receive up to five (5) extra credit points for attendance at the 2
weekly Star Parties, held by the Astronomy Department. Students may submit pink
attendance slips for receipt of said credit. In addition, students who visit the professor
during office hours at least two (2) times during the semester will receive one (1) point of
extra credit. ☺
Grading:
Letter grades on students’ transcripts will be assigned according to the following percentage
distribution:
90 % or above A
80 % - 89 % B
70 % - 79 %        C
60 % - 69 %        D
59 % or below F
According to University of Texas policy, each of these categories can include + and – grading.
For more information, please consult: http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/grades/.
Fractional percentages will be rounded upward.
In general:
    • A grade of A implies that all requirements have been met and substantially exceeded.
    • A grade of B implies that all requirements have been fully met.
    • A grade of C implies that all requirements have been minimally met.
    • A grade of D implies that some or all of the requirements have not been minimally
         met.
    • A grade of F implies failure to meet minimal requirements.
For this course, the following grading criteria will also apply to each assignment:
96% or above -- A+ Beyond the Call of Duty
These assignments fulfill the stated requirements unusually well, go beyond what is required,
and contain no errors of any sort. They integrate material from different classes (i.e.,
materials covered in or readings assigned for classes on different topics) into a clear and
coherent response. All the important points are covered and more. When appropriate these
assignments recognize possible conflicts or problems with what is said and explain the pros
and cons of different approaches. A 96% may cover fewer points than 100% answers or have
an area in which more discussion is needed. A 100% is perfect, uniformly excellent
throughout, and includes some genuinely original ideas (going beyond what has been said in
class or readings).
90 to 95%: A -- Good Solid Work
                                                                                              6


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
These assignments are fully developed and are focused and coherent. They are competently
done, without serious errors. No important points are omitted. They may however fail to
integrate materials completely, or have little to say that is not obvious or they may draw all or
most of their material from classes or readings on a single topic. These assignments have all
the elements of a more highly ranked assignment, but do not cover as much as answers in the
96% and up range. A lower score within the range lacks thoroughness or perceptiveness,
perhaps raising points without explaining them fully, or may have some additional flaw (a
serious omission or minor factual error).
8o to 89%: B -- Good in Some Respects, but Deficient in Others
These assignments are seriously flawed. They may fail to complete part of the assignment,
may have more serious errors, or may miss important points or misrepresent sources.
70 to 79%: C -- Seriously Deficient
These assignments do not respond to the questions asked. They ignore what was asked (all
or key parts of a assignment) or are full of errors.
Less than 69%: D-- Not completed
The assignment was not completed and the student did not provide an acceptable reason for
not completing it.
Style Manual:
This manual has been officially adopted as the preferred style manual for several of the
University colleges. Its use is preferred for this class using the footnote-bibliography option.
Please speak to the instructor if you wish to use another style as this is negotiable. 
The Chicago Manual of Style: The Essential Guide for Writers, Editors, and
         Publishers, 16th edition. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2010.
The Chicago Manual of Style Web site (especially see the link to “Q & A [Questions and
Answers]”). Quick guide available at:
http://www.press.uchicago.edu/Misc/Chicago/cmosfaq/
Writing Centers:
For assistance in documenting research materials or organizing thoughts for assignments,
students can make appointments for FREE conferences with writing consultants at UT.
Due Dates and Late Assignments:
Assignments are due at the end of class on the
stated due date unless otherwise specified.
Assignments will be accepted later than the due date
only by prior arrangement with the instructor or in
the case of a documented illness or emergency.
Assignments submitted later than the due date for
reasons other than documented illness or
emergency will be subject to an automatic reduction
of 10% of the grade for the assignment.
Class Attendance Policy (required policy):
“Class attendance is a requirement and use of the
full class period is expected. You will be allowed
three sick, personal, physical or mental health days without grading consequences. It is up
to your discretion how you use these three days. Being late to class three times or leaving
class early three times will count as an absence. 15 minutes late to the start of class will
constitute a tardy. Leaving class before being dismissed by your professor will constitute
                                                                                                7


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
an early departure. A 4th absence will result in the lowering of your final grade by one
letter grade. Absences, tardiness and/or early departures beyond this could result in course
failure. If a serious medical or personal situation occurs affecting attendance, please
discuss it with your professor.”
University of Texas Honor Code (required note):
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy Days:
“A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor, in writing, as far in
advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made to complete an
assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.”
University Academic Integrity and Scholastic Honesty (General Information
Catalogue):
“The value of a university degree depends on the absolute integrity of the work done by
each student for that degree, a student should maintain a high standard of individual honor
in his or her scholastic work” (page 98). Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced.”
Reasonable Accommodations:
Students requesting academic accommodations in the classroom must present a letter
prepared by SSD verifying the need for accommodations to each of their instructors (In the
School of Law, students should request letters to the Assistant Dean for Student Services,
who will make the accommodation arrangements). The student's file must be in Active status
prior to the preparation of these letters. For more information, visit:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/letters.php/.
Cell Phone Use:
In consideration of their classmates, students are strongly urged to leave cell phones turned
“off” or “silent” during class delivery. If it is necessary to leave a cell phone activated during
the class, please make every effort to step outside of the classroom, or away from the class,
should you accept a call.
Student Evaluation of Class:
At the end of the term, each student will be asked to complete an UT evaluation form that
elicits opinions about the quality and relevance of course content and the quality of
instruction. The instructor will NOT see course evaluations until after grades have been
turned in to the Registrar’s Office. Student input is used by the instructor for instructional
improvement as well as by the History Department for annual faculty assessment and
promotion decisions. Your careful and accurate completion of the evaluation form is very
important and most appreciated.
Course Schedule*
The following course schedule is subject to change due to inclement weather and other unforeseen changes, as well as official
schedules of the Harry Ransom Center and other venues we shall visit during the course. More importantly, learning is a
dynamic process and, as such, expansions and emendations often occur in the classroom setting. Therefore, the foregoing
is intended solely as a predictive guide to the organizing genius of this class, but is not intended to be slavishly prescriptive.
Acknowledgements: Several policies and materials in this syllabus were adapted from Prof. R. H. Taylor’s LIS 5043—
SU 2004 Syllabus and Prof. C. Brown’s LIS 5293-Spr 2006 Syllabus at the University of Oklahoma, and from Astronomy
162 at the University of Tennessee for the introductory material found in this syllabus. Sections of the course outline are
borrowed from Prof. Adrian Johns’ HIST 25307, Winter Quarter 2012, at the University of Chicago.
                                                                                                                                 8


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
                                                           *DRAFT 1 COURSE SCHEDULE*
 CLASS PERIOD          DATE                   TOPIC                   LABORATORIES          READINGS DUE         ASSIGNMENTS DUE
                                 Part 1: Why History and Philosophy of STEM2?
       1      MON 15 JUL 2019      Course Introduction        (1) Candle in a Jar      _____                 ___
       2      TUES 16 JUL 2019     1. Historiography of       (1) Lab Group Formation  1. Gribbin,           READING QUIZ 1 DUE
                                            Science           (2) Creatio ex materia  Introduction and pp.
                                                              (3) Lab 2 Elements       1-6
                                   2. Ancient Cosmology
                                                                                       2. Capra, Preface,
                                                                                       Prologue and
                                                                                       Timeline
       3      WED 17 JUL 2019      Ancient Kinematics         (3) Aristarchus (Gnomon) Kuhn, Chapter 1 and   READING QUIZ 2 DUE
                                                              (4) Star Party!         Technical Appendix
       4      THUR 18 JUL 2019     Aristotelian Cosmology     (4) 1. Anaximander’s     Kuhn, Chapter 2       READING QUIZ 3 DUE
                                                              Universe
                                                              2. Dr. Who Film
                               Part 2: Historical Methods and Reasoning in STEM2
       5      FRI 19 JUL 2019        Apollo XI Lunar Landing  Kepler’s Somnium         Kuhn, Chapter 3       READING QUIZ 4 DUE
                                        50th Anniversary
                                         Celebration!                                                      *STAR PARTY (PAI)*
       6      MON 22 JUL 2019      Ptolemaic Universe         (5) Astrolabe and        Capra, Chapter 1      READING QUIZ 5 DUE
                                                              Antikythera
                                                                                                             Choose Presentation
                                                                                                             Dates
       7      TUES 23 JUL 2019     “Saving the Appearances”   (6) Ptolemy’s Universe   Gribbin, Chapter 1
       8      WED 24 JUL 2019      Meet at Harry Ransom       (0) Descriptive          Gribbin, Chapter 3    1. PROJECT PROPOSAL
                                   Center                     Bibliography                                   DUE
                                                                                                             2. *STAR PARTY (RLM)*
                                                                                                             3. Select Manuscript
       9      THUR 25 JUL 2019     Mediaeval Cosmology and    (7) Foucault’s Pendulum  Gribbin, Chapters 4-5
                                   Kinematics                 (Optional)
      10      FRI 26 JUL 2019      Copernicus the Play        (8) Copernican Cosmology Kuhn, Chapter 5       1. QUIZ 6 DUE
                                                                                                             2. Ptolemy Lab (6) Due
                                                                                                             3. *STAR PARTY (PAI)*
                                                                                                                                    9


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
 CLASS PERIOD         DATE                  TOPIC                LABORATORIES          READINGS DUE         ASSIGNMENTS DUE
      11      MON 29 JUL 2019    Copernicus Part II       (9) Wittenberg Cosmology Capra, Chapter 2      READING QUIZ 7 DUE
      12      TUES 30 JUL 2019   Tycho Brahe and the Orbs  (10) Tychonic Cosmology Kuhn, Chapter 6       [Five Book Resources
                                                                                   Gribbin, pp. 33-68    Due]
                                                                                   Mysterium
                                                                                   Cosmographicum
                                                                                   Harmonice Mundi
      13      WED 31 JUL 2019    Johannes Kepler          PRESENTATION: TBA        Kepler’s Somnium      READING QUIZ 8 DUE
                                                          (11) The Neo-Pythagorean Gribbin, Chapter 3    *STAR PARTY (RLM)*
                                                          Universe
      14      THUR 1 AUG 2019    The Galileo Affair       PRESENTATION: TBA        Galileo, Letter to    [Project Abstract Due]
                                                                                   Grand Duchess
                                                          (12) Galilean Relativity
      15      FRI 2 AUG 2019     Evangelista Torricelli   (13) Alchemy             (in class) Jenkins    *STAR PARTY (PAI)*
                                 Sir Robert Boyle and the                          article (brief
                                 Vacuum Pump                                       overview)
      16      MON 5 AUG 2019     Sir Isaac Newton         Newton (General          Gribbin Chapter 4     READING QUIZ 9 DUE
                                 Theology                 Scholium)                                      (Boyle supplement)
                                 Newtonianism
                                 Mathematics (Principia)
                                           Part 3: Making STEM2 Modern
      17      TUES 6 AUG 2019    From Pascal to Euler:    PRESENTATIONS: TBA       Review Gribbin Ch 5
                                 Making Mathematics       Divide by Zero
                                 Modern and Felinus       Pascal’s Triangle
                                 Matematicus: The n-Lives <TBD: Faraday’s Motor>
                                 of an Equation
      18      WED 7 AUG 2019     MEET AT BLANTON          Art and Science          Dobbs, First Half     READING QUIZ 10 DUE
                                 MUSEUM OF ART                                                           (Newton # 1)
                                                                                                         *STAR PARTY (RLM)*
      19      THUR 8 AUG 2019    MEET AT HRC              Descriptive Bibliography                       Wikipedia Article Due
                                                          for History of Math
      20      FRI 9 AUG 2019     Darwin                   PRESENTATIONS: TBA       Gribbin, Chapter 7    READING QUIZ 10 DUE
                                                                                   Dobbs, Second Half    (Newton # 2)
                                                          (14)Natural Selection
                                                          (Thomas Malthus)
      21      MON 12 AUG 2019    MEET TEXAS MNH                                    Capra, Chapters 8 + 9 ART MUSEUM QUIZ
                                                                                                                                10


HERD 82075 HIS F322M - HISTORY OF MODERN SCIENCE MTWRF 100P - 230P RLM 7.114
 CLASS PERIOD         DATE                     TOPIC               LABORATORIES            READINGS DUE        ASSIGNMENTS DUE
                                                                                        Museums Article     DUE (#11)
                           Part 4: Contemporary Debates and Historical Perspectives on STEM2
      22      TUES 13 AUG 2019      Engineering and/as       PRESENTATION: TBA          Capra, Chapter 5    MUSEUMS AND
                                    Science: Nuclear                                                        NATURAL HISTORY
                                    Engineering Case Study   (15) Reactor Theory and β-                     Lab Due
                                    (Rickover)               Radiation (Cloud Chamber)
                                                             Electromagnetism
                                                             Rocketry
      23                            Science and the Civil    PRESENTATIONS: TBA         Gribbin, Chapter 13 NUCLEAR HANDOUT
              WED 14 AUG 2019       Society-Gender(ed)                                                      DUE (Quiz 12)
                                    Science (Sandra Harding)
      24      THUR 15 AUG 2019      The Grand Mystery        PRESENTATIONS: TBA         Capra, Chapter 7    *STAR PARTY (RLM)*
                                                                                        Review Kuhn 13      ::Descriptive
                                                                                                            Bibliography Due::
      25      FRI 16 AUG 2019       Einstein, Boltzmann, and PRESENTATIONS: TBA         Capra, Coda
                                    Maxwell
                                                              LAST DAY!!!             Review Kuhn
                                    Cold War Science                                    Postscript
                                    Kurt Gödel and
                                    Information:
                                    Incompleteness Theorem
    NOTE      WED 21 AUG 2019       ALL OUTSTANDING WORK AND FINAL PROJECT DUE BY 11:59 PM
                                                                                                                               11
