AET 351 (20610)     The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts
Fall 2019           Syllabus
Course              Live Audio Mixing
Information         W 8-11 AM in WIN 1.138
                    Course website at http://canvas.utexas.edu
Instructor          Carolina Perez MFA, Assistant Professor of Practice
                    carolina.perez@austin.utexas.edu
                    (954) 993-1042
                    office hours: TWTH 11:00 AM - 12:00 PM in WIN 2.154
Catalog             Project in live audio for concerts, performances, theatre, or other productions.
Description
Course Overview     Introduction to the concepts and current trends of live sound reinforcement. Students set up, engineer
                    and live-capture audio for concerts, events, theatre or other productions. Topics include microphone
                    placement and processing, wireless microphone and in-ear monitor systems, main PA tuning, ringing out
                    monitors, creating and reading signal flow block diagrams, digital mixing console programming, and
                    sound system troubleshooting.
Prerequisite(s)     Instructor consent
Objectives &        By the end of the course, students should be able to:
Assessment          1. Set up and operate audio equipment typical of live sound reinforcement.
Instruments         2. Create, read, and explain block diagrams of basic live sound systems.
                    3. Demonstrate proficiency in console operations as it pertains to a live sound setting.
                    4. Troubleshoot problems in a live sound reinforcement system.
                    5. Properly use all types of microphones in live sound reinforcement.
Course materials    All required materials will be posted to Canvas.
Safety Training     In accordance with regulations from UT’s Department of Environmental Health and Safety, all
                    undergraduate students are required to receive training in order to use the equipment in the art and
                    design labs. First, students must successfully pass the online training for general machine shop safety
                    (Module OH500 at http://ehs.utexas.edu/training/training-courses.php#oh500); upon successful
                    completion of this module, students will then receive hands-on training for specific equipment. Time will
                    be allotted during the first week of classes to complete the online portion.
UT Electronic Mail  Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students.
Notification Policy  Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
                     University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
                     critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
                    It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his
                     or her official e-mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
                     Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for
                     missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a
                     spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
                    (see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)


Use of Class       The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments
Materials           are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal
                    law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of
                    class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the
                    University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further
                    disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the
                    purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
                    (from https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Attendance         If a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance,
                   please inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
                   Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without
                   permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy. Two tardies equals an
                   absence.
Religious Holidays Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes
                   or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including
                   travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized
                   for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
                   student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
                   notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be absent from
                   scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
                   (from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)
Classroom          Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the instructor.
Etiquette          1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the beginning of
                    class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t
                    hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an announced break, since often the
                    second part of the class period is when we will engage in group activities.
                   2) Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the classroom. If you forget to do so, and
                    your phone rings, chirps, or vibrates loudly during class, turn it off immediately and discreetly. I reserve
                    the right to penalize repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s assignment.
                   3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights, sounds,
                    and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music,
                    polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.
                   4) Consider bringing earphones and/or earplugs to class for work sessions. If you like to listen to music
                   while you work, you are welcome to do so, so long as no one else can hear it. And if you are easily
                   distracted by noise/conversation, please bring earplugs to wear so that the conversation from desk
                   critiques will not bother you.
Grading            Course work will be weighted as follows in calculating the final grade:
                   Research Assignments 15%
                   Quizzes 20%
                   Show Paperwork 15%
                   Show Mixing 20%
                   Final Exam 10%
                   Attendance 20%
                   A     94-100%
                   A-    90-93%
                   B+    87-89%
                   B     84-86%
                   B-    80-83%
                   C+    77-79%
                   C     74-76%
                   C-    70-73%
                   D+    67-69%


                   D 64-66%
                   D- 60-63%
                   F 0-59%
Academic           The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide
Integrity          by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to maintain
                   absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the
                   University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors
                   with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
                         • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                         • complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
                              assistance in preparing them;
                         • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
                              discipline; and
                         • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
                   (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic           In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty
Dishonesty         as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
                         • Cheating
                         • Plagiarism
                         • Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
                         • Falsifying Academic Records
                         • Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
                              extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
                         • Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
                              without authorization to do so)
                         • Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
                   (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
                   Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
                   including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
                   (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism         “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining
                   by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas,
                   illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that material as
                   one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement
                   (from Sec. 11-402, http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-
                   discipline-and-conduct/).
Copyright and      Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers. Many
Fair Use           of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine of fair
                   use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright holders’ legal rights,
                   and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will discuss these issues during the
                   semester as needed, but when you have questions about whether or when you can appropriate
                   someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K. Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at
                   http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Services for       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
Students with      qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
Disabilities (SSD) (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-
                   6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I
                   can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
Student Support    There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They include (but
Services           are not limited to) the following:
                   Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range


                 of services and resources to support students and alumni.
                The Undergraduate Writing Center
                 (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
                 their courses.
                The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
                 time-management, and note-taking courses.
                University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
                 promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
                 officially enrolled in certain University programs.
                The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with their
                 personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Emergency       Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide students,
Procedures       faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security of the campus
                 community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff of emergency
                 situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have the ability to
                 disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of users subscribed to the
                 service. Please consider subscribing to this service at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/.
                 (adapted from
                 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf)
Campus Carry    The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as
                 buildings and spaces that are accessible to the public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms.
                It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or about their person
                 at all times while on campus. “About” the person means that a license holder may carry a holstered
                 handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license
                 holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger
                 area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled. A license holder may not carry a
                 partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or
                 walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
                The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried gun on
                 campus should immediately call 911. (from https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
Overview of     Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be altered to
Schedule         accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design program workshop
                 opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be announced via Canvas.
                                                Course Schedule
                             Subject to change with advanced written notice.
  Week       Date                                  Topic                                  Assignment Due
    1        08/28           Live audio fundamentals
    2        09/04           Analog console overview                             Yamaha MX20/6 Quiz
    3        09/11           Analog system I/O exercises
    4        09/18           Digital console overview                            Yamaha CL Quiz
    5        09/25           Digital system I/O exercises
    6        10/02           Mic’ing and processing drums                        Mic’ing techniques research
    7        10/09           Mic’ing and processing bass, guitar, and            Mic’ing techniques research
                             keyboard
    8        10/16           Wireless mics and vocal mic’ing                     Shure ULXD Quiz
    9        10/23           Loudspeakers and amp exercises                      Loudspeaker/Amp research
   10        10/30           IEMs and monitor exercises                          Shure PSM900 Quiz
    11       11/06           Show paperwork


12    11/13       System programming
13 Multiple dates Concert
14    11/27       Thanksgiving
15 Multiple dates VJ Battle
16    12/11       No class
17    12/18       Final exam
