                                THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                               Jazz Appreciation
                                           MUS307 – Unique #77600
                   Professors: Jeff Hellmer, University Distinguished Teaching Professor
                              John Fremgen, Associate Professor of Jazz Studies
                                                 Summer 2019
CLASS MEETING PLACE: On-demand streaming through Canvas:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1252636.
Office hours will be online, and will begin on Thursday, June 6:
Prof. Hellmer’s office hours: Tuesdays 10-11 AM, Thursdays 5-6 PM
Prof. Fremgen’s office hours: Mondays 5-6 PM; Wednesdays 10-11 AM
Office hours will be held through Zoom Videoconferencing at https://zoom.us. Please see the segment in
Module 0 in Canvas titled “Online Office Hours” for specific instructions on how to schedule a video
conference.
To contact the professors with general administrative questions about the course or substantive questions,
please direct your inquiry here: onlinemus307@austin.utexas.edu, or visit online office hours.
Contact technical support outside of class at: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE OVERVIEW
MUS 307 introduces you to the jazz idiom, emphasizing listening skills and developing critical thinking
and writing skills that will allow you to comment intelligently about music and its place in society. By
achieving the objectives below, you will understand jazz in a variety of contexts, including historical,
cultural, and social; and you will appreciate the processes and products associated with the art form. This
course satisfies the cultural diversity in the United States flag requirement, as the vast majority of the
course grade is based on content dealing with the culture, perspectives, and history of one or more
underrepresented cultural groups in the United States.
A significant portion of the evaluation of your performance in the course will take advantage of the
technology of the memory management company Cerego (discussed in class and in the Cerego video).
The class is designed to accommodate 100 or more students. The course meets online through Canvas.
Students are encouraged to visit http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html to test their computer and
network connection and learn about the course structure.
While there is no required text to purchase for this course, students are required to pay a one-time $10
charge for the use of Cerego during the semester, and a one-time $19.75 charge for the use of ProctorU
for the final exam. More details are found later in the syllabus. The total of these charges is far less than
traditional textbook prices.
Course Objectives: By the end of this course, you will learn to speak and write intelligently about music,
particularly about jazz. In the pursuit of that goal, you will be able to do the following:


     1. Develop listening skills that will improve your understanding and appreciation of music through
         the following activities:
                  ---Recognize specific selections from prescribed lists of songs.
                  ---Recognize musical elements such as form and rhythmic feel.
                  ---Recognize the use of improvisational and musical devices such as motivic
                  development.
     2. Develop competency in the history of jazz through the following activities:
                  ---Identify the instrument, style, and contribution(s) of important jazz musicians.
                  ---Name the characteristics of and understand the relationships between each jazz style.
                  ---Elaborate more deeply on the contributions of the five “all-time jazz greats.”
                  ---Articulate the relationship between music and society, in particular as it relates to jazz
                  and American history.
     3. Use your acquired vocabulary and listening skills to effectively describe and evaluate music
         through the following activities:
                  ---Effectively describe instructor-chosen selections be detailing your critical reaction, the
                  musical elements that are present, and the influence of societal context on the music.
                  ---Participate in discussion forums about jazz as your interests dictate.
     4. Understand the musical processes and elements involved in the creation of jazz through the
         following activities:
                  ---Globally describe the process of improvisation, and point to factors that differentiate
                  improvisers.
                  ---Describe the framework and principles that jazz groups use in their art.
                  ---Understand the latitude for interaction, communication, and self-expression that is
                  available in jazz, and the relationship between those latitudes and principles of American
                  society.
                  ---Clearly define 15-20 terms that are essential to describing jazz.
ONLINE COURSE FORMAT
This is a digital course---unlike almost all other courses offered at the University of Texas, you will be
viewing this class online (from the comfort of your own home, a library, or a coffee joint) rather than in-
person. You are expected to “attend” class by logging into the course to watch recorded lecture segments
that have already been posted to Canvas.
The course is divided into five weeks that correspond with the five weeks of class in the summer session.
Weeks 1 and 2 will be released when the course opens; weeks 3 and 4 will be released on June 20; and
week 5 will be released on June 27. Activities for each week are found in Canvas modules, which you are
required to move through in order. These activities include watching videos, answering poll questions,
taking quizzes, and completing assignments.
It is important for you to understand the schedule of this course. It is an on-demand course that gives you
some freedom to complete materials at your own pace. HOWEVER, the schedule shows due dates built
into the course to ensure that you pace yourself with the material. It is your responsibility to understand
the schedule contained in this syllabus and participate in the course accordingly. The course CANNOT be
completed successfully if you do not begin activities as the course starts. This is particularly true for the
Cerego exercises. This course is made up of modules, most of which contain multiple lecture video
segments, poll questions, an assignment, and a quiz.


GRADING STRUCTURE
Grades will be based on percentage of points possible. The course average will be rounded to the nearest
tenth of a percentage point. Please note that rounding is already being taken into account and so the
thresholds for each grade level will be strictly enforced. In other words, we will NOT bump up grades that
just on the lower side of each threshold:
                   A       92.0-100.0; A- 90.0-91.9, B+ 88.0-89.9
                   B       82.0-87.9; B- 80.0-81.9; C+ 78.0-79.9
                   C       72.0-77.9; C- 70.0-71.9; D+ 68.0-69.9
                   D       62.0-67.9; D- 60.0-61.9
                   F       59.9 and below
Please note that incomplete grades are highly discouraged and will only be given in the direst of
circumstances.
The grading structure comprises five different assessment types: Cerego sets, assignments, quizzes,
instapolls, and the final exam. Please refer to this chart for explanation:
 Total                                    Points for each
               Assessment Type                                                 Assessment Definition
 Points                                      assignment
                                                                  Building long-term memory of jazz facts and aural
 400pts            Cerego sets             Explained below
                                                                                    recognition skills
                                                                    Five or ten question quizzes over recent lecture
 150pts              Quizzes                      15
                                                                            material (two quizzes per week)
                                                                     650-1000 word descriptions of selected jazz
 150pts        Writing Assignments                75
                                                                                       recordings
                                                                    Questions that occur at set times during lecture
 100pts             Instapolls                     1
                                                                           videos (more explanation below)
                                                                    90 minute exam over course material (multiple
 200pts            Final Exam
                                                                            choice, short answer, and essay)
1000pts
Further details about components of the course grade are as follows:
Cerego
          40% - 400pts
    Jazz Facts 1                       10%    100pts
    Deep Listening 1                   10%    100pts
    Jazz Facts 2                       10%    100pts
    Deep Listening 2                   10%    100pts
The primary ongoing assignment in this course is to study in the Cerego sets to build your knowledge and
listening skills. Cerego is a student-pay service; you will be charged a one-time fee of $10 that covers all
sets in the course the first time you access Cerego through Canvas. You are expected to spend time in


Cerego sets that will help you learn many aspects of the subject. All Cerego sets are due at midnight
Central Daylight Time on Thursday, July 11.
Quizzes
Twice per week, you will take a multiple choice quiz after a video lecture. Each quiz will cover material
covered in specific lecture segments as outlined in the quiz study guides posted in Canvas. You will not
be able to continue to the remaining lectures in the course until each quiz is completed.
Writing Assignments
There will be two writing assignments, due June 13 and July 3, where you write about a specific piece of
music provided by the professors. Further details will be provided in the Canvas modules as the course
progresses. Each writing assignment will be worth 75 points.
Instapolls
While watching the video segments, you will receive numerous instapolls. These instapolls will pop up at
predetermined times during the segments, and they will require you to answer the question prompt to the
best of your ability. Answers are graded on completion rather than correctness. If you are paying attention
to the lecture content, you should have no problem receiving full credit for these regular polls.
Final Exam
We will have fewer examinations than in many versions of this course, and in other courses, because of
the use of Cerego, which gives you credit for studying and learning over time. The only examination in
this course will be the final examination, which will be held online at the scheduled time: Saturday, July
13, from 2-3:30 PM. The exam will consist of multiple choice, short answer, and essay questions.
The final exam will be taken online, in Canvas, and proctored by a testing company, ProctorU, in a virtual
face-to-face setting. This means you will be connected with a live person from one of their proctoring
centers from the time you start the test until you submit it. By using ProctorU, you can take an exam from
anywhere using a webcam and a high-speed Internet connection. You must take an exam at the date and
time it is scheduled (Saturday, July 13, 2-3:30 PM). ProctorU is a student-pay service; you will pay at the
time you schedule the exam. The cost is $19.75 if you meet exam scheduling deadlines. You can test out
your computer here to make sure it will work with Proctor U.
After the course begins, you will need to create a ProctorU account and schedule your exam with
ProctorU by June 29. We will offer a 1% bonus towards your final course grade if you schedule your
exam with ProctorU by midnight Central time on June 12. Detailed directions will be made available in
Canvas.
Please note the date and time of the final exam and make sure that you are able to attend. Makeup exams
will only be granted under extreme and unavoidable circumstances. Given that you can take the exam at
home, the only medical emergencies that trigger a makeup exam will likely include hospitalization. You
must have documentation of any emergency.
Note: if you expect now to be traveling on the day of the exam (evidence of this might be a nonrefundable
plane ticket), you will NOT be granted a makeup exam for these anticipated travel plans. Take the course


in another semester. Your decision to remain in the course after the first day of class reflects
acknowledgement of this policy.
TECHNICAL AND COMMUNICATION LOGISTICS
CLASS WEBSITE. To get to everything associated with the class, simply go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1252636.
You can enter directly from the internet or though Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into
Canvas and the class website, you will need your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class
website, you can navigate your way to other areas. Some of the most important include:
         1. Homepage – The homepage will have links to most areas of the course including the
              syllabus, Piazza discussion board, Proctor U sign up, and instructions on accessing the online
              office hours for the class.
         2. Modules – The Modules page includes links to the activities, taped lecture segments, lecture
              slides, assignments, and other course documents.
         3. Announcements – All course updates and announcements (such as a temporary change in
              office hours, or important details about assignments) will be sent through this feature on
              Canvas. This tab on our homepage will list all the announcements sent out during the session.
Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Modules tab.
TECH REQUIREMENTS FOR COURSE INCLUDING PROCTOR SERVICE
Required internet-enabled device. All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled laptop
or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should have enough
battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:
         a.     2 GB RAM/memory (most computers purchased in the last five years will have this)
         b.     Modern and updated operating system (Windows or macOS)
         c.      Updated web browser: Chrome (recommended), Safari, Firefox
         d.     5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
You should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lecture segments by visiting the test
stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html.
There are multiple computer labs on campus for your use if you do not have a personal computer or
laptop. (You can find a listing of these labs here: http://www.utexas.edu/its/campus-labs/). If you do not
have an internet-enabled device, some inexpensive ones are available at local stores of on the internet,
some for as little as $100.
         •    Bandwidth limitations: No use of high bandwidth programs. Because the streaming video
              is bandwidth intensive, you are not allowed to access YouTube, Skype, Gmail video chat or
              other online video system, or any other program that is bandwidth-demanding.
         •    Honor system for all graded assignments. By taking this class, you agree to abide by the
              University of Texas regulations concerning cheating. While working on activities, you cannot
              receive help from others or discuss your writing assignments, quizzes, and exams with other
              students. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact the instructors.
              Sophisticated software monitors your activities during quizzes, and checks written


             assignments for plagiarism. Detected academic integrity violations will be reported to the
             Office of the Dean of Students.
         •   Information and data security. All exercises, quizzes, writing assignments, and online
             interactions over the TOWER system will be saved and stored. All information will be kept
             for educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other
             researchers will involve de-identifying the data, including removal of names, UTEIDs, email
             addresses, and other information. To further insure that your information is secure, please do
             not include identifying information in your online interactions with others.
Please remember that all information is stored on secure UT/Austin computer servers. In online
interactions with others, remember that the instructors will have access to all information.
Recommended resources: Since the primary activity of the class is listening to music, high quality
headphones, or external speakers, are recommended for both lecture segments and Cerego sets. Tablets
and mobile devices are not recommended for use in this course.
Weekly Schedule: Our weekly schedule is as follows:
Weeks 1 and 2 released on June 6:
Week 1 (June 6-12)
Week 2 (June 13-19)
Weeks 3 and 4 released on June 20:
Week 3 (June 20-26)
Week 4 (June 27-July 3)
Week 5 released on June 27:
Week 5 (July 4-July 11)
We will look at jazz from the following perspectives:
“Nuts and bolts”—how the music works; how jazz is put together; how to talk about music
 “Critical”—how to develop your own aesthetic for evaluating music of all types; how to make informed
decisions about the music you choose to incorporate in your future
 “Biographical”—who’s who among the greatest jazz players; how to recognize them; and why they are
so highly regarded
“Stylistic”—how jazz styles differ from one another; how to hear those differences
“Sociological” –what the musicians are trying to say; how the music relates to societal factors and
historical events
POLICY & PROCEDURES
Accommodations
If you have approved accommodations for the course, please contact us through at
onlinemus307@austin.utexas.edu to arrange them. Please do this as soon as possible, so that you can
have the benefit of the accommodations throughout the duration of the course, including the quizzes that
occur during the first week. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.


Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/ or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web
site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs. Refer to the Dean of Students Student Judicial Services website
or call 471-2841 for the official university policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
The online course format allows for multiple methods of identity verification, collusion, collaboration and
plagiarism monitoring and detection. A violation of the course policy may include (but is not limited to)
the following:
     •    Providing your UT EID to any other person
     •    Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the material on any activity,
          assessment or assignment, before, during and/or after any activity, assessment or assignment
     •    Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format
     •    The public (such that it can be viewed by more than one person) posting of any form of a test
          bank or group of questions from any assignment
The University of Texas at Austin Academic Integrity Principles call for students to avoid engaging in
any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
student. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Grade-related penalties are routinely assessed. The severity of these penalties will be determined at the
instructor’s discretion and will generally not be less than a zero on one of the components of a student’s
final grade (quizzes, writing assignments) in which the violation occurred. Students can also be
suspended or even permanently expelled from the University for academic misconduct
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_conseq.php).
Students often join social media platforms, like Facebook, where work product is shared among many
students. While we do not prohibit you for joining such groups, we will hold ALL members of a social
media group responsible for any form of academic dishonesty that occurs within such a group irrespective
of its size. In other words, if any group of two or more students engages in any form of academic
dishonesty on the site (or Facebook page), ALL members of that site or page will also be treating as
having engaged in the same form of academic dishonesty because they can observe it and benefit from it.
Quite simply, be very careful about joining such groups.
Checks for plagiarism and collaboration via TurnItIn
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to
an archived database of published work and other submitted papers in this course to check for potential
plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to determine if paper or assignment is the student’s original
work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member, sometimes in
consultation with Student Judicial Services, will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper
has been plagiarized.
Religious Holidays
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.


We hope you enjoy the process of discovering jazz as much as we enjoy sharing the music with you. We
value your feedback on any aspect of the course, and encourage you to provide it to us at any time.
