                           ANT  324L  Digital  Data  Systems  in  Archaeology  
                                            Unique  No.  31680    
                                                 Spring  2019  
Wed  3:00  –  6:00  pm    
TAR  5D  (Texas  Archeological  Research  Laboratory,  Pickle  Research  Campus,  Bldg.  5D)    
  
Instructor:  Jonathan  H.  Jarvis  
Office:  TARL  116  
Office  hours:  Wed.  12:00  –  3:00  pm  or  by  appointment  (in  this  case  “by  appointment”  
means:  feel  free  to  stop  by  anytime  but  call  or  email  first  to  be  sure  I’ll  be  there)  
Email:  jjarvis@mail.utexas.edu  
Office  phone:  512/471-­‐5959  
  
  
Course  Description  
This  course  provides  the  basic  knowledge  and  skills  needed  to  operate  digital  equipment  
(e.g.,  GPS  and  Total  Data  Stations)  commonly  used  for  collecting  spatial  data  on  
archaeological  sites.  Classroom  instruction  on  mapping  and  grid  systems  will  be  
translated  into  "hands-­‐on"  instrument  operation  in  simulated  archaeological  field  
conditions.  An  introduction  to  GIS  software  and  its  uses  in  archaeology  (as  a  tool  for  
quantitative  analysis,  presenting/visualizing  data,  etc.)  will  be  provided.  Data  collected  
during  simulated  field  operations  will  be  processed  and  mapped  using  GIS  software.    An  
overview  of  near-­‐surface  geophysical  survey  techniques  will  be  included,  with  hands-­‐on  
instruction  in  the  operation  of  a  magnetometer.      
  
Prerequisites  
There  are  no  specific  prerequisites  for  this  course;  however,  students  are  expected  to  
have  some  basic  familiarity  with  desktop  computers  (PC’s)  and  should  be  comfortable  
working  with  technology.              
    
Textbook  /  Readings  
The  text  (citation  below)  will  be  provided  as  a  PDF;  it  is  also  available  as  a  free  download  
from:  http://www.esri.com/industries/ebooks/index.html.  Note  that  although  there  will  
be  a  few  questions  on  the  first  (and  only)  test  drawn  from  the  readings,  most  of  this  
course  will  rely  on  lectures  and  hands-­‐on  exercises.    The  text  is  simply  intended  to  
provide  a  sample  of  some  GIS  applications  in  archaeology.    SUPPLEMETARY  READINGS  
WILL  BE  PROVIDED  BY  THE  INSTRUCTOR.        
  
Environmental  Systems  Research  Institute  [ESRI]  
2009          GIS  for  Archaeology.  GIS  Best  Practices  Series.  ESRI.  Redlands,  CA.  (e-­‐book)  
  
  


Optional  Text  
The  optional  text  is  precisely  that—optional;  it  is  not  necessary  for  successfully  
completing  the  course.    It  is,  however,  a  very  useful  reference  for  the  more  commonly  
used  operations  in  ArcGIS.      
  
Clemmer,  Gina  
2017   The  GIS  20  Essential  Skills.  3rd  edition.  ESRI  Press.  Redlands,  CA.    
(Again,  it’s  optional.    ISBN  #  9781589485129)  
  
  
  
Grading  Criteria  
There  will  be  a  test  early  in  the  semester  to  assess  knowledge  of  site  mapping  and  
digital  data  collection  methods  acquired  during  classroom  lectures  and  readings  (25%  of  
semester  grade).    The  remainder  of  the  semester  grade  will  be  based  field  performance  
with  the  digital  collection  systems  (20%)  and  maps  produced  using  GIS  software  (3  sets  
of  maps  accounting  for  10%,  15%  and  30%  of  semester  grade;  a  grading  rubric  will  be  
provided  for  each  mapping  assignment).    Except  for  the  first  map,  each  set  of  maps  will  
present  quantitative  data  collected  in  the  field.    The  last  mapping  assignment  will  
incorporate  all  of  the  knowledge  gained  in  the  course  and  function  as  a  de  facto  final  
exam  for  the  course;  there  will  not  be  a  traditional  test  on  the  final  exam  day  scheduled  
by  the  University  for  this  course.      
  
The  plus/minus  grading  system  (100-­‐93=A;  92-­‐90=A-­‐;  89-­‐87=B+;  86-­‐83=B;  82-­‐80=B-­‐,  etc.)  
will  be  used  in  this  course.    Grades  will  not  be  curved.    There  will  be  opportunities  for  
extra  credit  available  as  the  semester  progresses.      
  
Attendance  &  Participation  
Attendance  is  important  in  all  of  your  classes.    It  is  particularly  important  for  this  class.    
This  is  a  techniques  class  that  provides  hands-­‐on  experience  with  hardware  and  
software  during  every  class  meeting;  as  such  attendance  and  participation  are  required.    
A  class  absence  (for  a  valid  reason,  of  course)  must  be  made  up  one-­‐on-­‐one  with  the  
instructor.    Please  contact  your  instructor  as  soon  as  possible  (within  1-­‐2  days)  if  you  
miss  a  class  to  arrange  for  a  make-­‐up.  More  than  one  class  absence  without  a  make-­‐up  
session  will  result  in  a  letter  grade  drop  in  your  final  grade  for  the  course.    
Participation  is  a  critical  component  of  this  course;  “field  performance  with  digital  
collections  systems”  (20%  of  your  grade)  cannot  be  accomplished  without  active  
participation.      
  
University  Policies  
The  usual  University  policies  found  on  every  syllabus  are  included  at  the  end  of  this  
document.    Please  take  a  moment  to  review  these  policies.    The  “acceptable  use”  policy  
applies  to  the  classroom  computers  and  the  TARL  network.      
  


Classroom  Policies  &  Important  Reminders  
•   You  are  encouraged  to  work  together  and  help  one  another;  however,  the  graded  
     assignments  (maps  and  test)  MUST  be  completed  on  your  own.      
  
•   If  you  are  having  problems  with  any  of  the  course  material  or  if  any  aspect  of  the  
     course  is  unclear,  please  let  your  instructor  know  as  soon  as  possible.    
  
•   Do  not  hesitate  to  make  use  of  your  instructor’s  office  hours.      
  
•   Please  remember  to  turn  your  phone’s  ringer  off  during  class  
  
•   Have  I  mentioned  that  attendance  and  participation  are  important?    
  
  
Assignment  Deadlines  &  Test  Date  
(Refer  also  to  the  schedule  below;  other  important  dates  from  the  University’s  academic  
calendar  can  be  found  near  the  end  of  this  syllabus)  
27  FEB  –  Test  
3  APR  –  Mapping  Assignment  1  Due  
24  APR  –  Mapping  Assignment  2  Due  
8  MAY  –  Mapping  Assignment  3  Due  
  
Tentative  Schedule  
Topics  and  activities  are  subject  to  change.    Lectures  often  include  live  software  
demonstrations  that  students  will  follow  along  with  on  classroom  computers.    Many  
“activities”  will  take  place  outdoors  on  the  grounds  of  the  Pickle  Research  Campus.    In  
the  event  of  uncooperative  weather,  the  week’s  outdoors  activity  will  be  postponed  and  
replaced  with  classroom  instruction  and/or  classroom  activities  as  appropriate.      
Jan  23  
Course  Introduction  
Presentation:  Maps  in  Archaeology  –  Past,  Present  &  Future;  general  overview  of  maps,  
their  uses  in  archaeology  and  Cultural  Resource  Management  (the  intersection  of  
archaeology  and  public  policy)  and  the  ethics  of  cartography  (cf.  How  to  Lie  With  Maps  
[Monmier  1991])  
Jan  30  
Lecture:  Maps  as  2-­‐D  models  of  a  3-­‐D  world  –  geodesy,  datum,  grid  systems  and  
projections;  review  of  coordinate  geometry  as  applied  in  archaeology;  review  of  land  
navigation  w/  map  and  compass      
Feb  6  
Lecture:  GIS;  getting  started  with  ArcGIS  


Activity:  Practice  land  navigation;  locate  our  project  area  on  a  map  with  ArcGIS;  identify  
and  convert  coordinates  
Feb  13  
Lecture:  Global  Positioning  System  (GPS)  technology;  using  GPS  with  maps  
Activity:  Navigate  to  our  project  area  with  consumer-­‐grade  GPS;  establish  datum  with  
sub-­‐meter  GPS  
Feb  20  
TEST  REVIEW  
Activity:  Total  Data  Station  (TDS)  set-­‐up  and  basic  operation;  Real-­‐Time  Kinematic  (RTK)  
GPS  set-­‐up  and  basic  operation  
Feb  27  
TEST  
Activity:  Establish  backsight  with  RTK;  TDS  operation-­‐  set  out  stakes  using  coordinate  
geometry  (“COGO”  function),  topographic  mapping,  etc.    
  
Mar  6  
Lecture:  GIS  –  layout  view  and  map  design;  cartographic  representation  
Assign  MAP  1  (project  location  map)  
Mar  13  
Activity:  Work  on  MAP  1  
Activity:  Practice  geospatial  equipment  operation  (Team  A)  
  
SPRING  BREAK  
Mar  27  
Lecture:  Geophysical  survey  –  electromagnetic  spectrum;  passive  vs.  active  sensors;  
ground  penetrating  radar  (GPR),  magnetometers,  soil  resistivity    
Activity:  Work  on  MAP  1  
Activity:  Practice  geospatial  equipment  operation  (Team  B)  
Apr  3  
MAP  PROJECT  1  DUE  
Activity:  Establish  magnetometer  collection  unit  with  TDS  
Activity:  Operate  magnetometer    
Apr  10  
Lecture:  GIS  –  shapefiles,  geodatabases  and  rasters  
Assign  MAP  2  
Activity:  Work  on  MAP  2  


Activity:  Practice  operating  geospatial  field  equipment  (Team  C)    
Apr  17  
Lecture:  Downloading  and  working  with  field  data;  surfaces  and  basic  quantitative  
analysis  in  ArcGIS;  georeferencing  data  
Assign  MAP  3  
Activity:  Work  on  MAP  2  
Activity:  Practice  operating  geospatial  field  equipment  (Team  D)    
Apr  24  
MAP  PROJECT  2  DUE  
Lecture:  Advanced  GIS  topics  –  GIS  and  databases  (“Big  Data”),  modeling,  etc.  
Activity:  Work  on  MAP  3  
Activity:  Students  individually  set-­‐up  TDS  and  operate  GPS  equipment  (one  at  a  time  
while  everyone  else  works  on  mapping  assignment;  TDS  set-­‐up  and  GPS  operation  will  
be  graded)  
May  1  
Lecture:  Digital  data  in  Texas  archaeology  and  how  it  informs  Cultural  Resource  
Management  decisions;  other  types  of  digital  data  and  available  resources    
Activity:  Work  on  MAP  3  
Activity:  Continue  individual  TDS  set-­‐ups  /  GPS  operation  (graded)  
May  8  
MAP  PROJECT  3  DUE  
Course  debriefing  
  
Important  Dates  
(Please  see  the  Registrar’s  academic  calendar  for  official,  definitive  dates  and  deadlines)  
25  JAN  –  Last  day  of  the  official  add/drop  period.    
6  FEB  –  12th  class  day  (date  the  official  enrollment  count  is  taken)  
8  APR  –  Last  day  an  undergraduate  may  change  registration  to  or  from  pass/fail  
  
University  Policies  
Acceptable  Use    
This  course  utilizes  University  computers  and  network  resources.    The  “Acceptable  Use  
Policy”  applies.    This  policy  can  be  found  at:  http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/.      
  
University  of  Texas  Honor  Code    
The  core  values  of  The  University  of  Texas  at  Austin  are  learning,  discovery,  freedom,  
leadership,  individual  opportunity,  and  responsibility.  Each  member  of  the  university  is  
expected  to  uphold  these  values  through  integrity,  honesty,  trust,  fairness,  and  respect  
toward  peers  and  community.    


  
Scholastic  Dishonesty  &  Plagiarism    
Plagiarism  is  a  serious  violation  of  academic  integrity.  In  simplest  terms,  this  occurs  if  
you  represent  as  your  own  work  any  material  that  was  obtained  from  another  source,  
regardless  how  or  where  you  acquired  it.  It  is  the  student’s  responsibility  to  read  and  
abide  by  the  requirements  for  presentation,  referencing  and  avoidance  of  plagiarism  to  
be  found  at:  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plag_collab.php.      
  
Documented  Disability  Statement    
The  University  of  Texas  at  Austin  provides  upon  request  appropriate  academic  
accommodations  for  qualified  students  with  disabilities.  For  more  information,  contact  
Services  for  Students  with  Disabilities  at  (512)  471-­‐6259  (voice)  or  1-­‐866-­‐329-­‐3986  
(video  phone)  or  http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.      
  
Use  of  E-­‐Mail  for  Official  Correspondence  to  Students    
E-­‐mail  is  recognized  as  an  official  mode  of  university  correspondence;  therefore,  you  are  
responsible  for  reading  your  e-­‐mail  for  university  and  course-­‐related  information  and  
announcements.  University  policy  suggests  that  students  should  check  email  at  a  
minimum  of  twice  per  week  (your  instructor  recommends  checking  email  daily).    The  
University’s  policies  and  instructions  for  updating  your  e-­‐mail  address  can  be  found  at:  
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php    
  
  
Religious  Holy  Days    
A  student  who  misses  classes  or  other  required  activities,  including  examinations,  for  
the  observance  of  a  religious  holy  day  should  inform  the  instructor  as  far  in  advance  of  
the  absence  as  possible,  so  that  arrangements  can  be  made  to  complete  an  assignment  
within  a  reasonable  time  after  the  absence.      
  
Behavior  Concerns  Advice  Line  (BCAL)    
If  you  are  worried  about  someone  who  is  acting  differently,  you  may  use  the  Behavior  
Concerns  Advice  Line  to  discuss  by  phone  your  concerns  about  another  individual’s  
behavior.  This  service  is  provided  through  a  partnership  among  the  Office  of  the  Dean  of  
Students,  the  Counseling  and  Mental  Health  Center  (CMHC),  the  Employee  Assistance  
Program  (EAP),  and  The  University  of  Texas  Police  Department  (UTPD).  Call  512-­‐232-­‐
5050  or  visit  http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/.    
  
