EDC F350: TEACHING SECONDARY SOCIAL STUDIES WHEN
“WE” GET HOME …
The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Curriculum & Instruction
UT Urban Teachers, Social Studies
Summer 2019
COURSE INSTRUCTORS
Delandrea (Dee) Hall
Email: delandrea_hall@utexas.edu
Phone: (214) 679-9129
Office Hours: By appointment only,
SZB 428
Steven Montemayor
Email:
stevenmontemayor@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By appointment only,
SZB 428
Field Supervisor (FS) & Instructional Coach (IC)
Michael Joseph                                          Heath Robinson
Email: mjoseph1487@gmail.com                            Email: robinson.ht@utexas.edu
INTRODUCTION AND RATIONALE
Teaching social studies requires us to answers the following questions:
    o   What is social studies? Who and what is included? What subjects or disciplines do we
        teach? What about these subjects or disciplines are important?
    o   Why do we teach social studies? What do we hope to accomplish? What might social
        studies mean to our students?
    o   How do we teach social studies? How can we subvert oppression in our classrooms?
        How can we model a more just society in our day-to-day experiences?


In this course, we will seek to answer these questions and provide an introduction to teaching
and social studies education. Through an examination of critical literature and research around
social studies theory and practice, we will also work to build a foundation for your purpose for
teaching while considering the scope, goals, and methods that are unique to social studies. It
is our hope that your purpose for teaching social studies becomes rooted in “Things I
Imagined” (as Solange would say), where teaching and schooling is about centering students
and their experiences through culturally relevant and sustaining practices; perspectives that
are often excluded, marginalized, simplified, or simply omitted become a fundamental part of
the curriculum; and it is understood that teaching is not as a perfected craft but an exciting
day-to-day endeavor that is reserved for the ambitious and critically conscious teacher.
Additionally, this class serves as a collaborative community to strengthen your immediate
teaching in your field placement with Breakthrough, while also being part of our larger mission
together in preparing you for work in urban schools by including the development of
knowledge, skills, and dispositions for recognizing the resources that culturally and
linguistically diverse students bring to the classroom, of critical awareness of injustices
common in urban schools and communities, and of agentive strategies for working toward
hope and social justice in the often restricted or even hostile work environments of urban
schools.
Thus, our goals/objectives for this semester are as follows:
     1. To understand the dominant social studies narrative and the themes that serve to
         define the role of teaching history, geography and economics in our society
     2. To confront those dominant narratives via other/counter narratives- subtle or obvious
         that take into account other perspectives
     3. To create units of study that serve more critical understandings of the social studies
     4. To expand the repertoire of teaching through humanizing pedagogical practices like
         critical historical inquiry and critical geography
     5. To recognize our lives as public intellectuals—not as teaching bureaucrats but as
         agents of change and advocates for the communities we serve.
COURSE PROCEDURES AND POLICIES
Attendance and punctuality
Due to the condensed and expedited nature of this course, attendance and punctuality are
required and vital to making this an engaging and effective class. As a result, you are expected
to attend class, be on time, and be well prepared to participate. If unforeseen, unexpected, or
conflicts arise, please notify me, along with at least one of your classmates and/or FS/IC, as
soon as you know you will be late or are going to miss class. Regardless of the absence,
students are still responsible for work that may be due and for information covered during the
absence. You may also be asked to complete an assignment tied to the class session you
missed. Missing two or more classes will result in the automatic loss of a letter grade. Multiple
tardies/early departures may also result in grade deductions.
2


*Please note that classes longer than 3 hours count as two classes for attendance (and
other) purposes!
Communication
Now is a good time to begin building your professional habits, so being responsive and timely
are important. Always respond to instructor, field supervisor and Instructional Coach (IC)
emails within 24 hours. Also it is imperative that you check your syllabus and Canvas
DAILY (for announcement or instructions)!! When you receive emails from any of us, please
read them carefully and let us know with a reply (a quick response such as, “Got it, thank you,”
will suffice). While texting can be convenient, keep text communication with me, with your
instructional coach, and with your facilitator limited to emergency situations or personal
matters. When you are communicating with any of us about anything work related, e-mail is
the professional way to do so. When there is an incident in your Breakthrough classroom that
warrants reflection or action and you are unsure of who to speak to about it at the time, write
and send yourself an e-mail describing the incident in detail the same day, so that you have a
time-stamped document should you need it in the future.
Active class participation
We cannot emphasize enough the need to participate actively in this class. You each bring a
unique perspective and set of experiences to our community and learning. Your contributions
add to the overall value of the entire course for you and your colleagues.
Coming to class prepared means completing the readings and a weekly reading reflection,
engaging in the day’s activities, and completing any assignment given in class.
Cell phones, laptops, and other digital devices
While these are helpful tools and are necessary for our work at times, these devices should be
used only as tools. We have a lot of important work to do each time we meet. Please do not
let your electronic devices distract you from the conversations and thinking that we’re
doing in class. Your class participation grade may be negatively impacted if you are continually
surfing the web, using email, texting, and the like.
Completing work and late work
We expect that all work for this class will be done with thought, care, and thoroughness, and
because so much of what we do is important for our work with peers and students, it is
essential for your work to be done promptly. All assignments (including readings) are due at
the beginning of our class unless otherwise noted in the assignment description. Late work will
NOT receive full credit. Any assignments turned in late will result a 10% deduction of points for
every subsequent day the assignment is late.
*If you have a valid need for an extension, you must discuss this with me prior to the due
date.
Field placement expectations and professionalism
Breakthrough acts as a part of your professional development sequence (Intern I). As a
result, your success in Breakthrough is a part of your grade for this course. If you do not
successfully fulfill your obligations to Breakthrough, you will pass this class or be allowed
3


to move forward in this program. This means that on days you’ll be in your field placement
(Breakthrough), it is essential that you come prepared with thoughtful plans and materials
prepared. It is also imperative that you get your lesson plans into your IC and/or FS, work with
them on planning and observations, and communicate with them effectively. So please make
sure you conduct yourself in a professional way with the Breakthrough staff and students and
pay careful attention to deadlines and small details.
Guiding references
    Documents                                               URL
  TEKS                http://ritter.tea.state.tx.us/rules/tac/chapter113/ch113a.html
  NCSS themes         http://www.socialstudies.org/standards/strands
  & C3                http://www.socialstudies.org/c3
  TExES               http://texes.ets.org/texes/prepmaterials/texes-preparation- manuals/
UNIVERSITY INFORMATION AND POLICIES
Accommodations for Students
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Please see me the first week of classes
if accommodations need to be made. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY. Students with disabilities may request appropriate
academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259, www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ or
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/documentation-guidelines/
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937(Video Phone) as
soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
Accommodations for religious holidays
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence
as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior.
This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal>http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Correspondence
4


The University’s policy states you are responsible for correspondence from professors and from
the University and that you check email, this includes Canvas, at least twice per day for
messages from us.
Absence for military service
In accordance with section 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code, a student is excused from
attending classes or engaging in other required activities, including exams, if he or she is called
to active military service of a reasonably brief duration. The maximum time for which the
student may be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board
as “no more than 25 percent of the total number of class meetings or the contact hour
equivalent (not including the final examination period) for the specific course or courses in
which the student is currently enrolled at the beginning of the period of active military service.”
The student will be allowed a reasonable time after the absence to complete assignments and
take exams.
Scholastic honesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies
on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial
Services website at http://www.utexas.edu/dept/dos/sjs/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Proper citations
Carefully and thoroughly cite any information you use from published materials. According to
the University’s policy on scholastic dishonesty and plagiarism, failure to do so could have
serious disciplinary consequences, including failing an assignment, failing the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Here is
a web site with information on plagiarism. Please review thoroughly:
http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/writing/plagiarism.pdf . Use APA for proper citation. Please consult
http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/ .
If you need writing help (for your reflections or any other written assignment) the following
resources could be helpful:
     ● UT Undergraduate Writing Center Handout: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/node/56
     ● APA sources: http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/
In addition, the UT Undergraduate Writing Center offers one-on-one consultations about your
work in progress. More information can be found at: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/
University Code of Conduct
Students are expected to abide by the University Code of Conduct.
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
5


expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
Emergency evacuation policy
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform me in writing during the
first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
office.
REQUIRED COURSE MATERIALS
We plan on providing with a course packet of the readings that you should bring to class every
day. It is yours to keep, so feel free to mark it up. The readings are also available for download
on Canvas in the modules, grouped by class session, if you would like to utilize a digital copy
instead.
All other readings or course materials needed for class will be located on Canvas.
You will also need your laptop computer for every class session as we will use them in class for
many of our class activities. If you are unable to bring a laptop or have any complications, let
us know and we will work to help you find a way to engage in class without it.
COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
Reading Reflections (25 points) – Due EVERY class session
Each class session, students will be asked to turn in a reflection that engages the readings that
should to be read and completed prior to the session for that day. These reflections should
answer the questions asked on the reflection sheet, integrate ideas across the readings,
raise thoughtful questions or critiques about issues in the readings, make connections
among the readings and what you have seen or experienced in classrooms or other contexts
in which youth participate, and consider what the ideas in the readings mean for your
teaching now and in the future. These reflections should also help you prepare your thoughts
so you can be an active participant in class discussions and activities.
During class, you will add to the reflection sheet, providing a reflection over the ways the class
has made you think about the readings differently or added to your understanding or caused you
to have more questions.
The reading reflections sheets will be provided prior to the class before the reading reflection is
due. The sheets will also be posted in a module on Canvas so if you would like to type your
6


responses in the boxes the availability is there. Regardless if you decide to write your responses
by hand or type them, you should complete and bring to class a hard copy of the reading
reflection on the session readings the day the session readings are due. Responses should
be thorough and fill up the boxes with thought, complete responses. While we will read all
responses as a way to gauge student understanding across the summer, we will not provide
detailed comments.
Points will be deducted for late reading reflections, careless/unreflective responses that
show that you have not thought about the readings, or reading reflections written during
the class session in which they are due.
Session Participation (10 points) – Due EVERY class session
Active classroom participation is expected for every class session (including daily
reflections/exit tickets and class activities). Points can be deducted for lateness, lack of
participation in activities / discussion, failure to complete in-class activities, etc. Your use (or
overuse) of technology will also impact the points you receive.
Plans for daily teaching: An in-depth lesson reflection (25 points) – Due Wednesday,
6/26
Once Breakthrough begins, you will be responsible for creating (individually or as a grade-level
team) lesson plans and implementing them daily. Your facilitator/instructional coaches will talk
to you about the expectations for these daily lesson plans. For this class, you will give us a close
look at your teaching by choosing one of the lessons from your first two weeks of teaching with
Breakthrough to highlight and reflect on.
The following is required as a part of this reflection:
    1. You will provide examples of student responses to the lesson that includes:
             a. Two or three examples of student work as a result of the lesson. This could be
                  formal or informal writing students engage in, a project of some kind,
                  conference notes that evidence what students were doing, or some other kind
                  of tangible documentation of how students responded to this lesson. For
                  privacy purposes, please remove or black out students’ name from their work.
             b. As a part of the reflection piece, for each example of student work, also include
                  a written response to or assessment of that student’s work with a brief
                  explanation of your thinking/rationale behind your response/evaluation of
                  student work.
                       i. For example, if a student earned full points on an assignment, what
                          about that student’s work can you point to as evidence of her meeting
                          or exceeding the assignment’s criteria? What do you know about a
                          student’s current developmental level, effort, or academic progress in
                          this class and how did that knowledge shape the responses or grade
                          you gave to that piece of the student’s work?
    2. You will also include a reflection on your planning and teaching that includes:
             a. A statement in which you describe your thinking and decision-making as you
                  planned the lesson.
                       i.    For instance, what were you excited, nervous or unsure about in
                             planning the lesson? What was challenging and easy in the planning?
7


                            Who/what served as resources for you in planning? What did you
                            expect to go well and what did you think would be challenging for
                            you and your students during the experience of teaching and
                            learning this lesson?
              b. A statement in which you reflect on the actual experience of teaching and
                  learning with this lesson.
                       i.   How do you think the lesson went—both successes and challenges?
                            What surprised you in the experience of teaching and learning? What
                            did you learn about teaching, about yourself as a teacher, about your
                            students? How will you (or how did you) draw on what you learned in
                            this lesson in lessons to come?
We will discuss your lesson as a class, and you will turn in you lesson plan and any
additional handouts or materials created for teaching and a write up of your reflection
addressing the criteria and answers to the questions above to Canvas by 11:59 PM,
Thursday 6/26.
Tagged teamed mini-lessons (20 points) – Due Week 2 and 3
With a classmate, you will team up to teach 2 mini-lesson over a concept and/or using method
that we have covered or will cover. Your team will develop and fill in the lesson plan
template and create a presentation with an activity for the class. Though not a true
example of teaching students during Breakthrough, this is an opportunity to develop your
teaching skills and get feedback from your classmates on strengths and weaknesses of your
presentation and activity.
You will have a maximum of 20 minutes (you can use less time if desired) for these lessons, and
the 2 lessons you plan to teach must be taught on different days. We will select those days in
class the first week. Your teams lesson plan will be turned into Canvas by the beginning of
class the day you are teaching the lesson (only one member of the team needs to turn in
the lesson plan for everyone)!
Sample lesson plan analysis (10 points) – Due Thursday, 6/13
Throughout the duration of this course, you will be given sample lesson plans from resources
like Rethinking School, Teaching Tolerance, Zinn Ed Project, etc. You task will be to take one
of these lesson plans (which you will get to keep) and analyze the lesson thinking about the
following:
     o Does this lesson align with what you have come to understand as good social studies
         teaching?
     o What type of narratives are present? Is the lesson critical? Would it bring about
         consciousness?
     o Do you see elements in the lesson that address some of the topics we have discussed,
         or have implemented some of the social studies methods we have used? If so, what
         are the topics or methods used (cite the reading), and does it align with reading? Is it
         similar or different?
     o Do you like the lesson and would you use it in your class (of course modifying for your
         students? If yes, why? If no, why not?
     o What would you change about the lesson?
     o How do you think the students would respond to this lesson? Why?
8


You will do a formal write-up of your analysis addressing the ideas in the questions above,
and turn it into Canvas by 11:59 PM, Thursday 6/13. MAKE SURE to describe or include
information about the lesson you are choosing so that we know which lesson you are
analyzing.
Data collection for letters to Breakthrough students (10 points) – Due Friday, 6/28
As part of your work for Breakthrough, you will write a letter to each of your advisees about
their academic and personal strengths, a letter that will be sent to each student in the fall of
the 2019-2020 school year. This is an amazing assessment opportunity to provide concrete,
rich feedback about what you as a teacher notice about your students as learners, and based
on our work in this course, particularly as readers and writers. We will begin collecting data
about students for these letters during this course. This data will include what you have started
to notice about your students, what interests them, where do they come from, etc. In other
words, you will work to build relationships with your students to aid you when it is time to write
your letters, your actual letters will be collected during your last week of teaching.
You will share the data you have collected about your students (and for privacy purposes we
will utilize pseudonyms during the discussion) with the class in a speed-dating style, using any
format you would like on Wednesday, June 6/26.
You will then turn in a write-up, or spreadsheet of data you feel most useful to Canvas by
no later than 11:59 PM, Friday 6/28.
Grade scale
  Percentage         Grade         Percentage         Grade
     100-93            A               79-77            C+
      92-90            A-              76-73             C
      89-87            B+              72-70            C-
      87-83            B               69-60             D
      82-80            B-               <60              F
9


     COURSE CALENDAR
Week 1: Broadening our understanding of social studies – Nothing without Intention (Interlude)
        DUE – Reading reflections Session #1 & #2
Wednesday, May        Thursday, May 30 – Session #1                       Friday, May 31 – Session #2
29                    9 AM – 5 PM, Room 526                               9 AM – 4:00 PM, Room 526
12PM-2PM, R0om
411                                “Nothing without intention”                      “Do nothing without intention”
UTUT Orientation      Topics:                                             Topics:
                       ▪ What is the purpose of social studies?            ▪ How do we teach social studies?
                       ▪ What are our purposes for teaching?               ▪ What is historical thinking?
                       ▪ How has social studies been taught                ▪ What does critical historical thinking
                             throughout American history?                       look like?
                       ▪ How does social studies education
                             connect with society at large?               Readings:
                                                                          Sexias, P., & Peck, C. (2004); Nelson, J.L., &
                      Readings:                                           Pang, V.O. (2014); Salinas, C., Blevins, B., &
                      Loewen, J.W. (2008); Vansledright, B. (2008);       Sullivan, C. (2012)
                      Leahey, C. (2014)
Week 2: Critical social studies methods – Can I Hold the Mic (Interlude)
        DUE – Reading reflections Sessions #3, 4, and 5; Tagged team mini-lesson session TBD
                      Tuesday, June 4 –           Wednesday, June 5 –      Thursday, June 6 –
                      Session #3                  Session #4               Session #5
                      2:25 PM – 4:45 PM           1:10 PM – 3:50 PM        12:45 PM – 2:45 PM
                      Location: TBD               Location: TBD            Location: TBD
                         “I can't be a singular          “too many           “too many lines, too
                        expression of myself,         manifestations”           many curves”
                       there's too many parts,
                          too many spaces”        Topics:                  Topics:
                                                  ▪ What are some          ▪ What is
                      Topics:                          of the dilemmas          constructivist
                      ▪ What are counter-              of teaching social       teaching?
                            narratives?                studies?            ▪ What does
                      ▪ Dominant                                                constructivist
                            historical            Readings:                     teaching look
                            narrative vs.         Kohl, H. (2007); Kent,        like?
                            counter-narratives    S.L. (1999); Levstik,
                                                  L.S. (2000)              Readings: Jadallah,
                      Readings:                                            E. (2000); Shear, S.B.,
                      Freire, P. (1970/2010);                              Sabzalian, L., &
                      Naseem Rodriguez, N.                                 Brown Buchanan, L.
                      (2017)                                               (2018); Schmidt, S.J.
                             o Jigsaw –                                    (2014)
                                 Stovall, D.
     10


                                (2006); King,
                                L.J. (2018)
Week 3: Rethinking/Reimagining social studies – Things I Imagined
           DUE – Reading reflections Sessions #6, 7, 8, and 9; 2nd Tagged team mini-lesson session TBD
                 Lesson plan analysis (Session #8)
Monday, June 10 –                               Wednesday, June          Thursday, June 13 –      Friday, June 14 –
Session #6                                      12 – Session #7          Session #8               Session #9
1:25 PM – 3:25 PM                               1:55 PM – 4:25 PM        12:35 PM – 3:05 PM       10:45 AM – 12:15PM
Location: TBD                                   Location: TBD            Location: TBD            Location: TBD
   “Some things I                                    “I saw things I       “Things I imagined”         “Saw things I
      imagined”                                        imagined”                                         imagined”
                                                                         Topics:
Topics:                                         Topics:                  • Rethinking             Topics:
• Rethinking                                    • Rethinking                 citizenship          • Building a
     geography                                        economics          • Dominant notions            lesson using
• What does                                     • What does                  of citizenship vs.        historical
     critical                                         critical               critical citizenship      inquiry
     geography                                        economics          • Building a positive    • Purpose, social
     look like?                                       mean, and what         classroom                 studies, and
                                                      does teaching          environment               practice
Readings:                                             economics this         (Classroom           • Lesson planning
Schmidt, S.J.                                         way entail?            Management)
(2015)                                                                                            Class Field Trip to
                                                Readings:                Readings:                the Briscoe Center!!
                                                Shanks, N. (2017)        Westheimer, J., &
                                                                         Kahne, J. (2004)         Readings: NCSS C3
                                                                         o Jigsaw – Busey,        Framework (2013 -
                                                                             C.L., & Walker, I.   PAGES 12 - 19; 23-
                                                                             (2017); Vickery,     25; 29; 53-55; 59-62)
                                                                             A.E. (2017);         – in the Canvas
                                                                             Naseem               module for Session
                                                                             Rodriguez, N.        #9
                                                                             (2018)
                                                                         Other Assignments:
                                                                         Lesson plan analysis
                                                                         DUE to Canvas by
                                                                         11:59 PM
Week 4: Planning, reflection, responsive teaching (All class meetings will be during department meeting time.)
*Times, dates and locations this week are subject to change! Be patient this week!!
                                                Wednesday, June          Thursday, June 20 –      Friday, June 21 –
                                                19 – Session #10         Session #11              Session #12
                                                SS Dept. Meeting         SS Dept. Meeting         SS Dept. Meeting
                                                Location: TBD            Location: TBD            Location: TBD
                                                Topics:                  Topics:                  Topics:
                                                                         • Lesson planning
       11


                                               •     Using students’  • Classroom        ▪    Reflection on
                                                     self-assessment    management            lessons, critical
                                                     to inform          (Part Duex)           pedagogy, and
                                                     teaching/lesson                          purpose for
                                                     planning                                 social studies
Week 5: Transformative teachers and teaching; What is your why?: Your purpose for teaching social studies –
My Skin My Logo
        DUE – Reading reflection for the Later…Session
              Plans for daily teaching: An in-depth lesson reflection
              Data collection for letters to Breakthrough students
                                               Wednesday, June                           Friday, June 28
                                               26 – Session #13
                                               4 PM – 7 PM                               Assignment DUE:
                                               Location: TBD                             Data collection for
                                                                                         letters to
                                                “Gucci on his sheets,                    Breakthrough
                                                 Gucci on his feet”                      students – to Canvas
                                                                                         by 11:59 PM
                                               Topics:
                                                ▪ Transformative
                                                      social studies
                                                ▪ What is the
                                                      purpose of
                                                      social studies?
                                                ▪ What is your
                                                      purpose for
                                                      teaching social
                                                      studies?
                                                ▪ How do
                                                      envision or
                                                      want your
                                                      social studies
                                                      teaching to
                                                      look like?
                                               Readings: Ladson-
                                               Billings, G. (2007);
                                               Ladson-Billings, G.
                                               (2014)
                                               Other
                                               Assignments:
                                               Plans for daily
                                               teaching: An in-
                                               depth lesson
                                               reflection DUE to
                                               Canvas by 11:59 PM
     12


13