Fall 2018 - INTRO TO DRAWING (20900)
Intro to Drawing/ From Traditional to Digital
Instructor: Yuliya Lanina
Class Location and Time: DFA 4.112 30 TTH 12:30 p.m. - 02:00 p.m.
Email: yuliya.lanina@utexas.edu
Office Hour: Tuesday, 2-3pm, DFA
TA: Logan Larsen ltlarsen@tx.rr.com
Description
The course is designed for students who wish to develop drawing skills and to experiment with
combining analog and digital techniques. You will learn a variety of drawing techniques,
including the basics of still-life drawing and life drawing, and explore the processes of
combining traditional and digital media to create a unique and personal artwork.
It is recommended that you have a basic knowledge of Adobe Photoshop before taking this
course.
Course Structure and Assignments
Drawing will take up most of our classroom time. The rest of it will be dedicated to lectures and
critiques. Your classroom works will be going into portfolios.
You are required to keep a sketchbook for homework (separate from the drawing pads used in
class). After each class you will be asked to complete one or two homework drawing
assignments, spending no less than 20 minutes on each drawing.
Both your classroom portfolios and the sketchbooks containing homework drawings will be
evaluated four times during the semester and will be collected at the same time.
The last four weeks of the semester will be dedicated to the final assignment – an original
artwork utilizing analog and digital techniques. There is no final exam in this class. However,
during the last week of classes, each student will present their final assignment to the class.
Attendance
Most of the classes will begin with instructions. Therefore, it is imperative that you show up on
time. Walking in late or leaving early is very disruptive to the class. If you do it more than once
without making prior arrangements, I will mark you as absent.
Each lecture will build on the previous one, so regular attendance is paramount. If you miss more
than three classes without verified, official documentation excusing your absence, your grade
will be lowered by one point.
Grading
The final grade will be a culmination of your performance on individual projects, your
homeworks, participation in class critiques, evidence of effort and technical development, and
successful competition of your final assignment.


Your final grade is comprised of the following:
4 classroom portfolios: 40%
Homework Drawings: 20%
Critiques: 10%
Final Assignment & Presentation: 25%+5%
Required Materials
No textbook is required for this course. You will, however, need to purchase a range of drawing
materials the cost of which will be comparable to buying a textbook. The following materials are
required for this course:
Paper:
• Pad of good drawing paper, 18” x 24” in size. Strathmore, Canson, or other drawing pads are
acceptable.
• One pad of newsprint, bogus rough, or craft paper, 18 x 24 minimum.
• One 9” x 12” sketchbook.
Mark-making and other supplies:
• One each of the following drawing pencils: 6b, 2b, Hb, 2H, 4H or One complete set of pencils
You can also buy one sketch set
• Pencil sharpener
• Compressed charcoal - 4b or 6b. Buy 2 sticks. Conte brand is by far the best.
• Conte crayons: 2 sticks of soft black, 2 sticks of terra cotta or other warm earth tone, 2 sticks of
white.
• Erasers: 1 Art Gum, 1 White Vinyl Pen Eraser, 1 Kneaded
• Drafting Tape or other low-adhesive tape.
• Box for supplies
• Drawing board with clips large enough to accommodate an 18” x 24” sheet of paper.
• Art Portfolio, 23” x 26” or similar size, large enough to accommodate your drawing pad
  Good place to get art supplies is Jerrys Artarama, www.jerrysartarama.com
  They are located at 6010 N Interstate Hwy 35, Austin, TX 78752.
They have student discount. They also offer free shipping for purchases over 35 dollars.
Electronic Devices:
Cell Phones, headsets, tables and laptops may not be used during class, unless you get special
permission of the instructor. Failure to comply with this policy will result in dismissal from class
University Policies:
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University


and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use
words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your
sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action,
including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty
and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address: http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you,
please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your
needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning
how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/
individualcounseling.html


Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
