            ANT 304T – Introduction to Texas Archaeology -WB
Unique # 79360
July 15 through August 20. LAST Day of Class: August 16.
Third and Last Exam: August 19th
CLASS MEETING PLACE: On-demand streaming through Canvas. There is no classroom!
    •   Canvas url: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251052
Dr. Wade’s Office Hours: MW 2:00 to 3:00 pm CST via Skype
Skype address: mariah.wade2
Email: m.wade@austin.utexas.edu
 TEACHING ASSISTANT:
 Mr. Jordan Bowers
 Office Hours: by appointment
 Skype address: bowers.jordan
 Email: onlineant304tta@austin.utexas.edu
Post and respond to student’s questions: Dr. Wade and Jordan Bowers: Monday through Friday
10 am to 12 pm (CST).
Contact technical support outside of class at: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu.
COURSE OVERVIEW
Course description: People have been in Texas since about 12,000 years ago and the evidence
of their presence throughout time is fascinating. Ever wondered how we know and can prove
that? This course introduces students to Texas archaeology through lectures and a variety of
media resources. Texas geographic and environmental diversity provided prehistoric and historic
peoples with unique resources and possibilities, and people used that diversity to make choices
and develop specific cultural characteristics while interacting with other peoples from the
surrounding regions.
Doing archaeology requires teamwork, critical thinking and multidisciplinary approaches. In
archaeology, it is often more important to ask relevant questions than provide ready answers. The
lectures, readings, videos and homework assignments in this course aim to emphasize these
requirements as well as how archaeology relates to other sciences.
This course may be used to fulfill the natural science and technology (Part II) component of the
common core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills,
teamwork, and empirical and quantitative skills.
This course may be taken for credit only once.
                                                                                                 1


Pre-requisites: none
Course readings: This course uses textual and media material from The Texas Beyond History
website.
http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/
All required readings, whether they are from The Texas Beyond History or from other sources,
are available through links provided in the modules or posted on Canvas. Every lecture has
required readings. You are encouraged to complete the assigned readings and watch any
assigned videos by the start of the class under which they are listed. The material from all
readings will be examined in quizzes and in exams.
Although not required, it is highly recommended that students purchase Stone Artifacts of Texas
Indians, by Ellen Sue Turner and Thomas R. Hester.
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ):
Before asking a question, please check this feature available on Canvas which will have answers to
several of your questions. This feature has been added to provide you with immediate answers
and to save you, and us, time.
ONLINE COURSE FORMAT
This is a digital course—unlike almost all other courses offered at the University of Texas, you
will be viewing this class online from any place you choose rather than in-person. You are
expected to “attend” class by logging in to the course to watch the recorded lectures posted on
Canvas.
Format of the course
It is important to understand the schedule of this course. It is an on-demand course which gives
you some freedom to complete materials on your own time. HOWEVER, the schedule shows
due dates built into the course to ensure that students pace themselves with the material. It is the
student’s responsibility to understand the schedule at the bottom of this syllabus and participate
in the course accordingly. The course is made up of seven modules which altogether contain
multiple lecture videos, instapoll questions, quizzes, and exams. Each module will open and
close on set dates during the session.
GRADING STRUCTURE
The grading structure comprises three different assessment types: quizzes, exams, and instapolls.
Please refer to this chart for explanation
  Total                                 Points for each
             Assessment Type                                             Assessment Definition
  Points                                   assignment
                                                                                                     2


                                                                 Quizzes will be multiple choice and
  25 pts            5 Quizzes                  5pts each
                                                                  True/False questions taken online
                                          1st exam is worth
                                                 20pts
                                           nd
                                         2 exam is worth       Exams will be multiple choice questions
  70 pts             3 Exams
                                                 20pts                     and taken online
                                         3rd exam is worth
                                                 30pts
                                                                Instapolls are pop-ups that will appear
                                                               periodically while watching the lecture
                                        40+ instapolls = 5pts   videos. They will appear silently for 1
                                        30+ instapolls = 4pts   minute and you must select an answer.
   5 pts           50 Instapolls        20+ instapolls = 3pts You only have one chance to answer these
                                        10+ instapolls = 2pts  polls when they appear. Answer at least
                                        <10 instapolls = 0pts   40 of the 50 instapolls throughout the
                                                               class and you will receive full credit for
                                                                      this portion of your grade.
 100pts
Most of the content of this course will be in the MODULES TAB. This course is comprised of 3
Units with smaller content modules in each unit.
• Unit 1: Covers Modules 1 and 2; quiz 1 and exam 1.
• Unit 2: Covers Modules 3 and 4; quizzes 2 and 3 and exam 2.
• Unit 3: Covers Modules 5, 6 and 7; quizzes 4 and 5 and exam 3.
• Students must complete each unit and take the respective exam before going on to the next unit.
After each exam date, access to that unit’s testing materials will be locked.
Grading Scale:
A = 100-90
B = 89-80
C = 79-70
D = 69-60
F = 59 or less
TECHNICAL AND COMMUNICATION LOGISTICS
CLASS WEBSITE. To get to everything associated with the class, simply go to:
     •   ttps://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251052
You can enter directly from the internet or through Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To
log into Canvas and the class website, you will need your UTEID and password. Once you reach
the class website, you can navigate your way to other areas. Some of the most important include:
         1.   Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the technical
              requirements and test stream webpage, the live video stream of the lectures,
              information regarding technical questions, as well as contact information for the
                                                                                                     3


             instructors and teaching assistants. On the left-hand side of each page of the Canvas
             course site are navigation tabs to all parts of the website, including the Syllabus.
        2.   Modules – The Modules page includes links to the lecture slides, activities, taped
             lecture segments, and other course documents.
        3.   Announcements—All course updates and announcements will be sent through this
             feature on Canvas. This tab on our homepage will list all the announcements sent out
             during the term.
Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Modules tab.
TECH REQUIREMENTS FOR COURSE INCLUDING PROCTOR SERVICE
Required internet-enabled device. All students are required to have access to an internet-
enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your
computer should meet the following requirements:
                      ○   Ram: 2GB
                      ○   Operating System: Windows XP, Vista, 7, 8, 10 (windows updates run)
                      ○   Operating System: Mac OS X 10.9.5, 10.10.5, 10.11.4, 10.12.4
                      ○   Browsers: Chrome is highly recommended. Safari and Firefox may work.
                      ○   Adobe Flash: must be installed and updated
You should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting the test
stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html.
There are multiple computer labs on campus for your use if you do not have a personal computer
or laptop. (You can find a listing of these labs here: (http://www.utexas.edu/its/campus-labs/). If
you do not have an internet-enabled device, some inexpensive ones are available at local stores
or on the internet, some for as little as $100.
        ●   Bandwidth limitations: No use of high bandwidth programs. Because the
             streaming video is bandwidth intensive, you are not allowed to access YouTube,
             Skype, Gmail video chat or other online video system, or any other program that is
             bandwidth-demanding while watching a lecture video.
        ●   Honor system for all graded assignments. By taking this class, you agree to abide
             by the University of Texas regulations concerning cheating. While working on your
             activities, you cannot receive help from others or discuss your writing assignments
             and exams with other students. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound
             to contact the TAs or instructors.
        ●   Information and data security. All tests, quizzes, and online interactions over the
             TOWER system will be saved and stored. All information will be kept for
             educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other
             researchers will involve de-identifying the data, including the removal of names,
             UTEIDs, email addresses, or other information. To further ensure that your
             information is secure, please do not include identifying information in your online
             interactions with others.
                                                                                                   4


Also, remember that all information is stored on secure UT-Austin computer servers. In online
interactions with others, remember that the instructors and TAs will have access to all
information.
Exams
Students will take three exams. These exams are NOT cumulative. The first exam will cover the
reading and lecture material from modules 1 and 2. The second exam will cover material from
modules 3 and 4. The third exam will cover material from modules 5 through 7.
The exams will be administered online through ProctorU. This is a testing service that confirms
your identity and monitors your computer and work space while you are taking the exam to
ensure that you complete it without any assistance from study resources, like notes, slides, or
other students in the class. This also means that you can take the exam from almost anywhere
using a webcam, a microphone, and a high-speed Internet connection, as long as it is in a quiet,
secure, and distraction-free setting. You will need to create an account on ProctorU
(https://go.proctoru.com/students/users/new). You will be required to show a physical UT EID:
a copy will not be accepted!
The charge for this service is $19.75 for each exam if you schedule your exam at least 72 hours
prior to taking it.
You should schedule your proctor for all three exams with ProctorU by July 18th. Go to the
ProctorU website and find the three exams related to UT-Austin ANT304T with Mariah Wade.
The first exam will be given from 5:00 to 6:15 pm on Thursday, July 25th. The second exam
will be given from 5:00 to 6:15 pm on Thursday, August 1st. The third exam will be given
from 5:00 to 6:15 pm on Monday, August 19th.
Exams will consist of multiple-choice and true-false questions.
Please note the dates and times of these exams and make sure that you are able to attend all
exams. Makeup exams will only be granted under extreme and unavoidable circumstances.
Given that you can take the exam at home, the only medical emergencies that trigger a makeup
exam will likely include hospitalization. You must have documentation of this emergency.
Note: if you expect now to be traveling on the day(s) of the exam, you will NOT be granted a
makeup exam for these anticipated travel plans. Your decision to remain in the course after the
first day of class reflects acknowledgment of this policy.
POLICY & PROCEDURES
Accommodations
• The University of Texas at Austin upon request provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.
• Given the nature of On-Demand online classes the only accommodation that would be required
relates to extra time to complete timed assignments (quizzes and tests). If you have approved
accommodations for quizzes and exams, please email Dr. Wade a copy of your approved
accommodations to make sure you are given extra time.
                                                                                                 5


• Those students who have accommodations must contact Dr. Wade through Canvas
IMMEDIATELY at the beginning of classes to be sure to have extra time allotted for UNIT 1
quiz and exam.
Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course or dismissal from the University. Since
such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the Student
Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/. Refer to the Dean of
Students Student Judicial Services website or call 471-2841 for the official university policies
and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
The online course format allows for multiple methods of identity verification, collusion,
collaboration and plagiarism monitoring and detection. A violation of the course policy may
include (but is not limited to) the following:
    •    Providing your UT EID to any other person
    •    Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the material on any
         activity, assessment or assignment, before, during and after any activity, assessment or
         assignment
    •   Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format
    •   The public (such that it can be viewed by more than one person) posting of any form of a
         test bank or group of questions from any assignment
The University of Texas at Austin Academic Integrity Principles call for students to avoid
engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
student. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
PLEASE NOTE: Grade-related penalties are routinely assessed. The severity of these penalties
will be determined at the Instructor’s discretion and will generally not be less than a zero on one
of the three components of a student’s final grade in which the violation occurred. Students can
also be suspended or even permanently expelled from the University for academic misconduct.
Students often join social media platforms, like Facebook, where work product is shared among
many students. While we do not prohibit you for joining such groups, we will hold ALL
members of a social media group responsible for any form of academic dishonesty that occurs
within such a group irrespective of its size. In other words, if any group of two or more students
engages in any form of academic dishonesty on the site (or Facebook page), ALL members of
that site or page will also be treated as having engaged in the same form of academic dishonesty
because they can observe it and benefit from it. Quite simply, be very careful about joining such
groups.
Religious Holidays
                                                                                                    6


A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence
as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence.
CLASS SCHEDULE
Unit 1
July 15 through July 23
    •   Introduction - What is archaeology and what archaeologists do.
    •   Archaeology Methods and Techniques
    •   Texas Physiography, Archaeological Regions and Archaeologists
    •   The First Americans – Routes, hypotheses and evidence
    •   The Antiquity of humans in America – Blackwater Draw
                July 19, Quiz 1
    •   Dating Methods and Paleoindian sites. Notes on Social Organization
    •   Ways of making a living.
                July 25, Exam 1
Unit 2
July 24 through August 1
    •   Paleoindian Burial Behavior. The Late Paleo Period/Transitional Archaic
    •   The Late Paleo Period/Transitional Archaic/East and Central Texas
    •   The Late Paleoindian Period/ Transitional Archaic – Climate and life changes.
                July 26, Quiz 2
    •   Middle and Late Archaic Periods. Landscape and Resources.
    •   The Late Paleo Period/Transitional Archaic. The Lower Pecos. Microbotanical evidence.
    •   Middle and Late Archaic Periods. Dwellings and Structures.
                July 31, Quiz 3
    •   Late Archaic and Early Prehistoric, general characteristics: Central, South, Coastal,
        Trans-Pecos, Lower Pecos.
                August 1, Exam 2
Unit 3
August 2 through August 19
    •   Woodlands - The Middle and Late Archaic Periods - Mound Building, Burial Customs.
    •   The Late Archaic and Prehistoric Periods: Texas Panhandle
    •   Material Culture and Rock Art. Preservation and Conservation.
    •   Trade and material culture - The Lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos.
                August 7, Quiz 4
    •   Late Prehistoric in Central Texas – Austin and Toyah Phases.
    •   The Jornada Mogollon and Hueco Tanks
    •   Hueco Tanks and La Junta de los Rios.
                                                                                                 7


                August 12, Quiz 5
     •   Historic Period: European Encounters.
     •   The Spanish Colonial Mission Period.
     •   The Mission Period. Presidios and soldiers. The Red River Wars.
     •   The 1800s in Texas
                August 19, Exam 3
COURSE EXPECTATIONS AND OUTCOMES
You will not become a Texas Archeologist after this course, but we hope you become one in the
future.
You will learn about Texas environmental and archaeological diversity and the ways native
inhabitants made use of the state’s natural resources;
You will learn about Texas connections to other archaeological areas and why present state
boundaries are pointless in terms of archaeology;
You will learn about how prehistoric and historic Texas inhabitants made a living and the
materials they used in their daily lives;
You will have a comprehensive understanding of the methodologies and techniques
archaeologists use to date sites, discover clues about the ancient environment, classify and study
lithic tools and ceramics and contribute to the preservation and conservation of archaeological
artifacts;
By the end of this course, we hope you have developed admiration and respect for the past Texas
inhabitants and are knowledgeable to contribute to the preservation of the archeological objects
that are Texas legacy.
                                                                                                  8
