                 PR378/ADV373: Integrated Brand Promotion Campaigns
Spring 2020                    Unique: 07100/06640            CMA 6.170                   T/R 3:30-5
Brad Love, Ph.D.                                                           Office location: BMC 4.342
E-mail: lovebrad@utexas.edu
Office Hours: W 1-2, R 1-2, other times also available by appointment (please ask if you need help)
   Course Reading
*Young, James Webb. A Technique for Producing Ideas. McGraw-Hill Companies: New York, 2003.
A short, useful discussion on developing creative solutions for those needing a push, available
digitally for less than $2, by borrowing a copy from me, or in the HathiTrust digital catalog.
   Course Description
   Campaigns is the capstone courses in the advertising program. This class integrates all of the
course work within both the major and outside areas. This is the course in which students learn the
most and have the most fun working in agency teams on a real project.
    In order to provide students with an appreciation of what should be included in an integrated brand
promotion (IBP) campaign plan, a major campaign development project and a series of individual
and task group projects are used during the semester. The major focus of the course is on the
development of an IBP campaign plan for a client. The class does not center on the development of
new skills; rather, it is about the refinement and integration of what you have already learned.
    In this class, students work on a range of projects as members of agency account teams.
Experiencing the rewards and learning to cope with the problems of working in a small group is an
important part of the class. Advertising is an all-weather, team sport.
    In addition to an emphasis on developing and presenting a complete campaign, the course is given
direction and supplemented through the use of lectures, handouts, video presentations, recommended
readings, and guest speakers. Further, a set of assignments focusing on various aspects of campaign
planning is spread across the semester.
   Course Objectives
   The objective of the course is to provide students with an in-depth understanding of the process of
planning, presenting, and implementing complete IBP campaigns. In order to accomplish this
objective, the emphasis in the course is on each individual learning-by-doing—that is, by developing
and presenting a complete campaign for a real client.
    Secondary objectives of the course are to increase each student’s level of competence,
professionalism, and ethical thinking. Specifically, the course is designed to help students sharpen the
following skills: strategic and critical thinking; planning; organizational; written and verbal
communication; time management; interpersonal; and group work (bringing out the best in others).
   Course Strategy
   To achieve the course objectives, students will use:
       • Supplemental readings, examples, and guest speakers to provide a common framework
         to structure understanding of the strategic IBP planning process;


      • A major account team campaign development project—as well as several smaller
        ones—to mirror the work environment on both the client and agency sides of the
        advertising and communications business; and
      • Writing assignments and other projects to help focus on key components of the
        strategic planning process and personal development.
    Student Evaluation
    Student performances will be assessed by evaluating:
      • Problem-solving and application skills through assignments and projects;
      • Account team performances based on the plansbook, team presentations and reports;
        and,
      • Contributions to team performance through peer evaluations.
    Each student’s letter grade at the end of the course is determined by performance in five
 areas assessed using the rubrics available on Canvas. The five areas and the relative
 importance of each are:
                             • Class/group participation                       10%
                             • Ungraded presentation (to class, for practice) 0
                             • First presentation (to me, for practice)        10
                             • Individual essay (assigned question)            15
                             • Main-client presentation                        32.5
                             • Main-client plansbook                           32.5
                                                                               100%
    Grades are on a plus/minus basis, as required by the university. “Plus” grades will be the
top three scores within each range, and “minus” scores will be the bottom three results. For
example, between 87 and 89 is a B-plus and between 80 and 82 is a B-minus.
   Other Course Requirements
   The class will consist of our regularly scheduled meetings, information delivered through online
technologies, as well as your personal and team participation—all to enrich the experience and
enhance your understanding of the issues and projects explored during the course. You must show up
and participate for this to work. Thus, attendance is required and expected.
    Special Notes
   Our client has volunteered time and assistance to contribute to the educational goals of our
department. All materials furnished by our client are to be treated as strictly confidential. The plans,
ideas and other materials prepared for our client become their property and may be used at their
discretion. In fact, our hope is that they will use it so you can demonstrate in every interview and
conversation forever how effective and brilliant you are.
    The advertising business is characterized by attention to details and deadlines. Demonstrating
creativity, enthusiasm and hard work should be each student’s objective during this course and
beyond. Acknowledging this, in some cases, there will be an opportunity to re-write individual essays
for a different grade. The class will discuss this more once this essay is assigned.


    You will notice throughout the semester that the course places much emphasis on presentation
skills. This focus has led other students to ask, “Is this a theater or an advertising class?” “Yes, it is,”
I’d say. An essential part of any career is the ability to present ideas in a clear and engaging manner.
While the ideas themselves of course have great value, it would be difficult to overstate the
importance of how you present those ideas. Presentation grades will reflect the fact that it is not
simply about how good your ideas may be but how effectively you present them.
   Teams will be organized early in the semester. The class will be divided up to maximize the spread
of student skill sets (research, design, etc) so that each team has a variety of members. Students are
encouraged to offer suggestions for team assignments, but talent distribution and teamwork
considerations take priority in the final organization.
   Academic Honesty
   All students are expected to demonstrate high ethical behavior and meet the terms and
conditions of The University of Texas at Austin Honor Code: “The core values of The
University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
   Violating university rules on academic honesty can lead to disciplinary penalties, including
failing grades and/or dismissal from the university. Because such dishonesty harms the
individual, fellow students, and the integrity of the university, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. The Student Judicial Services Web site has more
information in the Office of the Dean of Students section at:
http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/.
   Plagiarism
   Part of maintaining academic honesty includes avoiding plagiarism. In your work for this
class and all others, you must cite sources if you use words or ideas that are not your own.
This obviously includes quoted material, but it also covers works that may have inspired your
thinking or ideas you build upon.
   Religious Holy Days
   By UT Austin policy, it is required that you notify the instructor of a pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, you will have an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
   Documented Disability Statement
   Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official
accommodation letter from SSD. (Note: Details of a student’s disability are confidential.
Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition or diagnosis when receiving
an official accommodation letter.)


    §   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
        accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable
        for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
    §   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related
        accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the
        arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
        accessibility, etc.).
    §   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
        (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
   If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
 Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
 behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
 Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
 Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
 5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
   Q drop Policy
   The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
  “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
  permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any
  course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the
  student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
   Emergency Evacuation Policy
   Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
 outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
 following policies regarding evacuation:
        § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
            Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you
            entered the building.
        § If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
            class.
        § In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
   Do not re-enter a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions.
   Department Research Participant Pool
   Study participation is an important part of the undergraduate experience at UT. It allows first-hand
insight into what research should look like, sound like and feel like. As a result, all students in this
course are invited to participate in two School of Advertising and Public Relations research studies.
Completing study participation will count for extra credit in class. Studies will become available
throughout the semester at http://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool. Please be aware that you can


only get credit once for a study. This means that if you have other classes with similar offers, you
cannot seek credit for the same study in more than one class. Also note that you will not receive
additional extra credit in this class for participating in more than one study.
   Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students as well as Blackboard for Course
   Materials:
   Plan on both being an essential part of how you keep up to date about course happenings.
E-mail is an official mode of university correspondence. This means that students must
monitor their e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. This
also means you have to be sure that UT has an accurate and functioning e-mail address.
Instructions for updating e-mail addresses can be found at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php. Blackboard content is available on your
personalized page at courses.utexas.edu.
   Course Outline
   The tentative course outline below indicates the dates when assignments are due, topics will be
discussed, and so on. Changes will most likely be necessary as clients’ schedules shift and group
projects develop. The course structure will deliberately be fluid to encompass relevant current events
and ensure that the class’ educational needs are being met. Students will be held responsible for such
changes, which will be announced in class and through e-mail. Due dates, however, are unlikely to
change to make student planning as effective as possible.


  Schedule
Month Day               Topic                 Notes                        Assigned Work
 Jan. 21 Class intro.
        23 Challenging ideas                                 Assign: Sinek ‘Start with Why’
        28 Media future                 Discuss Sinek talk
        30 Idea generation              Group paperwork
Feb.     4 Using models, measurement Client preferences      Assign: graded pitches & plansbook
         6 Pitching, group work                              Assign: ungraded pitch, due 13 Feb.
        11 Class exercise
        13 Ungraded presentations        Feedback on Bb      Due: ungraded pitch
        18 Review and prep             Prepare for 1st pitch
        20 Client intro
        25 Client intro
        27 First pitches: insight                            Due: first pitch
March 3 First pitches: insight
         5 Discuss pitches & plansbook
        10 Indiv. essay/e.c. disc.
        12 Group work
        17 Spring Break
        19 Spring Break                                      Assign: indiv. essay, due April 9
        24 Group work
        26 Group work
        31 e.c.: job apps
April    2 Group work
         7 Group work
         9 Group work                                        Due: indiv. essay by 4 p.m. to my office
        14 Group work
        16 Group work
        21 Group work
        23 Group work
        28 Major Pitch                                       Due: plansbook
        30 Major pitch
 May     5 Discuss pitches
         7 Graduation advice             Last Class Day      Due: both e.c.


  Resources that may make your life easier and that you really should read to be effective
*Advertising Age: adage.com.
*AdWeek Web site: http://www.adweek.com/aw/index.jsp.
*Cialdini, Robert. Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion. William Morrow and Co: New York,
  1993. Really, anything by Cialdini is worth reading. He does an excellent job of making scientific
  research interesting and accessible.
*New York Times “Media & Advertising” section:
  http://www.nytimes.com/pages/business/media/index.html.
*PR Watch Center for Media and Democracy: www.prwatch.org.
*Public Relations Newswire: www.prnewswire.com.
*Public Relations Society of American Web site: www.prsa.org.
*Steel, Jon. Perfect Pitch. John Wiley and Sons, Inc: Hoboken, NJ, 2007. I don’t know if you can
  find a more useful book about persuading audiences through presentations. Looking forward in
  your lives, it’s safe to say this is a skill worth practicing.
*Steel, Jon. Truth, Lies, and Advertising. John Wiley and Sons, Inc: New York, 1988. If nothing else,
  the free sample on Amazon.com is well worth your time.
*Strunk, William and E.B. White. The Elements of Style. Online at: http://www.bartleby.com/141/.
*von Oech, Roger. A Whack On the Side of the Head. Warner Books: New York, 1998. A
  compendium of exercises to encourage different thinking styles, useful for those needing a push to
  innovate.
