                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
               STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:          SW n393R              Instructor: P. Cody
Unique Number:          88785                 Email: triciacody@austin.utexas.edu
Semester:               Summer 2019           Office: 3.212A
Meeting Time/Place: Mon/Wed                   Office Phone: 512-413-6405 (cell)
                        5:30pm-8:00pm         Office Hours: Mondays 4:00pm-5:00pm
                        SW 2.116                             Other times by appointment
                          Treatment of Children and Adolescents
I.      STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
The course is designed as an advanced clinical selective for graduate students in the School of
Social Work who wish to increase knowledge and skills for practice with children, adolescents,
and their families. Students will develop a working understanding of children and adolescents from
diverse backgrounds, affirming and respecting their strengths and differences. This course is
grounded in the identification, analysis, and implementation of empirically-based intervention
strategies for working with children, adolescents, and their families. This course will focus on
using multiple perspectives in the advanced application of theories, models and skills utilized in
varying treatment modalities, with emphasis placed at the micro and mezzo levels of practice. The
framework of the course is based on social work values and the ethical decision-making process,
as illuminated by the NASW Code of Ethics. A bio-psycho-social and cultural emphasis will be
applied to the various problem areas and disorders covered.
II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
    1. Demonstrate the ability to integrate theories and empirical research knowledge
        under girding fields of practice areas with child, adolescent, and family populations.
    2. Demonstrate skill in the application of different treatment modalities, including
        formal and informal systems of care.
    3. Demonstrate an advanced clinical knowledge of the relationship between
        assessment and intervention as it relates to the strengths, the processes involved in
        human change, and the capacities and resources of children, adolescents and
        families.
    4. Demonstrate the ability to adapt intervention models and strategies to reflect an
        understanding of persons from diverse backgrounds, including (but not limited to)
        race, ethnicity, culture, class, gender, sexual orientation, religion/spirituality,
        physical or mental ability, developmental level, age, and national origin.
    5. Critically evaluate and analyze different theoretical and intervention models as to
        their effectiveness in given situations. This includes: (a) the adequacy of the
        research and knowledge base; (b) the range of applicability; (c) the value and ethical
        issues, including the student’s own value system; and (d) the policy implications
        involved in delivery of services to children, adolescents, and families.
    6. Demonstrate the ability to implement and evaluate the effectiveness of clinical
        interventions for children, adolescents, and families.
                                                                                                 1


    7. Demonstrate the ability to tailor and integrate clinical interventions for children,
        adolescents, and families based on the context in which they are delivered.
    8. Demonstrate advanced knowledge of social work values and ethical decision-
        making processes as they relate to ethical dilemmas in clinical intervention with
        children, adolescents, and families.
III.    TEACHING METHODS
This class provides opportunities for both theory and skill development. Various models and
theories will be presented through a combination of lectures, demonstrations of the practice
interventions in each model, discussions about skills, videos, as well as small group and
experiential exercises.
IV.     REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
Weisz, J. R. & Kazdin, A. E., (Eds.) (2017). Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and
adolescents, 3rd edition. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
van der Kolk, B. (2014). The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of
Trauma. New York NY: Penguin Random House.
Perry, B. & Szalavitz, M. (2006). The Boy Who Was Raised as a Dog: And Other Stories From a
Child Psychiatrist’s Notebook. Philadelphia, PA: Basic Books.
Additional Readings located on Canvas.
V.      COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Attendance and Participation                                            10 points
Promising Practices Paper and Presentation                              30 points
        The paper component of this assignment (25 points) is an opportunity to learn about a
        treatment approach that you otherwise might not have the opportunity to learn about.
        This assignment is to be completed on your own. The topic must be approved by the
        professor by Monday, June 24, 2019 and the paper is due the last day of class. The paper
        should be approximately 5-7 pages and cover the following areas:
                1. Description of the approach (What is it? How does it work? Who is it used
                with?)
                2. What theory or theories support the use of this approach? (Describe the
                theoretical framework that is the basis for this approach. This may be available in
                the literature or you may have to critically think through the approach and figure
                out the theoretical perspective.)
                3. Review the current research or literature available about the approach. If there
                is little or no research, you may have to look at related research. What is the
                current state of the research? Is there any outcome research? What are the
                findings?
                4. How does the approach address diversity issues such as race, ethnicity, culture,
                class, gender, sexual orientation, religion/spirituality, physical or mental ability,
                developmental level, age, or national origin?
                                                                                                      2


                5. What is your personal assessment of the strengths and areas for improvement of
                this approach?
       The presentation component of this assignment (5 points) is a short 5-10 minute
       presentation on the last day of class. Each student will share their topic and provide the
       class with a 1 page handout summarizing the topic. Power points are not necessary for this
       presentation.
The Boy Who Was Raised as a Dog Paper and Presentation                30 points
       This is a group assignment. Each group will consist of 2, possibly 3 students. During the
       first week of class each group will be assigned one chapter of the Bruce Perry book. The
       paper and presentation and to be developed and submitted as a group.
       The paper and presentation should cover the clinical significance of the content of each
       chapter, its connection the larger field of social work and your professional and personal
       “take aways” from the chapter. The paper and presentation will reflect the collaboration
       and discussion that each group should have about the content. This paper should truly be
       collaborative as opposed to using a “divide and conquer” approach and will likely be 5-7
       pages. The presentation should be approximately 10 minutes.
       The paper and presentation are both due on Monday, July 8.
Professional and Personal Reflection Papers                           30 points
       Three reflections papers (10 points each) are due throughout the semester. Each paper
       should be related to a topic that is covered in class and should be 2-4 pages. The approach
       of the paper can be decided by each student for each paper but should be more than simply
       a recounting of the material covered in class and the readings. Each reflection paper should
       demonstrate a deeper level of thinking and consideration about the topic of the reflection
       paper. Students should think about how the topic relates to the larger field, how the topic
       relates to their personal goals, how the topic impacts them personally, the deeper meanings
       of the topic, professional critique and/or how it connects to their professional goals.
       Due dates: Monday, June 24; Wednesday, July 3; Wednesday, July 17
VI.    GRADES
       94.0 and Above               A
       90.0 to 93.999               A-
       87.0 to 89.999               B+
       84.0 to 86.999               B
       80.0 to 83.999               B-
       77.0 to 79.999               C+
       74.0 to 76.999               C
       70.0 to 73.999               C-
       67.0 to 69.999               D+
       64.0 to 66.999               D
       60.0 to 63.999               D-
       Below 60.0                   F
                                                                                                  3


VII. CLASS POLICIES
The use of laptops/tablets is not allowed in class unless you have individual approval from the
instructor. Please take notes on paper. The use of cell phones is not allowed in class. Unless you
are a parent or caretaker and need to be available for a possible emergency call, please silent your
cell phone and keep it stored in your bag during class.
VII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities,
religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect
to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social
Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that
did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this
environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree
with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one
another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public
social networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users
cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work
students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen,
read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc.,
can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective
careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
                                                                                                   4


settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing
accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                                                                     5


TITLE IX REPORTING. TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the
Education Amendments of 1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a
learning environment that is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, interpersonal
violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be
informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX
Coordinator and/or the Title IX Liaison for the SHSSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty
and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to obtain information. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found
at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone
who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                                                    6


EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    •  Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
       the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    •  If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
       of class.
    •  In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    •  Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
       Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
 Date   Topic                           Assignment Due     Readings
 Mon    Ø First Day of Class            --                 Syllabus
 6/10   Ø Introductions and Overview                       Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 1
 Wed    Ø Ethics                        --                 Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 26
 6/12   Ø Theoretical Foundations
            working with Children and                      On Canvas:
            Adolescents                                    Prochaska, J. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2002).
                                                           Transtheoretical model with guidelines for
                                                           families with child abuse and neglect. In A. R.
                                                           Roberts & G. J. Greene (Eds.), Social
                                                           Workers’ Desk Reference (pp. 379-384). New
                                                           York, NY: Oxford University Press.
 Mon    Ø Evidence Based Practice       --                 Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 21, 22, 27, 29, 33
 6/17       with Children and
            Adolescents
        Ø Culture, Ethnicity, and
            Language
 Wed    Ø Complementary and             --                 On Canvas:
 6/19       Alternative Treatments                         Charry-Sánchez, J.D. (2018). Effectiveness
            with Children and                              of animal-assisted therapy in the pediatric
            Adolescents                                    population: Systematic review and meta-
                                                           analysis of controlled studies. 39(7), 580-590.
                                                           Ahmetoglu, E. (2019). The contributions of
                                                           familial and environmental factors to children’s
                                                           connection with nature and outdoor activities.
                                                           189 (2), 233-243.
                                                           Eren, B. (2018). Teaching the Skill of Reading
                                                           Facial Expressions to a Child with Autism
                                                           Using Musical Activities: A Case Study. 7 (6),
                                                           156-164.
 Mon    Ø Trauma                        Promising          Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 15
 6/24                                   Practices Paper    van der Kolk; Ch. 1-6
                                                           Perry, Ch. 1-5
                                                                                                           7


                                 TOPIC due
                                 before class
                                 Reflection Paper
                                 #1 due
                                                  van der Kolk; Ch 7-10
Wed  Ø Trauma                    --               Perry, Ch. 6-11
6/26
                                                  On Canvas:
                                                  Perry, B. (2002). Childhood Experience and
                                                  the Expression of Genetic Potential: What
                                                  Childhood Neglect Tells Us About Nature and
                                                  Nurture. 3, 79-100.
Mon  Ø Depressive Disorders      --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 4, 5
7/1  Ø Suicide Prevention
                                                  On Canvas:
                                                  Nebhinani, N. & Singhai, K. (2019). Suicide
                                                  prevention strategies for adolescents and youth:
                                                  Where are we missing? J. Indian Assoc. Child
                                                  Adolesc. Ment. Health. 15(2), 1-12.
Wed  Ø Anxiety                   Reflection Paper Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 2, 3
7/3  Ø Obsessive Compulsive      #2 due
       Disorder
Mon  Ø In-Class Group            Group Paper      --
7/8    Presentations: The Boy    DUE: The Boy
       Who Was Raised as a Dog   Who Was Raised
                                 as a Dog
Wed  Ø Disruptive Disorders      --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
7/10
Mon  Ø Autism Spectrum Disorders --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 17
7/15
                                                  Recommended: The Horse Boy by Rupert
                                                  Isaacson
Wed  Ø School Based Approaches   Reflection Paper Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 13
7/17 Ø ADHD                      #3 due
Mon  Ø Child Welfare             --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 11
7/22
                                                  On Canvas:
                                                                                                 8


                                                          Henry, D.; (2005). The 3-5-7 Model: Preparing
                                                          Youth for Permanency. Children and Youth
                                                          Services Review, 27(2), 197-212.
 Wed    Ø Library Day / No Class       --                 Work on your Promising Practices
 7/24                                                     Paper/Presentation on your own time
 Mon    Ø Last Day of Class            Promising          --
 7/29   Ø Promising Practices In-      Practices Paper
            Class Presentations        Due by the End of
                                       the Day
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ahmetoglu, E. (2019). The contributions of familial and environmental factors to children’s
connection with nature and outdoor activities. 189 (2), 233-243.
Charry-Sánchez, J.D. (2018). Effectiveness of animal-assisted therapy in the pediatric
population: Systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled studies. 39(7), 580-590.
Nebhinani, N. & Singhai, K. (2019). Suicide prevention strategies for adolescents and youth:
Where are we missing? J. Indian Assoc. Child Adolesc. Ment. Health. 15(2), 1-12.
Eren, B. (2018). Teaching the Skill of Reading Facial Expressions to a Child with Autism Using
Musical Activities: A Case Study. 7 (6), 156-164.
Henry, D.; (2005). The 3-5-7 Model: Preparing Youth for Permanency. Children and Youth
Services Review, 27(2), 197-212.
Perry, B. (2002). Childhood Experience and the Expression of Genetic Potential: What
Childhood Neglect Tells Us About Nature and Nurture. 3, 79-100.
Perry, B. & Szalavitz, M. (2006). The Boy Who Was Raised as a Dog: And Other Stories From a
Child Psychiatrist’s Notebook. Philadelphia, PA: Basic Books.
Prochaska, J. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2002). Transtheoretical model with guidelines for families
with child abuse and neglect. In A. R. Roberts & G. J. Greene (Eds.), Social Workers’ Desk
Reference (pp. 379-384). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
van der Kolk, B. (2014). The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of
Trauma. New York NY: Penguin Random House.
Weisz, J. R. & Kazdin, A. E., (Eds.) (2017). Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and
adolescents, 3rd edition. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
                                                                                                       9
