                                Sociocultural Influences on Learning
                                               ALD 327
                                              Spring 2019
                                               SZB 292
                                       Thursdays 1:00-3:45 PM
 Instructor          Soyoung Park, Ph.D.                        TA           Chelseaia Charran
 Office              SZB 440M                                   E-mail       ccharran13@utexas.edu
 E-mail              soyoungp@austin.utexas.edu
 Office Phone        (512) 475-8572
 Cell Phone          (914) 714-4274
 Office Hours        By appointment
                                     COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course is an introduction to thinking critically about bias and sociocultural factors that
influence ourselves, students and their families, and school systems. We will explore how our
socio-political, cultural, and historical contexts impact our individual identities as well as the
identities of the students and families in our schools. We will also critically examine the role that
such sociocultural factors play on the learning process. Specifically, this course will emphasize
how sociocultural and linguistic factors, such as race/ethnicity, language, immigrant status, class,
etc., intersect with disability. We will apply these understandings to classroom practices,
exploring and developing teaching approaches that are responsive to and appropriate for children
and youth with disabilities from culturally and linguistically diverse communities. This course is
intended to prepare prospective special education practitioners to engage in anti-bias work with
culturally and linguistically diverse students with disabilities and their families.
There are two essential questions guiding this course:
    1. Why do sociocultural influences matter for children with disabilities and their families?
    2. What does it mean to be an equitable special education teacher?
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
    •    Identify bias within themselves and develop a critical lens to begin dismantling these
         biases in their work with students, families, and school staff
    •    Identify bias within schools and generate approaches for resisting the impact of such bias
         on the experience of students and families
    •    Apply their understanding of the sociocultural influences on learning to 1) their own
         lived experiences, 2) observations of schools and classrooms, and 3) their own future
         classroom practice
A variety of approaches, including class lectures, discussions, simulations, group activities, and
written assignments will be utilized to achieve course objectives.
                                                    1
Park, S. (2019)


                               PROFESSIONAL COMPETENCIES
By the end of the course, students will be able to demonstrate skills in the following domains, as
outlined by the Council for Exceptional Children (CEC) and the Texas State Board of Education
Certification (SBEC) standards:
CEC Special Education Preparation Standards
Learner Development and Individual Learning Differences
        1.1 Beginning special education professionals understand how language, culture, and
             family background influence the learning of individuals with exceptionalities.
Learning Environments
        2.1 Beginning special education professionals, through collaboration with general
             educators and other colleagues, create safe, inclusive, culturally responsive learning
             environments to engage individuals with exceptionalities in meaningful learning
             activities and social interactions.
Professional Learning and Ethical Practice
        6.2 Beginning special education professionals understand how foundational knowledge
             and current issues influence professional practice.
        6.3 Beginning special education professionals understand that diversity is a part of
             families, cultures, and schools, and that complex human issues can interact with the
             delivery of special education services.
Collaboration
        7.0 Beginning special education professionals collaborate with families, other educators,
             related service providers, individuals with exceptionalities, and personnel from
             community agencies in culturally responsive ways to address the needs of individuals
             with exceptionalities across a range of learning experiences.
Texas SBEC Standards
Standard II: The special education teacher applies knowledge of professional roles and
responsibilities and adheres to legal and ethical requirements of the profession.
        2.2 Teachers know personal cultural biases and differences that may affect one’s teaching
        2.4 Teachers respect the culture, gender, and personal beliefs of individual students and
             families
Standard III: The special education teacher knows how to communicate and collaborate
effectively in a variety of professional settings.
        3.3 Teachers can foster respectful and beneficial relationships between parents/guardians
             and school community personnel
Standard IV: The special education teacher understands and applies knowledge of the
characteristics and needs of individuals with disabilities.
        4.11 Teachers know the effects of cultural and environmental influences (e.g., cultural
              and linguistic characteristics, socioeconomic level, abuse/neglect, substance abuse)
              on the child and family
                                                    2
Park, S. (2019)


                                          COURSE TEXTS
Required Books: There are two required books for this course. These can be purchased at the
University Co-op Bookstore or through other retailers such as Amazon.com.
(1) The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Students by Gloria Ladson-Billings
(2) Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics of Caring by Angela Valenzuela
Articles and Book Chapters: All articles and book chapters are available on Canvas.
                                               CANVAS
Our Canvas site is a critical feature of this course. All course materials, including the syllabus,
readings, slides, and any handouts used in class can be found on Canvas. You will submit all
assignments, receive comments, and track your grades through Canvas. I will also use Canvas to
post announcements. You can e-mail me through Canvas or at the address listed above.
                       EXPECTATIONS AND ATTENDANCE POLICY
Class Attendance: Timely and consistent attendance is critical to your learning, the learning of
your peers, and your professional development. For this reason, attendance and participation
constitute 30 points of your grade. The attendance policy for this course is described in the
Assessments section below.
Class Participation: Active and thoughtful participation in all class activities is also integral to
this course, and is built into your grade (see below). Meaningful participation in this class
involves the following:
    • Be present – Listen to your peers when they speak, listen to your instructor when she
        speaks, ask questions, share your ideas
    • Do the readings in advance of class sessions
    • Turn off cell phones and keep them out of sight until the scheduled break
    • Use laptops for classwork only
    • Communicate with your instructor – Life happens. I do not expect you to check parts of
        yourself at the door, but please let me know if there are any reasons why you are not able
        to fully engage with a class session.
Class Norms: In this course, we will discuss topics that may be sensitive for some and will
likely bring up personal experiences. Additionally, class sessions will be hands-on, interactive,
and collaborative. As such, it is important that we build a community in which we all feel safe to
share our thoughts, stories, and questions. In the first week of class, we will collectively write
class norms. These will serve as a guide for how we conduct ourselves in our conversations. All
students are expected to adhere to these communally agreed upon norms.
                                                   3
Park, S. (2019)


Communication with Your Instructor: Please communicate any concerns, questions, or
circumstances with me in a timely manner. I will do my very best to be transparent with you, and
I hope you will similarly be transparent with me as we navigate this course together. I am more
than willing to accommodate your needs as best I can, but I can only do so if you communicate
with me. Know that I am easily available via e-mail, text, or phone call, as well as in person
before/after class and in office hours.
                                          ASSESSMENTS
         Points                             Assignment                                           Due Date
       30 points                   Class Attendance/Participation                                 Ongoing
       30 points                    Anti-Bias Journal Entries (2)                              Ongoing before
                                                                                             5/9/19 at 11:59 pm
       15 points                     Educational Autobiography                                    3/14/19
       25 points                             Final Paper                                          5/14/19
                     Grade          Percentage          Grade                 Percentage
                       A             94–100%                C+                   77–79%
                       A−             90–93%                C                    73–76%
                       B+             87–89%                C−                   70–72%
                       B              83–86%                F                     < 70%
                       B−             80–82%         *Traditional rounding principles apply.
  Class Attendance/Participation (15 classes each worth 2 points = 30 points)
  The success of this course depends on the extent to which you attend to and participate in all
  class sessions and activities. Timely and consistent attendance of entire class sessions is
  critical for your own learning and the learning of your classmates. The class also relies on your
  thoughtful and active engagement in small/large group discussions. This requires that prior to
  class meetings, you will have read and critically considered the class readings and other
  assignment materials. For this reason, please bring all assigned readings to class.
  Your attendance and participation for each class session is worth two points. When you miss
  a session, these points will be deducted from your course grade. If you are late to two classes,
  this will be considered an additional absence and two points will be deducted from your grade
  accordingly. It is understood, however, that over the course of the semester a situation may
  arise that prohibits your attendance or causes tardiness. Please communicate such situations
  in advance to avoid any penalty and to build your professional practice. Communicating your
  needs is an important aspect of your professionalism as a teacher.
  Due: Ongoing
                                                   4
Park, S. (2019)


 Anti-Bias Journal Entries (2 entries each worth 15 points = 30 points)
 Bias is all around us. It takes intentional observation and critical thinking for us to be aware of
 our own biases and of how bias impacts all of us in our society. This is especially important as
 teachers of culturally and linguistically diverse learners with disabilities – students who are
 particularly vulnerable to systemic bias. In this class, we will develop critical lenses necessary
 for us to engage in anti-bias thinking and practice. You will submit two 5-8 page journal
 entries reflecting on two different themes we discuss in class and how they manifest in your
 school placements. Your journal entries should draw on course materials and discussions.
 Below are some questions you might consider addressing in your journal entry:
           •   How does your theme of choice manifests in the schools/classrooms you observe?
               How does it impact teaching and learning in your view?
           •   Have you observed specific instances of bias related to your theme of choice?
               AND/OR have you observed educators engaging in anti-bias practices related to
               the theme?
           •   How might you as a teacher address the theme and engage in anti-bias practices?
           •   Any lingering questions or thoughts?
           •   Be sure to make clear connections to course readings and discussions
 Due: You can submit your journal entries at any point throughout the semester before 5/9/19
 at 11:59 PM, but it must be after we’ve discussed your theme of choice (e.g., a journal entry
 discussing biases or anti-bias practices related to immigration status should be submitted after
 we discuss immigration).
 Educational Autobiography (15 points)
 You will write a 5-8 page educational autobiography in which you reflect on your life
 experience as it relates to the topics and ideas discussed in the course. You will explore the
 relationship between sociocultural factors, your identity, and school experiences. To the extent
 you are comfortable, you should address how you identify yourself (e.g., race, class, gender,
 religion, etc.), the kinds of schools you attended (e.g., public, private, predominantly white,
 predominantly students of color, bilingual, etc.), and what your experiences were like in these
 school settings (e.g., the kinds of learning experiences you had, your relationship with
 faculty/staff as well as with your peers, and how your own sociocultural background may have
 contributed to your schooling experiences). The purpose of this assignment is for us to
 critically examine our educational trajectories and to place our stories in the wider socio-
 political, cultural, and historical contexts in which we live.
 Due: Thursday, March 14th at 11:59 PM
                                                   5
Park, S. (2019)


 Final Paper: A Deeper Dive into Sociocultural Influences on Learning (25 points)
 Pick a sociocultural influence on learning that is of interest to you. This can be a topic we
 explored in class, or it can be an area that we did not have time to investigate. You will submit
 a 10-14 page final paper that includes the following sections:
 What is it and Why it Matters (3-4 pages)
     •   What is the sociocultural influence on learning that you selected? How is it defined in
         the scholarly literature? How do you personally define this sociocultural factor?
     •   What is the socio-political and historical role that this factor has played in schools,
         specifically for students with special needs?
     •   Why should special education teachers be aware of this factor? What impact does it
         have on learning and on the school system? How does it intersect with disability?
 Personal Experience (2-3 pages)
     •   What has your experience been with this sociocultural factor in your own life
         experience?
     •   What has your experience been with this factor in your placements/field observations?
         How have you seen this factor influence learning for students? How have you observed
         faculty/staff address (or not address) this factor?
 Applying it to Your Classroom (3-4 pages)
     •   How do you plan to address this factor in your own work with culturally and
         linguistically diverse students with disabilities and their families? What specific
         frameworks and approaches will you draw from?
     •   Consider a variety of aspects of your classroom including a) interactions with students,
         b) norms and classroom climate, c) curricular materials and activities, d) parent
         communication and collaboration, e) specific topics you may want to integrate into
         lessons, f) organization of the physical space, g) school-community connections, etc.
 Personal Reflection (2-3 pages)
     •   How has your thinking about sociocultural influences on learning changed over the
         course of the semester? What has stayed the same for you?
     •   How do the personal shifts you’ve made impact your views on the sociocultural factor
         you chose to explore for this paper?
 At a minimum, you must include five scholarly references in your paper. These can include
 course readings or other works that you find.
 Due: Tuesday, May 14th at 12:00 PM (noon)
                                                  6
Park, S. (2019)


Formatting: All assignments should be typed in 12-point font and double spaced. Please submit
all assignments on Canvas. Any citations should follow the American Psychological Association
(6th Edition) format.
Grading: All assignments will be graded as complete or incomplete. You will receive extensive,
qualitative feedback on each assignment. Students will not be able to receive a grade for the class
until all assignments are completed. This means that the student has 1) produced an assignment
that meets all guidelines and criteria outlined in the syllabus as well as discussed in class, and 2)
submitted the completed assignment on Canvas. If a student submits an assignment that does not
meet the guidelines/criteria, then that student will receive an incomplete and will be asked to
revise and resubmit the assignment. Students will also, of course, receive an incomplete if the
assignment is not submitted at all.
I understand that life happens and that there may be situations in which it is difficult to submit
assignments that you feel reflect your best work by the dates/times they are due. In such cases, I
am more than happy to work with you on developing a plan for submitting assignments that you
feel proud of on an alternative timeline. Please communicate with me in advance. This will allow
us to avoid any unexpected surprises and unnecessary stress.
Late assignments (based on the due date or the alternate submission date we agree upon) will be
marked down 2 points for each day they are late.
A detailed description of each assignment is provided on the following pages.
                                                   7
Park, S. (2019)


                                         WEEKLY SCHEDULE
 #    Date          Main Topic(s)                    Readings                 Assignments Due
                                          Syllabus – bring questions!
                                          On Point (2005) – Cultural
 1    1/24   Introduction to course       Identity and Teaching
                                          Grant & Sleeter (2004) –
                                          Race, Class, Gender, and
                                          Disability in the Classroom
                                          McIntosh (1989) – Unpacking
                                          the Invisible Knapsack
 2    1/31   Our families, our cultures,
             our identities               Britto (2008) – Who Am I?
                                          Ethnic Identity Formation of
                                          Arab Muslim Children
                                          Johnson (2018) – Introduction
                                          and Ch. 1 in Privilege, Power,
 3     2/7   Equity, social justice, and
                                          and Difference
             bias in schools
                                          Pollack (2012) – Unpacking
                                          Everyday Teacher Talk
                                          Connor (2006) – Michael’s       Optional anti-bias journal
                                          Story
 4    2/14   Intersectionality
                                          This American Life (10/20/17)
                                          – “Expect Delays” Act 3
                                          Tatum (1997) – Defining         Optional anti-bias journal
                                          Racism
 5    2/21   Race and disability
                                          Blanchett (2006) –
                                          Disproportionate
                                          Representation
                                                                          Optional anti-bias journal
 6    2/28   Immigration and disability   Valenzuela (1999) Subtractive
                                          Schooling
                                          Ruiz et al. (2002) – Bilingual  Optional anti-bias journal
                                          Special Education Classroom
 7     3/7   Language status and
             disability                   Thompson (2015) –
                                          Questioning the Long Term
                                          English Learner Label
                                          Lareau (2011) – Unequal         Educational Autobiography
             Socioeconomic status and     Childhoods Ch. 1 & 13
 8    3/14                                                                Optional anti-bias journal
             disability                   Park et al. (2002) – Impacts of
                                          Poverty on Quality of Life
                                                  8
Park, S. (2019)


      3/21   NO CLASS – SPRING BREAK
                                             Blanks & Smith (2009) –         Optional anti-bias journal
                                             Multiculturalism, Religion, and
  9   3/28   Religion and disability         Disability
                                             Wertheimer (2015) – Public
                                             Schools Shouldn’t Preach
                                             Annamma (2018) – Pedagogy       Optional anti-bias journal
                                             of Pathologization
 10    4/4   Gender, sexuality, and
             disability                      Kuklin (2014) – Jessy from
                                             Beyond Magenta
             Teaching culturally and         Ladson-Billings (2009) –        Optional anti-bias journal
 11   4/11   linguistically diverse learners Dreamkeepers
             with disabilities (Part 1)
                                             Thorp & Sánchez (n.d.) –        Optional anti-bias journal
                                             Why Address Cultural &
             Teaching culturally and
                                             Linguistic Diversity
             linguistically diverse learners
 12   4/18   with disabilities (Part 2)      Vascellaro (2011) – Out of the
                                             Classroom and Into the World
                                             Ch. 1
                                             Park et al. (2001) – Quality of Optional anti-bias journal
             Partnering with diverse         Partnerships
 13   4/25
             families (Part 1)               Riojas-Cortez (2011) –
                                             Culture, Play, and Family
                                             Harry (2008) – Collaboration    Optional anti-bias journal
             Partnering with diverse         with CLD Families
 14    5/2
             families (Part 2)
                                             Lo (2012) – Demystifying the
                                             IEP Process
                                             Delpit (2001) – “Skin Deep”     Final Paper due Tuesday,
                                             Learning                        May 14th at 12 pm (noon)
 15    5/9   Reflection and celebration
                                             NAEYC (2010) – What is
                                             Anti-Bias Education?
                                                     9
Park, S. (2019)


                                    UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Religious Holy Days
UT Austin policy requires that you notify instructors of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. We will together develop a plan for
making up work if you must miss a class to observe a religious holy day, or for submitting
assignments at a date different than the one listed in the syllabus.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
      • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
      • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
          accessible
      • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
         “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
         values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless
it is assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether
collaboration is encouraged or not. Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are
not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you
will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the
course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be
found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                  10
Park, S. (2019)


                                  UNIVERSITY RESOURCES
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT
student, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to
improve their writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness
and self-reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric,
consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance
their personal growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
                                                 11
Park, S. (2019)
