                                           Digital Production Art 3-D
                                                       AET 339
                                                         20942
                                   Designing in time for multiple dimensions.
                                 Thinking in malleable units of measurement.
                          We will be designing YOUR ORIGINAL CHARACTER
                                                      CONCEPT
                             Final Output as digital 3D animation and 3D print.
                                                     Spring 2020
                                                      DFA 4.126
                                           T Th 9:30- 11:00 am
Instructor:                 Dax Norman
                            daxnorman@utexas.edu
                            daxnorman.com
Office Hours:               Mondays 11 am-12:30 Pm or by
                            appointment
I. Rationale:
This course simulates the production pipeline of a 3-D digital art studio; Manifesting creative ideas into tangible
reality via 3D modeling, texturing, rigging, animation, lighting, rendering, environment design, and 3D Printing.
Course leads student through design and production pipeline for creating unique digital 3D content.
Course Aims and Objectives:
Aims
This course teaches students to manifest ideas from thought to tangible reality in a digital space. This course
consists of projects focused on the creation of animated 3-D characters and objects, to virtual game environments.
In this semester-long exploration of 3-D digital artistry, one will be able to try on all aspects of the production
pipeline to see which best suits them. Digital production art 3D is an action packed and fun filled sampler of the
exciting world of creating 3D graphics and the myriad potential therein.
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
          •   Understand the similarities and differences between producing animation for a 3-D game versus film
          •   Learn about modular 3D design
          •   Design Movements Unique for 3D character Design
          •   3D Print original character design
          •   Conceptualize characters and environments in both form and function
          •   Create character and environment designs in the form of 3-D digital models
          •   Comprehend the process of rigging, or character setup
                                                            11


          •   Explore texture through multiple approaches to surfacing digital models, including 3D painting, bump
              and specular mapping, as well as procedural texture approaches.
          •   Apply 3-D character animation for use in both rendered video as well as real time game
              environments
          •   Evaluate the relationship between art history and its relationship to the current state of 3 -D digital art
          •   Create a most specific creative 3D project, utilizing the entire 3D production pipeline, for both
              maximum efficiency and maximum output possibilities.
                                        Project(s) intended to prove a thorough understanding of 3D production process
                                                                                  in order to dissolve boundaries between
                                                                                                   games, film, art, design,
                                                                                      to best prepare for a relevant future,
                                                                         controlling production in the age of information.
II. Format and Procedures:
This course will meet twice a week. During the first meeting, there will be a lecture that will include demonstration
along with discussion. During the second meeting of the week, there will be group learning project with discussion.
The in-class projects will review and practice the material covered from the week’s first class meeting. Active
participation in weekly in-class group projects will be a major component of the professionalism and participation
component of student grades for the course that will comprise 20% of the final grade.
                                                            11


 III. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
 through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes,
 communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
      Date                      Main Topic(s)                       Work to do at home                   Evaluation
                                                                  to be completed before class
                 Intro to class and intro to Maya            Download autodesk Maya,                Introduce class and
                 interface.                                  Create sketchfab.com                   begin first project
                 Discuss scope of class as well as           account.
                 goals and expectations.
                 Sketch concept from in class                Build 3D concept from in
                 Demonstration.                              class collab.
                 build and export 3d model.                  .ma = best maya file type
                                                             .fbx= overall best 3D file
01/21, 1/23                                                                 type for export
                 Modeling and Texturing process/                                                    Finish Project 01.
                 overwiew.
                                                             Know difference between                Have character
                 Creating a simple animation with            procedural and file textures.
                                                                                                    design ready for
                 principles.
                                                             You may use either, but know           next Tuesday.
                 including using reference
                                                             their strengths and weaknesses
                 Exporting animation tests via               in reference to your personal
                 playblast, Rendering and output             art production style.
01/28, 01/30                                                 Create animation
                  Discuss modeling concerns for             Create and texture / Environment Modeling
                 animation.                                 model.
                 Project process checkpoint:
                 checkpoint #1                              Must be created with animation/
02/04, 2/06                                                 story in mind.
                 model props for character                   Create textured models for props.       Modeling
                                                             (w/ efficient file texturing, using
                                                             only one map for 3 objects)
02/11, 2/13
                 facial modeling: techniques                 This should be a deconstructed face    Modeling /texturing
                                                            (know what that means and
02/18, 2/20                                                 Why) created as “X” for multiple loops.
                 facial modeling (continued): texturing      UV Mapping. This should not be a        Texturing
                                                             mysterious thing at this point.
                                                             If UV mapping is confusing at this
02/25, 2/27                                                  point, let TA know asap.
                 model and texture continued                 (OUTPUT!)
                                                            Output models for sketchfab             Finish Character
                                                                                                    Development.
03/3, 3/05
                 Modeling and texturing Character            Practice at least 2 types of           Begin Rigging
                 DUE                                         SDK in your project
                 Rigging using set driven keys
03/10, 3/12
                 Spring Break
3/17, 3/19
                 Char. Rigging for loop combos.             Understand SDK. Create sdk.             Rigging /animation
3/24, 3/26
                                                          22


            Animation using your rigged             Rigging / animation output.         Rigging /animation
            character and blend shape process (.FBX!) understand 12 PRINCIPLES
                                                                          of
3/31, 4/02                                          Animation.
            Create Final animation loops.          Create Animation. Understand the     Animation
 4/07, 4/09 Designing loops for interactivity      graph editor. Create specific timing
            Refine animation loops. Add lighting. and  refine
                                                    Refine     animation
                                                            animation      loops.
                                                                        loops.           Animation
            export loops via rendering              Rendering and Post
 4/14, 4/16                                         Production.
                                                                                        Animation
            Work on final project                                                       refinement/
                                                   Work on final project                Rendering
4/21, 4/23
            Final Output and delivery of assets    Deliver Output via UNITY 3D, Final Delivery
            In Class Presentation.                 Maya, Sketchfab, 3d Print            and presentation.
5/05, 5/07
                                                 22


Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to your requests for their feedback)
During this course I will be asking you to give me feedback on your learning in informal as well as formal ways,
including through anonymous surveys about how my teaching strategies are helping or hindering your learning. It’s
very important for me to know your reaction to what we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these
surveys, ensuring that together we can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
IV. My Assumptions
It is my belief that with hard work and a little bit of patience, anyone can be good at 3-D digital art. The learning
curve is slower for some than others, but do not be discouraged and you will get to where you wan t to be. With the
projects we create in this course, I advise students to make something that they can get really excited about. Think
about making short-term goals for your progress, and try to learn a new skill each day. The 3 -D digital art process is
very iterative, in that projects build upon one another, and many steps are repeated ad infinitum. With a fi rm plan in
place, it will be easy to create a road map for success.
Finishing projects is of the utmost importance. We are building bigger things out of all of the parts we constantly
design and implement in this course regularly. Pay attention to cours e announcements and supplementary materials
via canvas. Ask questions, come to office hours.
V. Course Requirements:
          1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                    (a) Expected classroom behavior: take notes, ask many questions, and attend class for the entire
                         duration. Make a solid effort on each project outside of class, so that you may have many
                         questions to contribute to the discussion.
                    (b) Cell phone use, including texting, is unallowable. Keep cell phones stored during the duration
                         of class
                    Religious Holy Days
                    By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
                    the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
                    assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy d ay, I will give you an opportunity to
                    complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
          2. Course Readings/Materials:
                    Recommended Textbooks:
                    (a) Introducing Autodesk Maya 2018: Autodesk Official Press, by Dariush Derakhshani. 1 st
                         Edition. ISBN: 9781119059639
                    (b) Unity in Action: MultiplatformGame Development in C#,
                    By Joseph Hocking. ISBN: 9781617292323
                    (c)Cartoon Animation, by Preston Blair. ISBN: 9781560100843
                    (b) Supplies needed: Laptop computer capable of running Autodesk Maya and Unity.
                    (c) Other supplies: Jump Drive for external storage and data backup. A mouse for your laptop, as
                    the 3D software will be much slower to use without one.
                    (d) To download free student version of Maya and Unity:
                    http://www.autodesk.com/education/free-software/maya
                    http://unity3d.com/
                    (e) URL for course website: http://aet326.tumblr.com/
                    (f) Sketchfab.com → create an account for your class process blog
                                                              33


3. Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
        (a) Finished Assignments should be posted to canvas in the requested format before 9:00 AM on
               the Due Date
        (b) Late assignments will be lose 10 points for the first day late, 20 points if 2 days late, 40
               points off if 3 days late, and so on, with point subtraction doubling for each day of lateness
        (c) Preliminary information on papers or projects, with due dates, shall be posted to canvas on
               the date of assignment
                                                  33


                       (d) List of assignments that will impact the final grade: (projects include presentation component)
  -Attendance
  -Abstract animation
  -Final project deliverable
  -Environment A ssets (incl. textures)
  -Character Model Assets (incl. textures)
  -Character Prop Assets (incl. textures)
  -Character Animation
  -Sketchfab Presentation
                        (e) This course will consist of projects. Each of these projects in of itself represents at least one
                       aspect of the 3D digital production ART pipeline, and builds upon the last, culminating in a
                       finished multimedia work. (optimized for future output)
                       (f) Any changes in the syllabus, such as project due dates, will be announced in class as well as
                       on canvas.
              4. Use of Canvas in class
                     In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected
                     access at http://canvas.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
                     online, to post grades, and to submit assignments. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS
                     Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
   VI. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
                       The following are equally
                       weighted components of your final
                       grade:
  -Attendance:
  -Abstract animation:
  -Final project deliverable:
  -Environment Assets (incl. textures) :
  -Character Model Assets (incl. textures) :
  -Character Prop Assets (incl. textures) :
  -Character Animation :
  -Sketchfab Presentation: includes documentation and presentation of work.
                       Attendance, Professionalism and Participation (20%):-→
                       MISSING MORE THAN 3 CLASSES will result in an AUTOMATIC ZERO for this grade.
                       It is important that you finish all projects. I will accept resubmissions for project as long as
                       original was turned in on time.
    Letter Grade             Percentage
A                            93%-100%
                                                                  44


A-                         90%-92%
B+                         87%-89%
B                          83%-86%
B-                         80%-82%
C+                         77%-79%
C                          73%-76%
C-                         70%-72%
D+                         67%-69%
D                          60%-66%
F                          0%-59%
   IX. Academic Integrity
   University of Texas Honor Code
   The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
   opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these valu es through integrity,
   honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
   X. Other University Notices and Policies
    Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
       • All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
            student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students
            are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with Universit y-related
            communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
            mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions
                                                               44


          for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic acc ommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details
of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition or
diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.)
     ▪▪   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
          instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
          etc.).
     ▪▪   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
          required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
          transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     ▪▪   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
          reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
          http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
 discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
 among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
 Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512 -232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
   undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
   dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than
   that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
 Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm
 is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
          ▪▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
               exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
          ▪▪ If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
          ▪▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                     ❖❖ ❖❖     ❖❖     ❖❖
                                                            55


66