AFR 372G                                                                       Spring 2019
Belkis Ayón, La cena (The Supper), 1991. Collograph. Collection of the Belkis Ayón Estate.
                                   Afro-Latin America
                         African and African Diaspora Studies 372G
                                     HIS 350L, LAS 366
                                          Spring 2019
Instructor: Dr. Mónica A. Jiménez
                                COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course examines the historical experiences of people of African descent in Latin America
and the Caribbean (often called “Afro-Latin America”). The guiding questions of this course
are: What is Afro-Latin America? Where is it? How can we write the histories of African
descended peoples in the region we call “Latin America”? Can the histories of Africans and
their descendants be contained within the confines of “nation”?
Topics we will explore include: the particularities of slavery in the Americas, the Haitian
Revolution and its impact on articulations of race and nation in the region, debates on “racial
democracy,” as well as, the relationship between gender, race, and empire.
This course carries the Global Cultures, Writing and Independent Inquiry flags.
Learning Goals
The course has a three-fold objective:
                                               1


AFR 372G                                                                           Spring 2019
        1) To deepen our understanding of the diverse histories of Africans and their
        descendants in the region.
        2) To continually probe the ongoing tension between national and transnational
        processes that is embedded in much of this scholarship.
        3) To explore alternative frameworks that might enhance our understanding of the
        histories of people of African descent in the region.
Students will gain a sense of historical processes of change over time, and a broad
methodology for assessing how events and experiences influence the choices people make,
what they believe is possible, and how these inform human activity today. Through this
engagement students will strengthen analytical and critical thinking skills, while also developing
and deepening their reading comprehension and writing skills.
Grade Breakdown
Active Class Participation                       20%
2 Response Papers – (15% each)                   30%
RESEARCH PROJECTS                                50%
    • Consultation and planning (10%)
    • Paper (25%)
    • Presentations (15%)
Expectations and Assignments:
ATTENDANCE AND ACTIVE CLASS PARTICIPATION (20%): The success of this
course requires your consistent presence in class as well as your contribution to class
discussion.
Each student is expected to attend class, participate in discussions, and complete all reading
and writing assignments by the deadlines indicated in this syllabus or any written addenda.
Class discussions are an important component and students will be graded on their
participation, contributions to discussions and engagement with their peers.
The first three absences do not affect your grade. The fourth unexcused absence and every
one thereafter will deduct 2 points (out of the 20 possible) from the attendance grade in the
class. You are responsible for keeping track of your absences.
Cell phone use will not be tolerated in class. Please keep your cellphone silenced and in
your pocket or bag. If you are texting in class, I will ask you to leave and you will be counted
absent for that day.
RESPONSE PAPERS (30%): Students are required to turn in two thoughtful 3-page reading
responses to the weekly readings.
Reading responses should be turned in via Canvas by 3:30 pm on Thursday of the week they
are due. Students will have rotating due dates so that only 15 students will turn in papers on
any particular week. I will assign you due dates for your individual response papers.
                                                2


AFR 372G                                                                       Spring 2019
RESEARCH PROJECTS – (50%)
    • Consultation and annotated bibliography (10%)
    • Paper (25%)
    • Presentations (15%)
Students will write a 10-page research paper, using primary sources and centered on a topic
of your choice. Your final paper will entail a three-step process: 1) A consultation with the
professor on your potential paper topic and sources, 2) An abstract with an annotated
bibliography, and 3) a 5-7 minute in class presentation at the conclusion of the semester.
Final papers are due via Canvas on Monday, May 20th by Midnight.
EXTRA CREDIT: There will be two opportunities to earn extra credit this semester:
    1) Attend the filming of season 7 of Blackademics Television on February 19 at 6:30 pm,
        or
    2) Attend the Black Studies @ 50: 1968/1969 conference on March 15.
To earn credit you must turn in a two-page review of the event you chose to attend. These are
due any time before the last day of the semester. Reviews should be turned in via Canvas.
Required Books:
    • Alejandro de la Fuente and George Andrews, eds. Afro Latin American Studies: An
        Introduction. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018). Available electronically
        via UT library.
    • M. NourbeSe Philip, Zong! (Weslayan: Wesleyan University Press, 2008). Available
        electronically via UT library.
    • George Reid Andrews, Afro Latin America, 1800-2000, (New York: Oxford University
        Press, 2004). Available electronically via UT library.
    • George Reid Andrews, Afro-Latin America: Black Lives, 1600-2000 (Cambridge: Harvard
        University Press, 2016). Available electronically via UT library
    • Lara Putnam, Radical Moves: Caribbean Migrants and the Politics of Race in the Jazz Age
        (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina, 2014). Available electronically via UT
        library.
    • Miriam Jiménez Román and Juan Flores, eds. The Afro-Latin@ reader: History and Culture
        in the United States (Durham: Duke University Press, 2010). Available electronically
        via UT library.
All other readings will be available on Canvas.
                                        Course Schedule
                                          Week One
January 22 Introduction and Course Overview.
                                                3


AFR 372G                                                                         Spring 2019
January 24, Discussion – What and Where is Afro-Latin America?
De la Fuente and Andrews, “The Making of a Field: Afro-Latin American Studies” in Afro-
Latin American Studies.
                                          Week Two
January 29, Legacies of Slavery
Saidiya Hartman, Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along the Atlantic Slave Route, 1-18; 49-100.
January 31, Slavery in Latin America
Roquinaldo Ferrieria and Tatiana Seijas, “The Slave Trade to Latin America: A
Historiographical Assessment” in Afro-Latin American Studies.
                                         Week Three
February 5, Slave Mathematics: The case of the Zong
M. NourbeSe Philip, Zong!
This is a book of poetry, please read through the entire book focusing in particular on pgs.
183-212.
February 7, In the Wake of Slavery
Christina Sharpe, “Black Studies in the Wake”
                                          Week Four
February 12, Haiti and the Haitian Revolution
Laurent Dubois, “The Haitian Revolution”
February 14, Haiti: The Birth of Racial Capitalism
Liliana Obregón, “Empire, Racial Capitalism and International Law: The Case of Manumitted
Haiti and the Recognition Debt”
                                          Week Five
February 19,
No Class – Individual Student Meetings
Extra Credit Opportunity: Attend Blackademics Television Season 7 live recording, 6:30 pm at
KLRU Studio 6A, Moody College of Communications.
February 21, Slave Revolts and Liberation Struggles
Andrews, Afro Latin America, 1800-2000. Chapters 2, “ ‘An Exterminating Bolt of Lightening:’
The Wars of Freedom, 1810-1890”
Peter Blanchard, “The Language of Liberation: Slave Voices in the Wars of Independence.”
                                          Week Six
February 26, Afro-Latinos and the Nation
Andrews, Afro Latin America, 1800-2000, Chapter 3, “ ‘Our New Citizens, the Blacks:’ The
Politics of Freedom, 1810-1890.”
February 28,
Andrews, Afro-Latin America: Black Lives, 1600-2000, Chapter 2, “On Counting and Not
Counting”
                                               4


AFR 372G                                                                    Spring 2019
                                        Week Seven
March 5, Black Thought in Flux
Frank A. Guridy and Juliet Hooker, “Currents in Afro-Latin American Political and Social
Thought.” In de la Fuente and Andrews, Afro Latin American Studies
March 7, Colonialism and Black Puerto Ricans
José I. Fusté, “Unsettling Citizenship/Circumventing Sovereignty: Reexamining the
Quandaries of Contemporary Anti-colonialism in the United States through Black Puerto
Rican Antiracist Thought.”
                                        Week Eight
March 12, Transnational Flows – Garvey, the UNIA, and People on the Move
Ronald Harpelle – “Crosscurrents in the Western Caribbean: Marcus Garvey and the UNIA
in Central America.”
March 14,
Video: “Marcus Garvey, Look for Me in the Whirlwind”
March 15,
Extra Credit Opportunity – Attend “Black Studies @ 50: 1968/1969” Conference
                      Week Nine – NO CLASS/SPRING BREAK
March 19
March 21
                                         Week Ten
March 26, Race, Empire and Migration in the 20th Century Caribbean
Lara Putnam, Radical Moves, Introduction.
March 28
Lara Putnam, Radical Moves, Chapter 1: “Migrants’ Routes, Ties, and Role in Empire, 1850s–
1920s”
                                       Week Eleven
April 2, Afro- Mexico
Laura A. Lewis, “Blacks, Black Indians, Afromexicans: The Dynamics of Race, Nation,
and Identity in a Mexican Moreno Community.”
April 4
Bobby Vaughn, “Afro-Mexico: Blacks, Indígenas, Politics, and the Greater Diaspora”
                                       Week Twelve
April 9, The Persistence of Anti-Blackness in Latin America: Brazil
                                              5


AFR 372G                                                                    Spring 2019
Jaime Amparo Alves, “From Necropolis to Blackpolis: Necropolitical Governance and Black
Spatial Praxis in São Paulo, Brazil”
Christen Smith, “Battling Anti-Black Genocide in Brazil,” NACLA Report on the Americas,
49:1 (2017).
Sérgio Ramalho, “Who Killed Marielle Franco? An Ex-Rio de Janeiro Cop With Ties To
Organized Crime, Say Six Witnesses In Police Report.”
April 11, No Class
Attend Institute for Historical Studies conference: “Genealogies of Freedom.”
                                         Week Thirteen
April 16, The Persistence of Anti-Blackness in Latin America: Hispañola
Ana-Maurine Lara, “A Smarting Wound: Afro-Dominicanidad and the Fight against
Ultranationalism in the Dominican Republic.”
April 18,
Video: Si bondye vle, Yuli/God Willing, Yuli
                                         Week Fourteen
April 23, Afro Latinos in the United States
Jesse Hoffnung-Garskoff, “The Migrations of Arturo Schomburg: On Being Antillano, Negro,
and Puerto Rican in New York, 1891-1938.”
April 25
Several selections from The Afro Latin@ Reader:
    • Aida Lambert: “We are black too: experiences of a Honduran Garifuna.”
    • Maria Rosario Jackson: “Profile of an Afro-Latina: black, Mexican, both.”
    • Antonio Lopez: “Enrique Patterson: Black Cuban intellectual in Cuban Miami.”
    • Eduardo Bonilla-Silva: “Reflections about Race by a Negrito Acomplejao”
                                          Week Fifteen
April 30, Final Presentations
May 2, Final Presentations
                                         Week Sixteen
May 7, Final Presentations
May 9, Final Presentations and Wrap Up
May 20 – Final Papers Due via Canvas by Midnight
                                               6
