                                                                                             1
BA 324                   Introduction to Business Communication                Summer 1 2020
                   Note: Syllabus Applies ONLY to Piloted BA 324 Section 70744
Instructor Info                                                             Sections
Dr. Robert Carroll                                            70744/MTWTh 10-12 pm/Zoom
(Robert.Carroll@mccombs.utexas.edu)
Office: My living room
Office Hours: T/Th 12- 1pm and by appointment
        Graders: David Cheuvront: davidcheuvront@utexas.edu
                  Office Hours: M 5-7 pm
Please Note: While this is a piloted version of a new BA 324 course, there are Master
Syllabus policies that apply to all sections (regardless of instructor). Assignments, dates,
and readings are subject to change.
Prerequisites
Required classes:               English 603A, Rhetoric and Writing 306, 306Q, 309K, or
                                Tutorial Course 603A, and credit or registration for BA
                                101H (or 102H), 101S, or 101T
Primary Required Textbooks
HBR Guide to Better Business Writing by Bryan A. Garner
HBR Guide to Persuasive Presentations by Nancy Duarte
Mission Statement
Designed to help students develop strategic business communication skills, including
effective oral, written, and digital communication, across diverse types of audiences,
presentations, and documents. An emphasis on audience analysis, basic communication
theory, interpersonal communication, and teamwork will prepare students to create
positive change in their respective fields.
Course Objectives
Learning Objectives:
    •   Communicate effectively with a range of audiences (large and small, formal and
        informal, technical and non-technical) and in a range of formats (written, spoken,
        and technologically mediated).
    •   Work productively in a team-based setting, both in-person and digitally.
    •   Research, evaluate, and present data in a clear and compelling manner.
    •   Develop effective interpersonal and intercultural communication skills.
    •   Give, receive, and use feedback to craft strategic and effective business
        communication.


                                                                                         2
Key Content Areas, Core Skills, & Required Assignments
All BA 324 assignments focus on three key content areas (see below) that reflect the
mission and objectives of the course. Each area represents a fixed percentage of course
assignments. In two areas, a minimum number of specific assignments are required for all
sections of the course. Students should review the required assignments for their
instructor’s BA 324 section.
Written Communication (50 percent), including
    •   Short writing assignments and exercises (e.g., emails, reflections, summaries,
        etc.).
    •   One business research report or proposal
    •   Agendas, work plans, PowerPoint slides, outlines, etc.
Oral Communication (25 percent), including
    •   One group research presentation
    •   One individual assignment
Professional Development (25 percent), including
    •   Class participation and professional conduct
    •   Other assignments (written or oral) requiring analysis and integration of course
        concepts
    •   Reflections on skills and course activities
Grading Scale & Policies for Piloted BA 324/BA 324H Sections
All Piloted BA 324 and BA 324H sections use the same plus/minus grading scale to
determine students’ final course grades (see below):
    A 564 and above
    A- 540-563.9
    B+ 528-539.9
    B 504-527.9
    B- 480-503.9
    C+ 468-479.9
    C 444-467.9
    C- 420-443.9
    D+ 408-419.9
    D 384-407.9
    D- 360-383.9
    F 359.9 and below


                                                                                                   3
Assignment Grade Questions
If you do not understand why you earned a specific grade on any assignment, please discuss the
grade with your instructor during office hours. Unless you suspect a clerical or data entry error,
please wait at least 24 hours after receiving your grade (but no more than one week) to discuss
grading questions with your instructor.
Assignment Re-Grade Restrictions
If you believe that your graded work received too little credit, you may submit it for a re-grade
under the following conditions. Please do not expect a grade change.
    1. All re-grade requests must be submitted with a clear, written statement that explains why
        you believe the original grade was incorrect. Any attempt to request a re-grade in person
        will be politely denied. Any requests that are not professional will be denied.
    2. All requests for re-grades must be submitted within one calendar week of when the
        graded work was returned.
    3. Your instructor will re-grade the entire assignment (not just your area of concern), and if
        the instructor missed any issues, additional points will be deducted. Thus, your grade can
        go up or down on a re-grade.
Final Grade Questions
To make your desired final grade in this course, you must produce work that is high-quality and
technically clean in all three key content areas. Please note that grades reflect your outputs and
outcomes (i.e., deliverables), not your hard work or improvement (i.e., effort).
The final course grade is not open for discussion or negotiation. Any lobbying efforts (e.g.,
asking for a higher grade because you want or need one) do not demonstrate an audience-
centered approach to communication and will not be successful. No additional assignments or
extra credit are offered to individual students. Final grades will not be rounded up.
Writing Flag Designation (Substantial Writing Component Course)
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also revise one or more assignments, and
you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the
Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Instructor Communications
Instructors use email and Canvas to communicate with students. Students are responsible for
checking their university-registered email accounts and Canvas regularly. Emails and
announcements from instructors contain important information about the course. Never send an
email when emotional, as this only damages your professional relationship with your instructor.


                                                                                                     4
Assignment Submission & Late Work Policies
All BA 324 assignments are due before the beginning of class (unless your instructor states
otherwise). Assignments submitted later than five minutes after the deadline are subject to a 20-
percent deduction. Late assignments will not be accepted after the beginning of the next class.
If you fail to follow your instructor's submission instructions for an assignment (Canvas, TurnItIn,
hard copy, etc.), your grade may be reduced according your instructor’s late work policy.
Attendance Policies
Since BA 324 teaches skills that require consistent practice and feedback, regular class attendance and
active participation are required. Lecturers reserve the right to deduct points from your final grade for
both excess late arrivals and absences.
Students with personal or family emergencies should immediately register their situation
with UT’s Student Emergency Services (SES) by calling 512-471-5017. Your instructor can
only grant requests for assignment extensions, modifications, etc. if your case is verified by SES.
If you are feeling stressed, overwhelmed, or otherwise in need of help, please consider utilizing
these resources (in addition to talking to your professor):
    •   Your BBA Academic Advisor
    •   McCombs Counselor In-Residence: Tony LeBlanc (512) 232-3489
    •   University Mental Health Services: (512) 471-3515
Class Absences
For MTWTh classes, you may miss three classes—for any reason—without penalty. There are
no excused or unexcused absences in BA 324. You must log on to Zoom and stay the entire
time (unless noted by your instructor). Leaving early will result in an absence.
For each absence after the maximum (three for MTWTh), you will receive a one-percent
deduction (six points) per absence from your final grade. For example, if you miss four classes,
six points will be deducted from your final grade.
Instructors reserve the right to fail students who miss more than three classes. A lack of late
arrivals cannot be used to offset absences.
Late Arrivals
If you arrive after the instructor has begun class, you are considered late. After two late arrivals
for MTWTh classes you will receive a one-percent deduction (six points) per late arrival from
your final grade.
Notification Regarding BBA Recruiting Conflicts (from Dr. David Platt)
Conflicts occasionally arise between classes and the search for employment. We understand how
important the job search process is to you, and McCombs provides many resources in support of
career exploration and search. However, UT is first and foremost an educational institution and
your BBA degree will be the credential that certifies your education. As such, education will take
precedent whenever such a conflict arises.


                                                                                                     5
All companies that recruit at McCombs are informed of this fact. Should a conflict arise, we
recommend that you inform the company that an academic conflict exists and request an
accommodation, and/or contact BBA Career Services and request their assistance.
Note that while we do have influence with the companies that recruit at McCombs, not all
conflicts can be resolved and we have little or no influence with companies that do not recruit
through the Recruit McCombs system.
University Policies Relevant to BA 324
Diversity & Inclusion
It is the intent of all BA 324 instructors that students from all diverse backgrounds and
perspectives be well served by this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the
diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a
resource, strength, and benefit to all students. Please talk to your lecturer about any concerns.
Services for Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 512-471-6259 or 471-6441 (TTY).
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify your instructor of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an exam or
quiz, an assignment, or a project to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. Review this
policy at http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-
procedures/attendance/.
Scholastic Dishonesty (Please Read Carefully)
Scholastic dishonesty is defined by the University as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to give unfair academic
advantage to the student or the attempt to commit such an act. This includes submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the
instructor and providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. For additional information, see the Dean of
students’ website and University General Information Catalog at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ and http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, which you can review at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
     •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
         evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
         requires exiting and assembling outside.


                                                                                                    6
    •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing
        during the first week of class.
    •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    •   Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by one of the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
        Services office.
    •   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): Call 512-232-5050 or visit
        https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php.
    •   Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Sexual Harassment Reporting
Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), which went into effect as of January 1, 2020, is a Texas State Law that
requires all employees (both faculty and staff) at a public or private post-secondary institution to
promptly report any knowledge of any incidents of sexual assault, sexual harassment, dating
violence, or stalking “committed by or against a person who was a student enrolled at or an
employee of the institution at the time of the incident". Please note that both the instructor and
the TA for this class are mandatory reporters and MUST share with the Title IX office any
information about sexual harassment/assault shared with us by a student whether in-person or as
part of a journal or other class assignment. Note that a report to the Title IX office does not
obligate a victim to take any action, but this type of information CANNOT be kept strictly
confidential except when shared with designated confidential employees. A confidential
employee is someone a student can go to and talk about a Title IX matter without triggering that
employee to have to report the situation to have it automatically investigated. A list of
confidential employees is available on the Title IX website.
Email Policies
All of us will try to respond to class-related emails within one business day. (Note: U.S.
business days are traditionally Monday through Friday, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.) In addition, follow
these guidelines when emailing each other, your instructor, and your grader:
    •   Since there are no excused absences, please do not email your instructor about an
        absence unless you’ll be missing a deadline or another deliverable.
    •   If you are missing a deadline or deliverable due to absence (e.g., you get sick on
        presentation day), register your issue with SES immediately and email your instructor
        ASAP.
    •   Please do not include specific grade(s) in an email. We cannot email about specific
        grades without violating FERPA data security regulations.


                                                                                   7
           Course Assignments & Point Value
Written Communication: 300 pts
   • Email Assignment Draft                              25 pts         6/11
   • Email Assignment Final                              25 pts         6/14
   • Mid-Semester Progress Report Email                  10 pts         6/21
   • Business Research Quiz                              10 pts         6/22
   • APA Mastery Assignment                              10 pts         6/22
   • White Paper Pitch (Written Version)*                50 pts         6/23
   • “Talk Like TED” Polished Draft + Peer Review        20 pts         6/25
   • “Talk Like TED” Talk Outline and References         25 pts         6/29
   • “Talk Like TED” Talk Slide Deck                     25 pts         6/29
   • White Paper Polished Draft + Peer Review            20 pts         7/7
   • White Paper Visual Aid*                             25 pts         7/8
   • Final White Paper*                                  50 pts         7/8
   • Course Wrap Up                                      5 pts          7/9
Oral Communication: 150 pts
   • The Airport Test                                    25 pts         6/9
   • White Paper Pitch*                                  25 pts         6/23
   • “Talk Like TED” Informative Presentation            50 pts         6/29
   • White Paper Presentation*                           50 pts         7/8
Professional Development: 150 pts
   • Pre-Semester Skills Assessment                      10 pts         6/7
   • Module 2 Activity Reflections (2 @ 25 pts)          50 pts         6/21
   • Participation Self Evaluation                       50 pts         7/9
   • Capstone Team Performance Review                    30 pts         7/9
   • Post-Semester Skills Assessment                     10 pts         7/9
                                       Total 600 pts
           NOTE: All grades are posted on CANVAS. There is no curve in this class.
                                    (*= team submission)
          A: 94 and above             B-: 80-83.9           D+: 68-69.9
          A-: 90-93.9                 C+: 78-79.9           D: 64-67.9
          B+: 88-89.9                 C: 74-77.9            D-: 60-63.9
          B: 84-87.9                  C-: 70-73.9           F: 59.9 and below


                                                                                                8
                Course Assignment Descriptions
                                      Written Communication
Pre-Semester Skills Assessment: Complete a Qualtrics/Canvas quiz over the syllabus as well as
questions about your current communication skills.
Email Assignment: Write a short cold-call email to a potential employer inquiring about a job or
internship and request information.
Business Research Module & Quiz/APA Mastery: Complete the modules and quiz on Canvas
over best research practices and how to properly cite information
Mid Semester Progress Report and Temperature Check: Write a professional email about
your growth in the course, goals for the remainder of the semester, and updates on current work
projects. Complete a short Qualtrics survey about how the semester is progressing.
White Paper Pitch: Create a work plan for completing the White Paper Project with your team.
You should have fully developed ideas and outlines.
Polished Draft “Talk Like TED” Talk Outline, Slide Deck, & APA References + Peer
Review: Upload a polished draft of your “Talk Like TED” Talk Deliverables before class.
Review classmates’ drafts and provide substantive feedback during the in-class workshop.
“Talk Like TED” Outline & APA References: Write a formal outline (with APA in-text
citations and a references page) for your “Talk Like TED” Presentation.
“Talk Like TED” Slide Deck: Create a slide deck to accompany your “Talk Like
TED” Presentation.
Polished Draft White Paper Report + Peer Review: Upload a polished draft of your individual
section(s) of the report before class. Review your teammates’ drafts and provide substantive
feedback during the in-class workshop.
White Paper Visual Aid: Create a slide deck to accompany your Capstone Formal Presentation.
White Paper Report: Write a formal team research report that analyzes a recent (less than five
years old) example of an industry or company that is falling behind trends.
Course Wrap Up: Stay Tuned! J
                                        Oral Communication
The Airport Test: Complete a unique take on the elevator pitch/Walk Me Through Your Resume
pitches. This is an all-or-nothing assignment.
“Talk Like TED” Presentation: Give a TED Talk-style informative presentation (in class) on a
topic of your choosing.


                                                                                                  9
White Paper Pitch: As a team, pitch to your chosen company how you will address their issues,
including preliminary research and high level recommendations.
White Paper Presentation: Present your analysis and recommendations from White Paper
report to the class. All team members must speak and only team performance will be evaluated,
similar to real world presentations.
                                     Professional Development
Module 2 Activity Reflections: Complete 2 of 3 reflection topics drawn from in-class activities.
You’ll be asked to reflect on your understanding on diverse and ethical business situations.
Class Preparation & Participation: Throughout the semester, you will be evaluated on your
preparation for and participation during class. For class preparation, please read all assigned
chapters, complete polished drafts, bring your computer on workshop days, etc. For class
participation, please be ready to answer questions, contribute to group discussions, complete all
activities, avoid getting sidetracked during group work, etc.
Team Performance Evaluations: Complete performance evaluations for yourself and each of
your White Paper team members.
Pre- and Post-Semester Assessments: Complete Qualtrics surveys about your time in class.


                                                                                                      10
                            Summer 1 2020 Schedule
                              Date              Format              Topics & Deliverables             Readings
                                                              Welcome to Class; Understanding
                                                               Current Business Needs and Skill
Week 1:              Thursday, June 4, 2020      Lecture                  Reflection
Understanding
Business
Communication
Module                Sunday, June 7, 2020     Deliverable        Pre-Semester Skills Survey
                                                             Building Communication Strengths:     Garner Sections
                                                             Preparing to Sell Yourself and Your    1 & 2; Online
Week 2:               Monday, June 8, 2020       Lecture                     Ideas                    Readings
Understanding
Business
Communication
Module                Tuesday, June 9, 2020  Lab/Deliverable          "The Airport Test"
                                                                                                   Garner Sections
                                                                                                    3 & 4; Duarte
                       Wednesday, June 10,                   Introduction to Digital and Business Section 3; Online
                              2020               Lecture                Writing Styles                Readings
                                                              Revision Process and Email Draft/
                     Thursday, June 11, 2020 Lab/Deliverable  Peer Review; Introduce TED Talks
                      Sunday, June 14, 2020    Deliverable            Email Assignment
                                                                Interpersonal and Intercultural
Week 3:              Monday, June 15, 2020       Lecture                Communication             Online Readings
Working in a Diverse
World Module         Tuesday, June 16, 2020   Lecture/Lab     Conflict and Conflict Management
                       Wednesday, June 17,
                              2020               Lecture        Teamwork; Introduce Capstone      Online Readings
                     Thursday, June 18, 2020      Lab                 Ethics Unwrapped
                                                                  Complete 2 of 3 Reflection
                                                                 Assignments; Mid-Semester
                                                              Progress Email (And Temperature
                      Sunday, June 21, 2020    Deliverable                  Check)


                                                                                                              11
                                                                         Conducting Research and Data      Duarte Sections
                                                                       Evaluation; Business Research Quiz   1 & 2; Online
Week 4:                 Monday, June 22, 2020           Lecture          and APA Mastery Assignment           Readings
Preparing Reports
and Presentations
Module                  Tuesday, June 23, 2020      Lab/Deliverable     Capstone Pitch (Written and Oral)
                                                                                                           Duarte Sections
                         Wednesday, June 24,                            Improving Presentation Skills and   5 & 6; Online
                                2020                    Lecture                Slide Deck Creation            Readings
                                                                          Presentation Practice and Peer
                       Thursday, June 25, 2020      Lab/Deliverable      Reviews of TED Talk Outlines
Week 5:                 Monday, June 29, 2020         Deliverable                   TED Talks
Pitching Yourself and                                                    Crafting Business Solutions and
Your Ideas Module       Tuesday, June 30, 2020          Lecture                      Pitching              Online Readings
                                                                                                           Garner Section 2
                                                                                                           & Duarte Section
                       Wednesday, July 1, 2020          Lecture                 Semester Review               1 Recaps
                        Thursday, July 2, 2020            Lab                    Team Meetings
Week 6:                  Monday, July 6, 2020             Lab                Extended Office Hours
Pitching Yourself and                                                     Peer Reviews of White Paper
Your Ideas Module        Tuesday, July 7, 2020            Lab               Sections/Group Meetings
                       Wednesday, July 8, 2020        Deliverable      White Paper Report and Presentation
                                                                       Post-Mortem/Dr. Carroll's Birthday;
                                                                             Group Evaluations and
                                                                          Professionalism/Participation
                        Thursday, July 9, 2020    Lecture/Deliverables              Reflection
         Final Exam (if needed as make-up): Friday, July 10th from 7-10 pm.
          If we do not need this time, I will let you know later in the semester. Please plan for this just in
                                                           case.
