                Sex, Science, and America
                           AMS 311/WGS 301
                                   Fall 2018
                   Course Description
COURSE DETAILS     Sex and science have long been intertwined in America, with anxieties
                   about national identity at the crux of these entanglements. In this course,
                   we will trace the legacy of science, medicine, public health, and
Unique Numbers:    reproduction from the Antebellum to the present day, studying
AMS 311: 31092     everything from medical experiments on enslaved women to egg
WGS 301: 45953     donations in the 21st century. We will draw on a variety of sources,
                   including fiction, film, histories, and primary documents from the past and
Professor Info:    present, using the topic of reproduction as an entry point for
Anna Lyon          understanding America’s longstanding anxieties about the race, class, and
                   genetic composition of the nation’s residents.
                   Guiding Questions
                   How have scientific and pseudoscientific discourses been used to
                   encourage and discourage the reproduction of certain groups?
                   Who has been afforded and denied reproductive rights in American
                   history, and how?
                   Whose bodies have been used to aid in the reproduction of others, and
                   how have cultural and scientific discourses explained and justified this?
                   How do these histories help us understand sexual and reproductive
                   politics in the present moment?
                   How do scientific and medical discourses shape and reflect American
                   culture?
                   Expected Outcomes
                   By the end of the course, you will understand how the fields of science,
                   medicine, and public health have influenced and responded to anxieties
                   about race and class in America. You will be able to synthesize primary
                   and secondary sources, as well as historical and contemporary sources, to
                   make original arguments about American history and how it has shaped
                   our current moment. You will also become practiced at critically analyzing
                   nonacademic sources and pairing them with scholarly sources to make
                   historically grounded arguments about events unfolding in today’s world.
                   Writing Flag Requirements
                   You will write regularly and complete substantial writing projects.
                   You will receive feedback to help improve your writing, and be given an
                   opportunity to revise at least one assignment.
                   Your writing will make up at least one third of your course grade.


                     COURSE POLICIES
Attendance and Participation: Each student may miss two class days
without penalty. Please notify me if you are not going to be in class,            COURSE POLICIES
regardless of the reason. Attendance will be taken each day, and the
participation portion of your grade will be determined based on a
combination of your attendance, your completion of the readings, and
your commitment to elevating our class discussions.                        Grading Scale
Excused Absences: If you need to miss class for a religious holiday, or if     A: 93-100
you are a student athlete and need to miss class for official events           A-: 90-92
required by your team, please notify me (by email) of the dates within
                                                                               B+: 87-89
the first week of class. Illness-related absences will be excused if a
doctor’s note is provided within one week of the absence. All other
                                                                                Wellness
                                                                               B:  83-86 Resources
absences will be unexcused.                                                ➢
                                                                               B-: 80-82
                                                                             Counseling and Mental Health
                                                                               C+: 77-79
                                                                             Center:  https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Class Conduct: Students are expected to be attentive, respectful, and
polite to all classmates, instructors, and guest lecturers. Our course     ➢
                                                                               C: 73-76
                                                                             Women’s Health Center:
covers material that American society encourages us not to discuss             C-: 70-72
                                                                             https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/
openly, and therefore students should expect to feel uncomfortable and         D+: 67-69
                                                                             womenshealth.html
challenged at times. Please manage your discomfort in respectful and
                                                                           ➢ STID:Testing:
                                                                                    63-66
mature ways. Behavior that undermines our learning will result in a stern      D-: 60-62
                                                                             https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/h
request that you leave the classroom and rejoin us only when you are         s_uhsstitesting.html
ready to comport yourself gracefully.
                                                                               F: 0-59
                                                                           ➢ Behavior Concerns advice line:
Electronics: Phones and laptops must be turned off and stowed during         https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavi
class. Students who wish to access the readings on a tablet may do so,       or-concerns-advice-line
though printing them out is preferred. You may take notes in a notebook
                                                                           ➢ Student Emergency Services
or tablet, though abundant note-taking is not necessary for success.
                                                                             http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu
Academic Honesty: Your own work, even if you are doubting yourself,          /emergency/
will always score higher than plagiarized work. You will be graded based   ➢ Student Legal Services:
on your commitment to understanding our course material, and to              http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu
improving your writing over the course of the semester. I do not expect      /lss/
your work to be perfect, but I do expect it to always be your own.
                                                                           ➢ Legal Aid for Survivors of Sexual
Students who commit academic dishonesty will receive a 0 on the              Assault:
assignment and will be referred to the Student Judicial Services and the     http://www.legalaidforsurvivors.o
Office of the Dean of Students. Please visit the Student Judicial Services   rg/
website for additional information: www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/.         ➢ Gender and Sexuality Center (can
Plagiarism occurs if you represent as your own work any material that        assist with name changes):
was obtained from another source, regardless of how or where you             http://diversity.utexas.edu/gende
acquired it. For examples of plagiarism, see                                 randsexuality/
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_plagiarism.php
                                                                           ➢ LGBTQIA+ Health Resources:
Students with Disabilities: If you have SSD accommodations, please           https://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/
submit your official letter within the first week of class. If you need a    HT/HT_LGBTQIAhealthcare.html
disability accommodation, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
                                                                           ➢ LGBTQIA+ Scholarships:
(SSD) through the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement at:         https://www.affordablecolleges.c
471-6259 (voice), or 471-4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or hard of         om/resources/lgbtq-college-
hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining         resources/#scholarships-for-lgbtq-
authorized accommodations. For additional SSD information, please see:       students
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.


                                              ASSIGNMENTS
  All written work must be submitted in hard copy AND on Canvas by the beginning of class on the due
  date. Extensions will only be granted under extraordinary circumstances. Detailed instructions will be
  provided as each essay is assigned.
                                   To earn full participation points, each student must have no more than
                                   two unexcused absences, and must participate richly in class discussions.
               Class
25%                                It is obvious when a student has not completed the assigned reading, and
               participation
                                   students who fall behind on readings will notice an unpleasant impact on
                                   their participation grade.
                                   A thesis-driven paper of 3-4 pages. You may choose EITHER Paper A,
               Paper 1: Reading    engaging with The Handmaid’s Tale, or Paper B, engaging with Killing the
15%            Analysis (Choose    Black Body. Both papers will also consider contemporary events,
               Paper A or B)       additional course readings, and outside scholarly sources. Prompts and
                                   instructions will be provided on the date assigned (see syllabus).
                                   A 3-4 page paper analyzing a primary source that we will view together at
                                   the Briscoe Center. Your paper must draw on course readings and outside
               Paper 2: Primary
15%                                sources. You will analyze the document within its historical context, and
               Source Analysis
                                   consider the questions it answers and poses for scholars. Prompt and
                                   instructions will be provided on the date assigned (see syllabus).
                                   Students may revise Paper 1 and/or Paper 2, incorporating instructor
                                   feedback. Please meet with me before revising. The grade for your revised
               Paper Revisions
-                                  paper will replace your original grade. Revised papers will be accepted
               (Optional)
                                   through December 3rd. If you are happy with your grades on both papers,
                                   you may choose not to revise.
                                   A proposal of how you will approach your final paper. 1-2 pages plus an
               Final Paper         annotated bibliography. This proposal will require you to investigate your
10%
               Proposal            topic, locate sources, and formulate a thesis, so do not expect it to be a
                                   quick assignment.
                                   5-6 double-spaced pages on a topic relating to sex, science, or
                                   reproduction in the United States. Students will use the analytical tools
25%            Final Paper
                                   they have developed in the class and apply them to a topic that expands
                                   the scope of what we have covered as a group.
                                   Students will give a 5-minute presentation of their final papers on one of
               Final
10%                                the last 3 class days. The presentation should be planned and practiced,
               Presentation
                                   with visual aids and an engaging delivery.


➢ Please purchase or borrow                                       BOOKS
  Killing the Black Body, The
  Handmaid’s Tale, and
  Beloved. From the other       Atwood, Margaret. The Handmaid's Tale. Anchor Books, 1998. Buy/borrow
  books, we are only reading
  excerpts. Those can be        Briggs, Laura. Reproducing Empire: Race and Sex, Science and Reform in
  found on Canvas. Additional
                                    Puerto Rico and the Mainland United States, 1880-1960. University of
  primary sources will also be
  found on Canvas.
                                    California Press, 1998. Canvas
➢ All course books are          Davis, Angela. Women, Race & Class. Vintage Books, 2001. Canvas
  available through the Co-
  Op, Amazon, and the UT        Ehrenreich, Barbara, and Deirdre English. Witches, Midwives, and Nurses: a
  Library system.
                                    History of Women Healers. Black Powder Press, 2005. Canvas
➢ Readings must be
  completed by the day they     Morrison, Toni. Beloved. Vintage, 2016. Buy/borrow
  are listed on the syllabus.
                                Parens, Erik, et al. Prenatal Testing and Disability Rights. Braille Jymico Inc.,
➢ The reading schedule may
                                    2009. Canvas
  be subject to minor
  changes.
                                Roberts, Dorothy E. Killing the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and the
                                    Meaning of Liberty. Vintage Books, 2017. Buy/borrow
                                Schwartz, Marie Jenkins. Birthing a Slave: Motherhood and Medicine in the
                                    Antebellum South. Harvard University Press, 2009. Canvas
                                Seaman, Barbara. The Doctor's Case Against the Pill. Dolphin, 1980. Canvas
                                Thomas de la Peña Carolyn. The Body Electric: How Strange Machines Built
                                    the Modern American. New York University Press, 2005. Canvas
                                Washington, Harriet. Medical Apartheid: The Dark History of Medical
                                    Experimentation on Black Americans from Colonial Times to the Present.
                                    Anchor Books, 2006. Canvas
                               the Black Body: Race, Reproduction, and the Meaning of Liberty


                                          COURSE SCHEDULE
                                  Subject to change at instructor’s discretion
                             UNIT 1: Contemporary Reproductive Technologies
Wednesday August 29: Syllabus Day
In class: syllabus, expectations, discussion, trigger warnings
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Friday August 31: Assisted Reproduction and the role of the donor
In class: activity and discussion, bring laptops
Reading due: “How In Vitro Fertilization Works” (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none
Monday September 3: Labor Day—NO CLASS
Wednesday September 5: Gauging our ethical position on donor selection
In class: activity and discussion
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Friday September 7: Legislating Assisted Reproduction—Cramblett v. Midwest Sperm Bank
In class: discussion
Reading due: “White Woman Who Sued Sperm Bank Over Black Baby Says It’s Not About Race”
AND “Wrongful Birth and Wrongful Life Lawsuits” (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none
Monday September 10: Legislating Assisted Reproduction—Baby M
In class: Discussion, Paper A/B sign-ups, Final Presentation sign-ups
Reading due: “Baby M” AND “Traditional vs. Gestational Surrogacy” (on Canvas)
Assignment due: Look at your schedule for all your courses and figure out whether you want to do Paper
A or B, and which day you want to present your final paper.
Wednesday September 12: Disability Rights and the Ethics of Genetic Testing
In class: discussion
Reading due: Saxton Chapter (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none
Friday September 14: Disability Rights and the Ethics of “Wrongful Birth” lawsuits
In class: discussion
Reading due: “A Wrongful Birth?” (on Canvas)
Assignment due: Get a head start on The Handmaid’s Tale


Monday September 17: Paper A Assigned—Don’t come if you’re signed up for paper B
In class: Paper A Writing Workshop Bring laptops
Reading due: Get a head start on The Handmaid’s Tale
Assignment due: none
Wednesday September 19: Power and Reproduction in The Handmaid’s Tale
In class: activity and discussion
Reading due: The Handmaid’s Tale (Sections I through IX)
Assignment due: none
Friday September 21: Power and Reproduction in The Handmaid’s Tale
In class: activity and discussion
Reading due: Finish The Handmaid’s Tale
Assignment due: none
               UNIT 2: Reproductive Rights and Reproductive Justice in the late 20th Century
Monday September 24: Purity and the Sexual Double Standard in the 1950s
In class: videos and discussion
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Wednesday September 26: Kinsey busts the Myth
In class: video, lesson, discussion
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Friday September 28: Final Paper Proposal Assigned
In class: writing workshop: final paper proposal Bring laptops
Reading due: none
Assignment due: Be ready with one or two final paper topic ideas
Monday October 1: The Pill and feminism
In class: video and discussion
Reading due: Seaman chapter (on Canvas)
Assignment due: Paper A due
Wednesday October 3: The Pill and imperialism in Puerto Rico
In class: discussion
Reading due: Briggs chapter (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none
Friday October 5: Racism and the fear of unconsensual sterilization
In class: video and discussion
Reading due: Davis chapter (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none


Monday October 8: Paper B Assigned—Don’t come if you wrote Paper A
In class: Paper B Writing Workshop Bring laptops
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Wednesday October 10 (Indigenous People’s Day): Contraception and coercion
In class: discussion
Reading due: Killing the Black Body (Chapter 3)
Assignment due:
Friday October 12: Killing the Black Body—Criminalizing reproduction
In class: discussion
Reading due: Killing the Black Body (Chapter 4)
Assignment due: Final Paper Proposals due
                      UNIT 3: Sex, Science, and National Identity in the Progressive Era
Monday October 15: Nerves and Nervous illnesses in the 1800s
In class: lesson and discussion
Reading due: De la Peña chapter (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none
Wednesday October 17: Guest Lecture—Hysteria and Vibrators
In class: guest lecturer: Andi Remoquillo
Reading due: TBA
Assignment due: none
Friday October 19: Social Darwinism and negative eugenics—1880s
In class: Briscoe visit sign-ups, discussion
Reading due: Killing the Black Body (Chapter 2)
Assignment due: none
Monday October 22: Twilight Sleep and positive Eugenics
In class: lesson and discussion
Reading due: Ehrenreich and English “Women and the Rise of the American Medical Profession” (on
Canvas)
Assignment due: Paper B due
Wednesday October 24: Visit to Briscoe Center, Paper 2 assigned
In class: view James Percy obstetrical casebook
Reading due: none
Assignment due: register online in advance, Bring ID
Friday October 26: Visit to Briscoe Center, Paper 2 assigned
In class: view James Percy obstetrical casebook
Reading due: none
Assignment due: register online in advance, Bring ID


Monday October 29: James Percy and the medicalization of birth
In class: primary source discussion—James Percy casebook
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Wednesday October 31: Paper 2 Writing Workshop
In class: Paper 2 Writing Workshop Bring laptops
Reading due: none
Assignment due: Be ready with an idea of what you want to argue in Paper 2
Friday November 2: Eugenics in America today?
In class: synthesizing course material so far, preparing for debate
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Monday November 5: Debate: Is assisted reproduction a form of eugenics?
In class: debate
Reading due: none
Assignment due: be ready for the debate
Wednesday November 7: Writing Workshop—Final Papers
In class: Final paper proposals returned, final paper writing workshop Bring laptops
Reading due: none
Assignment due: none
Friday November 9: Final Paper Meetings and Writing Time
In class: one-on-one meetings and writing time
Reading due: none
Assignment due: Paper 2 due
                                      UNIT 4: Sex, Science, and Slavery
Monday November 12: Slave breeding
In class: lesson, discussion
Reading due: Killing the Black Body (Chapter 1)
Assignment due: none
Wednesday November 14: Enslaved healers vs. doctors
In class: primary source analysis, discussion
Reading due: Schwartz chapter "Healers” (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none
Friday November 16: Enslaved women and pregnancy
In class: discussion
Reading due: Schwartz chapter “Pregnancy” (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none


Monday November 19: Medical experiments on enslaved people
In class: discussion
Reading due: Washington Chapter (on Canvas)
Assignment due: none
Wednesday November 21—Thanksgiving Break—NO CLASS (read Part 1 of Beloved)
Friday November 23—Thanksgiving Break—NO CLASS (read Part 1 of Beloved)
Monday November 26: Motherhood and slavery
In class: discussion
Reading due: Beloved, part 1 (p. 1-195)
Assignment due: none
Wednesday November 28: Slavery and psychological trauma
In class: none
Reading due: Beloved, part 2 (p. 199-277)
Assignment due: none
Friday November 30: Sex, science, and power throughout American history
In class: discussion
Reading due: Beloved, part 3 (p. 281-324)
Assignment due: none
Monday December 3: Answering the guiding questions of the course
In class: wrap up discussion of all course material
Reading due: none
Assignment due: Revision papers due
Wednesday December 5: Final Paper Presentations
In class: presentations
Reading due: none
Assignment due: final paper due if presenting
Friday December 7: Final Paper Presentations
In class: presentations
Reading due: none
Assignment due: final paper due if presenting
Monday December 10: Final Paper Presentations
In class: presentations
Reading due: none
Assignment due: final paper due if presenting
NO FINAL EXAM
