                    Sociocultural Influences on Learning (ALD 327/AFR 372D)
                                                 Spring, 2019
                                          Unique Numbers: 09400
                                       University of Texas at Austin
                                   Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
                                          M, W, F, 11 am – 12 pm
                                                   SZB 411
Instructor: Alex Armonda
Office Hours: Monday, 1:30-3pm or by appt.
Office: SZB 528E
Email: armonda@utexas.edu
Disclaimer: This syllabus should be seen as a living document. The instructor retains the right to
revise the syllabus at any point in the Spring 2019 semester as deemed necessary.
REQUIRED TEXTS
    •    ALD 327 Course Reader*
    •    Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Students,
         2nd Edition**
    •    Peter McLaren, Life in Schools: An Introduction to Critical Pedagogy in the Foundations of
         Education, 6th Edition**
    •    Angela Valenzuela, Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics of Caring**
* Course reader can be purchased at Jenn’s Copy and Binding.
**Books can be purchased through the UT Co-op. Physical copies required.
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is devoted to exploring the relationships between education, culture, and society. It will focus
on: structures of social and educational inequality, in particular as they relate to race, class and gender;
processes of power and control in education, as they are expressed in curriculum, policy, and pedagogy;
education as a process of social and cultural reproduction; and teaching as a form of intervention in these
processes. The course will give special attention to the experiences and educational conditions of those
who have been marginalized within U.S. schools. By the end of the course, students will become familiar
with the sociological, cultural, and political contexts and dimensions of education in U.S. society, will
come to understand relationships of power within society and as they are expressed in schooling, and will
develop the foundational knowledge necessary for working with children and youth from diverse
backgrounds.


POLICIES
Attendance: After the first absence, for each additional absence (with the exception of documented
illnesses or medical emergencies) students will lose 3 points from their final course grade.
Academic Integrity: All work must be your own. If referring to ideas or information from others, make
sure that you cite the source. No credit will be given for work that violates this principle.
Late Work: Reading Responses will not be accepted if turned in after the deadline. All other written
assignments will lose 2 points each day after the deadline.
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING BASIS
Note: Extended guidelines for the following assignments are provided at the end of this syllabus.
Reading Responses
Each Sunday, you will respond to a series of guided questions pertaining to the arguments of the assigned
readings for the coming week. This response should be specific and composed in accordance with
scholarly norms. The prompts will provide space for you to engage, describe, extend, and challenge the
authors’ key ideas.
Access the Reading Response through the assignments/modules page on canvas.
There are 11 opportunities to complete the 10 Reading Response assignments required. This means you
are allowed to choose a week to skip the Reading Response, or earn extra credit by completing an
additional Reading Response.
Your responses are due by 11:59 pm on the Sunday before our first class of the week. No late assignments
will be accepted. Responses will be completed and submitted on Canvas.
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay you will reflect on your life experience as it relates to the topics and ideas covered in class.
You will describe how your own identity and development have been influenced by the social and
cultural processes in education we are studying, and you will analyze your own experiences to explain
their importance and meanings. The Autobiographical Essay is due on March 1 by 4:00 pm. Essays will
be turned in on Canvas.
Service Learning
This course includes a 15-20 hour service learning component which you must complete in order to
receive credit for the class. It is your responsibility to contact one of the sites on the Service Learning
Opportunities list (or an equivalent site) to complete your volunteer service learning. The supervising
staff member at your site will be asked to sign off on a form certifying that you have completed your
required hours.


Service Learning Analysis
This assignment consists of five brief reflections on your experiences at your service learning site. Each
of the reflections will focus on a different topic, and in each you will combine close observation with
careful interpretation and analysis. Service Learning Analysis is due on April 21 by 11:59 pm. These will
be turned in on Canvas.
Group Presentation
In small groups, you will undertake an oral presentation at the beginning of one Friday class session. This
presentation should be related to the topic and readings of the week, examining the key themes in relation
to a pop-culture artifact. This is an open-ended and creative assignment, which asks you to take initiative
in analyzing the topic and opening the discussion of it. Please see the extended description at the back of
the syllabus for more information.
Final Reflective Essay
In this essay you will reflect on what you have learned during the course, and how it has affected your
thinking about teaching, learning, and/or schooling. While you will engage with specific course concepts
and readings that have made a difference to you, the assignment is subjective in nature, and asks you to
describe, from your own perspective, your intellectual and emotional growth in relation to this material.
The Final Reflective Essay is due on May 12 by 11:59pm. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Participation
Participation is a very large component of your grade in this course. Besides the reading responses, it will
be the primary way by which I will assess that you are keeping up with the reading assignments. Both
attendance and participation in class is important to facilitate your own learning and that of others. Our
discussion depends on all voices being shared and heard. In order to engage in class discussions, it is
important that you carefully read all assigned readings prior to class, and that you bring the readings with
you to class.
Assignment                                                   Points
Reading Responses                                            20
Autobiographical Essay                                       10
Service Learning Analysis                                    20
Group Presentation                                           10
Final Reflective Essay                                       25
Participation                                                15


93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F
University Notices and Policies
Academic Integrity: University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
    •   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
        (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative
        text conversion, etc.).


     •   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field
         trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given
         day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     •   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video
         phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
         http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
         •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
              nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
         •    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
         •    In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.


  SCHEDULE
Week &        Topic                   Readings                                 Assignments
Class Dates                                                                    Due
1             Introduction to Course     •   Syllabus                          Review
                                                                               Service
(Jan. 23, 25)                            •   Baldwin: A Talk to Teachers       Learning Sites
                                                                               Select weeks
                                                                               for group
                                                                               presentation
2             Critical Race Theory       •   Yosso: Whose Culture Has Capital? Reading
              and Deficit Thinking                                             Response 1:
(Jan. 28, 30,                            •   Weiner: Challenging Deficit       Jan. 27
Feb. 1)                                      Thinking
3             Race, Poverty, and         •   Noguera: selections from City     Reading
              Social Reproduction            Schools and the American Dream,   Response 2:
(Feb. 4, 6,
                                             pp. 1-58                          Feb. 3
8)
4             Power, Ideology, and       •   McLaren, Chapter 5: pp. 131-154   Reading
              Pedagogy                                                         Response 3:
(Feb. 11, 13,                            •   Freire: Chapter 2 from Pedagogy   Feb. 10
15)                                          of the Oppressed
5             Class, Corporatization,    •   McLaren, Introduction: pp. 14-29  Reading
              and Education                                                    Response 4:
(Feb. 18, 20,                            •   Hursh: Assessing No Child Left    Feb. 17
22)                                          Behind and the Rise of Neoliberal
                                             Education Policies
                                                                               Deadline to
                                                                               select service
                                                                               learning site
                                                                               Feb. 22


6             Neoliberal Reform and   • Dumas: ‘Waiting for Superman’ to     Reading
              the Image of the          Save Black People                    Response 5:
(Feb. 25, 27, Teacher                                                        Feb. 24
March 1)                              • Britzman: Cultural Myths in the
                                        Making of the Teacher
                                      • Film: Waiting for Superman
                                                                             Autobiographi
                                                                             cal Essay Due
                                                                             March 1 @
                                                                             4:00 p.m.
                                                                             (canvas)
7             Gender, Performativity, • Thorne: selections from Gender       Reading
              and School                Play, pp. 49-88                      Response 6:
(March 4, 6,
                                                                             March 3
8)                                    • Butler: selection from Gender
                                        Trouble, pp. 134-141
              Service Learning De-
              Briefing
8             Gender, Sexuality, and  • American Association of              Reading
              Discrimination            University Women (AAUW):             Response 7:
(March 11,
                                        How Schools Shortchange Girls        March 10
13, 15)
                                      • Fine: Sexuality, Schooling, and
                                        Adolescent Females
                                      • Mayo: The Tolerance that Dare Not
                                        Speak Its Name
9             NO CLASS – SPRING       • Start Valenzuela’s Subtractive
              BREAK                     Schooling
NO CLASS
10            Culture, Language, and  • Valenzuela, Chapter 2: pp. 33-60;    Reading
              Education                 Chapter 3 (partial): pp. 61-75       Response 8:
(March 25,
                                                                             March 24
27, 29)                               • Gutierrez and Rogoff: Cultural
                                        Ways of Learning
11            Cultural Difference and • Valenzuela, Chapter 3 (partial): pp. Reading
              Marginalization           75-113; Chapter 5 (partial) pp. 161- Response 9:
(April 1, 3,
                                        181                                  March 31
5)


12            Culture and Resistance  • Simpson: Land as Pedagogy             Reading
                                                                              Response 10:
(April 8, 10,                         • Suina: The Pueblo People and the      April 7
12)                                     Dominant Culture
13            (Re)thinking Resistance • Solórzano & Bernal: Examining         Reading
                                        transformational resistance           Response 11:
(April 15,
                                                                              April 14
17, 19)                               • Kumashiro: Toward a Theory of
                                        Anti-Oppressive Education
14            Teaching, Curriculum,   • Ladson-Billings, Chapters 2-3: pp.    Service
              and Social Context        17-58                                 Learning
(April 22,                                                                    Analysis
24, 26)                               • Giroux: Teachers as
                                        Transformative Intellectuals          Due April 21
                                                                              @ 11:59 pm
                                                                              (canvas)
15            Culturally Relevant     • Ladson-Billings, Chapter 5: pp. 85-   Begin work on
              Teaching                  110                                   Final
(April 29,
                                                                              Reflective
May 1, 3)                             • Paris & Alim: What are we             Essay
                                        seeking to sustain through culturally
                                        sustaining pedagogy?
16            Summing up                                                      Service
                                      • Readings to be determined             Learning
(May 6, 8,
                                                                              Form (Signed)
10)                                                                           Due in Class
May 10 –                                                                      Final
Attendance
                                                                              Reflective
Optional
                                                                              Essay Due
                                                                              May 12 @
                                                                              11:59 pm
                                                                              (canvas).


Reading Responses
Each Sunday, you will respond to a series of guided questions pertaining to the arguments of the assigned
readings for the coming week. This response should be specific and composed in accordance with
scholarly norms. The prompts will provide space for you to engage, describe, extend, and challenge the
authors’ key ideas.
Access Reading Responses through the assignments/modules page on canvas.
Your responses are due by 11:59 pm on the Sunday before our first class of the week. No late assignments
will be accepted. There are 11 opportunities to complete the 10 required Reading Responses. This means
you are allowed to choose a week to skip the Reading Response or earn extra credit by completing an
additional Reading Response.
Additional Notes:
     •   Responses should attend to the issues, ideas, or passages emphasized in the guiding questions.
     •   Responses should be approximately 300-400 words.
     •   If you are having technical difficulties with Canvas, email your response directly. Emailed
         responses must be received by 11:59 pm on Sunday to receive credit.
     •   Avoid using long quotations from the text, since you need the space for your own comments and
         analysis.
     •   Your response should focus on the key points of the text, rather than on general speculations. Be
         specific in your writing.
     •   Ten reading responses will be required during the course; each is worth 2 points.


Autobiographical Essay
In this essay (4-5 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on your own life experience as it relates
to the topics and ideas we have been considering in class. The question for you to respond to in this
assignment is:
      •  Who are you, and how has your identity been influenced by, and constructed in relationship
         to your educational experiences?
“Educational experiences” includes school, but can also include other educational experiences in your
family, with peers, or in other contexts. This essay is concerned with how your development is connected
to the educational, social, and cultural context you have come from. Along the way you should consider
how some of the racial, class, cultural, and gender understandings, differences, and processes that
we have discussed have affected you (and also, if you want, how you have responded). You should
provide specific descriptions of experiences to make your essay more vivid, and should analyze these
experiences to explain their importance and meanings. (You do not need to tell your whole life story.)
It is important to connect your description to the topics and ideas we have been concerned with in class.
APA required for in-text citations and works cited page.
The Autobiographical Essay is due on March 1 @ 4:00 p.m. Assignments are to be turned in on Canvas.
Evaluation
This essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) Specific discussion of personal experience and identity
2) Depth of analysis and insights
3) Connections drawn to ideas and topics considered in the course with proper citations


Group Presentation: Popular Culture Analysis
In small groups, you will undertake an oral presentation at the beginning of one Friday class session. This
presentation should be related to the topic and readings of the week, but should discuss how the week’s
readings (themes, argument, content, etc.) relates to a particular pop-cultural artifact. This is an open-
ended and creative assignment, which asks you to take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening the
discussion of it to the class.
I am leaving the definition of Pop-cultural artifacts intentionally vague. They can range from a specific
episode of a TV show, a piece of curriculum, a popular song, a film, a website, or anything along those
lines. Once you make your decision as a group, run it by me along with your plan for analysis.
It is great to engage with the reading, but do not summarize it. This is not a book report, but rather a
comparative analysis between the readings and the artifact you have chosen. Plan your presentation
carefully for about 15 minutes; if you reach 20 minutes you will be stopped.
Key guidelines: 1) choose a relevant, interesting pop-cultural artifact. 2) do not summarize the text.
3) plan for 15 minutes.
Notes:
     •    You will come up to the front of the class for the presentation.
     •    Powerpoint/Prezi is good, but not required; however, it helps to have some kind of visual aid.
     •    Do not leave time in your presentation for discussion, since I have already planned discussion
          time after each presentation.
     •    If you invite interaction from the class, make sure it is for no more than 5 minutes (it should be
          well-structured and relevant).
     •    If you show a video clip, it should be no more than a few minutes so that you have time to present
          your own analysis.
Evaluation
Presentations will be evaluated on:
1) depth of analysis and creativity of presentation/connection to cultural artifact
2) quality of planning and collaboration among presenters
3) insights offered on topic and/or readings of the week.


Service Learning Analysis
This assignment consists of four brief reflections (1.5-2 full typed double-spaced page for each) on
your experiences at your service learning site, in which you will explore aspects of the work you are
involved in, the organization itself, and your own responses and accomplishments. Each of the reflections
will focus on a different topic, and in each you should include the following two elements:
1) Description: Provide specific and detailed description of what you see, hear, and learn. Try to create
a vivid picture in the reader’s mind of the place or actions you are observing.
2) Interpretation: Reflect upon the meanings of the events and processes you have described. Drawing
on our course readings and class discussions, suggest what you think might be some of the reasons for
what you have described, as well as its effects and significance.
Service Learning Analysis is due on April 21 @ 11:59 pm. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Reflection 1: Organization Context
Describe the context and mission of the organization you are working with, and your own thoughts about
it. Consider the communities served by the site, the range of participants, the needs it aims to address, the
mission or values of the organization, and its structure and setup. You can draw from conversations with
staff, observations, organization literature, etc.
     ➢ Interpretation questions: Why has this organization chosen to focus on their particular mission?
         What are some of the key challenges associated with the central projects that this organization has
         taken on? What are your initial impressions of the structure and relationships at the site?
Reflection 2: Your Role and Relationships
Document the specific role and tasks you have at the organization, your relationship to participants and
staff, and your feelings about your service learning at this early stage. Describe specific responsibilities,
interactions, events, or projects that give texture to your individual experience as a volunteer, rather than
focusing on the organization as a whole.
     ➢ Interpretation questions: How does it feel to you so far to be engaged in this project? What is
         exciting about your experience? What is difficult? How are you negotiating the relationships
         you are involved in with participants?


Reflection 3: Asset-Based Description
In class we have emphasized the importance of an asset-based perspective on students and communities
(as opposed to a deficit perspective). Focusing on the students/participants you have been working with,
describe the strengths and resources that they bring from their experience, families, and/or communities,
including the specific interactions that demonstrate these assets.
     ➢ Interpretation questions: What strengths and resources allow this person(s) to persist and progress
         in their lives and/or learning? What understandings have you gained from working with them?
         How can the assets they bring with them from their family/community help to challenge deficit
         perspectives that might be applied to them or to their community?
Reflection 4: Social Justice Commitment
Consider in what ways the site at which you are participating is committed to a project of social justice
that aims to broadly transform social conditions for the communities it serves. Describe whether the staff
and participants see the work they are involved in as reaching beyond the amelioration of individual cases
to broader change, and the ways in which they enact this commitment.
     ➢ Interpretation questions: What does social justice mean to this organization? In your view, does
         the work of this site move toward this goal? Has your participation altered your own
         understandings and views of social justice?
Evaluation
The Service Learning Analysis will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) carefulness and specificity of descriptions of site and experiences
2) depth and interest of interpretive comments and connections to course literature
3) evidence provided of engagement with service learning organization
4) clarity and coherence of writing.


Final Reflective Essay
In this essay (5-7 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on what you have learned during the
course and its various assignments, and how it has affected your thinking about teaching, learning, and/or
schooling. In the course of your discussion, you should engage specifically with course concepts and
readings that have made a difference to you. The assignment is subjective in nature; in this essay, you
should coherently describe, from your own perspective, your intellectual and emotional growth in
relation to this material. (Some questions that might spur your thinking for this assignment: How did the
course, and connected field experiences, challenge or change your thinking? How did it confirm or
extend your own insights or experiences? How did it feel to you to work through the arguments
presented? What remains as an important problem or gap for you?)
In referring to course texts, make sure you use specific references, including quotations (APA
citation). Do not summarize the texts; instead, they will serve as tools to help you work through your
ideas. You can also refer to your own life experience to help you develop your narrative if you wish;
however, this is not an autobiographical essay but rather a narrative of your own response to the course
content.
The Final Reflective Essay is due May 12 by 11:59 pm. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Evaluation
The final reflective essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) depth and interest of reflections, analysis, and ideas
2) specific engagement with course readings and concepts with proper citations
3) organization and coherence of overall argument/narrative.
