       Copy​RIghtING​WRITING
                                                                     ADV 338L (Unique #5975)
the person handing out grades.
Person 1: Ryan Romero
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com
Office: BMC 4.306
Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays
        12:30pm - 2pm, 3:30pm - 5pm
the real brains of the operation (your TA).
Regan Gavin
rtgavin@utexas.edu
Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: TBD
Awhhh, yeeeeah. We gawna wriiiiite.
Why do we need a class to learn how to write copy. We write emails, we write love notes, we
text, compose bad poetry, and occasionally put words between emoji. Because of this, you
probably think you have a informed opinion on the matter, “Hell, I write all the time,” you’d say.
“I know how to use words.” The thing is, there’s a difference between getting your point across
to someone who cares and sinking tiny gleaming hooks into the left atrium of the targets
collective heart. Writing well, especially for a brand, takes practice. It takes care. It takes...well,
writing a lot of stuff. Think about it. These people aren’t trying to read what you’ve written. In
fact they’re actively trying not to and they hate you a little bit for trying to make them. Here
we’re going to practice, discuss, disect, care, craft, and compose oodles of things. We’ll learn
to talk about ourselves, talk about our client’s product, communicate entire stories in a few
words, and milk a simple joke for several minutes of entertainment. We may find our voice or
write in voices that aren’t our own. Write buttoned up or free form like New Orleans’ jazz.
We’ll do all this, not because its easy, but because most of you plan to get paid to do it and
you probably didn’t notice all seven grammatical errors in this section not including the obvious
mistakes in the headline.


Open Away From Face.
I was young, maybe 8 or 9 years old, riding shotgun in my dad’s 1976 Corvette Stingray. He
sold that car before I turned 16 and I’ll never forgive him for that. However this is a syllabus,
not a therapy session, and as such, I’ll get back to the story at hand. He had placed a plastic
bottle of Dr. Pepper between us. It could have been wedged between the seat and the shifter
or maybe crammed in a cubby of some sort created only because GM engineers couldn’t think
of any more esoteric dials or gauges to cram into the cockpit. I imagine one engineer pointing
with his slide rule, “Huh, a blank spot. Let’s put a little slot in it. Maybe they’ll wanna cram
some cool 70s aviator sunglasses in there. Though he didn’t refer to them as belonging to a
specific decade as the 70s, at this point, would have just been “now”. “Or maybe a soda bottle
so that it fits some future professor’s story better.” Truth be told, I don’t remember if that car
even had cup holders. Who cares. This was a ‘vette. If one was worried about securing one’s
then legal open container appropriately, one would have bought a station wagon. But I digress.
I looked down at the bottle, wherever it was, and read a small line of copy, stamped in Dr.
Pepper maroon or whatever name they had for the brand’s famous color. It was small, and
wrapped around the curvature of the top of the cap, reading simply, “Open Away From Face”. I
scratched my head, small, somewhat frizzy curls bouncing. “Dad…” I hesitantly probed.
“Uh huh,” he mumbled, magically, effortlessly, throwing the shifter from second gear to third.
“When I’m bigger, this is gonna be my car, right?” I asked touching the clock in the center of
the dash which, for some reason, did not have a flat bottom to the opening it sat in like every
other gauge in the car.
“Yup, you help me change the oil and keep her going and she’s yours,” he smiled.
“That’s what I thought,” I chirped. “Also, why are these words here…” I sounded them out
slowly, “open...away...from...face?”
He sighed a bit as we approached a stoplight. The car’s shifter descending gears from one to
the next, engine revving and slowing with each movement. The car stopped with that familiar
bounce, our bodily momentum finally eliminated. He turned, hand still on the shift knob, and
looked me in the eyes. “Well, son. Those words are there become some idiot shook a bottle up
really good, spun the top off, and took out his own eye. Now, the rest of the world has to be
bothered by them because Dr. Pepper has to cover their ass just in case some other idiot does
the same thing.” The light changed, my father revved the motor, did the secret dance with his
feet and we launched forward again, engine in our ears.
“Huh,” I considered aloud to him. “What a big waste of everyone’s time.”
“Yeah,” he breathed. 3rd. 4th. “...it really is.”
Every year this section of my syllabus gets longer. And in the end, no one gets a ‘vette, they
just get a little sadder. Still, try to enjoy your warning labels, sans bottle cap:


do the work. do it on time. it’s your only chance.
Late assignments are a zero. Read that again. And again. Make arrangements with me
to turn in assignments EARLY if you know you’ll be absent. Emergency issues should
be handled by Student Emergency Services who will, in turn, contact me. There is no
extra credit, only Zuul. Unless you have accommodations from SES and have worked
out said accommodations with me AHEAD OF TIME, there is no extra credit work,
makeup tests, or other special treatment.
favorites exist.
I, like every professor, has on occasion been accused of having favorites. Guess what. I
do. So do your parents, your bosses, everyone you meet in the world, and you. My
favorite students are the ones who apply themselves, do the work, process all the
feedback and work to better their work and themselves. They needn’t always do as I
suggest but they should seek to understand criticism and use that information to do
better. Then, they come back big, hard, and often. They don’t make excuses. They
don’t show up without work. They don’t keep repeating the same mistakes over and
over without seeking help to rectify them. Why do I like these people? Because they’re
here to do the work.
Here’s the good news. You’re already my favorite student and staying that way makes
you more successful at what you came here to do. But show me you don’t want to
work, you don’t want to care, you don’t have time to participate and while you won’t
lose the opportunity to do good work, you will begin to lose respect. That’s how the
world works. Nobody expects you to be good right off the bat, few are. You just have to
want to be good and then take the steps to get there. Do that and you’ll always be my
favorite snowflake.
thicker skin through advertising.
No matter how much of an introvert you may be, how delicate your feelings are, or how
attached you are to your art, advertising is not and will never be private. It is a public
endeavor. Period. Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes harshly, by your
colleagues and me. Fair and honest critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. It
can even be difficult for those who are.
Remember: you are not your work. Don’t take criticism to heart, take it to head.
Consider it. Process it. Use it. Keep your cool and know that very few ideas make the
final cut. Critique is difficult to hear no matter who says it and no matter how they say it.
The people in this room are here to build your book and get you a job. We are not a
creative director worried about you taking his job, we’ve nothing to gain from making
you feel bad, and we’re not the internet trolls who will tear your work down from the
shadows. Sadly, all of that is going to happen later on in the real world. For now, know
that we’re your instructors, your colleagues, and your friends trying to make you better.
Breathe. Listen. Grow.


         let’s get passionate.
         We talk about a lot of things in class. As creatives our goal is to make real, truthful
         human emotional connections. And both humans and emotions are nothing if not
         messy. Touchy subjects will be brought up and discussed because we’re putting real
         work out into the real world where those subjects exist. While we have to discuss (and
         grow from doing so) the impact these thoughts and ideas have on society from an
         academic perspective, I will not tolerate racism, hate speech, misogyny or any other
         kind of marginalization and neither should you.
         We’re navigating a very delicate time in our society and if someone, including myself,
         ever crosses a line, even accidentally, I encourage you to come to me or to my TA and
         address your concerns. Chances are the person in question was simply mistaken or
         ignorant on the subject and will want to apologize. This is how we grow. This is how we
         move forward. You are safe here. You are welcome here. Do not bottle up your
         concerns as nobody can feel creative if they don’t feel safe and we won’t undermine
         our mission to grow your creativity.
helpful people and places.
    ● College of Communication Instructional Media Center:
         http://communication.utexas.edu/technology/imc/
    ● Fresh-ups: UT College of Communication Software Workshops:
         http://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Fresh-Ups-UT-College-of-Communication-Softw
         are-Workshops/147245465319771
    ● UT Counseling and Mental Health Center, 24-Hour Telephone Counseling:
         512-471-2255
    ● Behavioral concerns advice line: 512-232-5050
    ● Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-6222: ​www.uwc.utexas.edu
    ● Student Emergency Services: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ut policies.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 512.471.6259, 512.471.6441 TTY.
things to do.
Think smart. Think weird. Invent. Explore. Share.
things to don’t.
Cheat (you will be caught, you will fail, you will be kicked out of school). Be lazy. Be indifferent.
e-mail and canvas
In this course, email and Canvas will both be used to communicate. I’m very reachable on my


email. So you will be as well. Make sure your Canvas email is updated to a current, reachable
account. You will be responsible for checking it regularly for class work and announcements.
It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful than usual lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts,
feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for
support. Our CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson,
LCSW | CMA 4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is unavailable)
        Need Immediate Help?
                     - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                        | 512-471- 3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
                     - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
                        cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
Embrace ambiguity.
You are looking at my best attempt at explaining what I hope for you all to accomplish but I am
human and classes vary widely. We will endeavor to stick closely to this grade breakdown, the
assignments I have listed, and the schedule below. However, we may feel it’s necessary to
change some things up as we move along for the benefit of the entire class. Any changes will
be discussed and we’ll come to a decision together.
grade breakdown:
Bios                           15%
Truth in Advertising           15%
HyperboLIES                    15%
Scripts                        15%
Scripts                        15%
Advertising is Everything      15%
Quick Hit Projects             10%


But, when? WHEN?!
R, 8/29  - Welcome: Syllabus, Introductions, Lecture on Bios
T, 9/3   - Bios
R, 9/5   - Bios
T, 9/10  - Bios
R, 9/12  - Bios / Lecture on Truth in Advertising
T, 9/17  - Truth in Advertising
R, 9/19  - Truth in Advertising
T, 9/24  - Truth in Advertising​ (crazy people quiz)
R, 9/26  - Truth in Advertising / Lecture on HyperboLIES
T, 10/1  - HyperboLIES
R, 10/3  - HyperboLIES
T, 10/8 -  HyperboLIES
R, 10/10 - HyperboLIES / Lecture on Scripts
T, 10/15 - Scripts TV/Video
R, 10/17 - Scripts TV/Video
T, 10/22 - Scripts Video
R, 10/24 - Scripts Video
T, 10/29 - Scripts Radio
R, 10/31 - Scripts Radio
T, 11/5  - Scripts Radio
R, 11/7  - Scripts Radio / Lecture Advertising is Everything
T, 11/12 - Advertising is Everything
R, 11/14 - Advertising is Everything
T, 11/19 - Advertising is Everything
R, 11/21 - Advertising is Everything / Intro Songvertising (?)
T, 11/26 - Catchup
R, 11/28 - Thanksgiving Holiday
T, 12/3  - Final Book Review
R, 12/5  - Final Book Review
