                                Syllabus for ALD 118C: McNair
                                             Seminar
                                             Spring 2019
                                         Mondays 4-5PM
                                          Office: SSB 4.400
Instructor:
    1) Eric Dieter, Ph.D.
         ericdieter@austin.utexas.edu
         Office Hours: by appointment
         SSB Room 4.418
Teaching
    Assistants:
    1)        Taylor
    Payne
       tpayne@utexas.edu
       Office Hours: by appointment
       SZB 506G
    2) Enrique Aguayo
       enriqueaguayo@utexas.edu
         Office Hours: by appointment
         Room TBD
                             COURSE SEMINAR DESCRIPTION
The purpose of this course is to provide an experience for students to familiarize themselves
with the academic discipline, to establish and center their research and to prepare for their
pursuit of graduate studies programs. This semester, students will begin researching their
respective fields in order to gain a better understanding of how they fit within their academic
discipline(s), and vice versa. Through writing assignments, course work, guest speakers, and
readings, students will explore the culture of their discipline, including key issues, research
methodologies, publications, and scholars in their field. The course is designed for students to
become acquainted with their field so that they are better prepared to work with and/or
challenge current research produced in their areas of interest, as well as prepare students to
think about their graduate school application processes.


Tips for success:
This course is designed to enable you to take responsibility for your learning and research.
This requires self-discipline and self-management of your own time. Be proactive about
these assignments and budget your time/energy accordingly.
Be proactive in consulting your faculty mentors to become better acquainted
with methodologies, literature, and approaches in your field of interest.
                                             CLASS
                                            POLICIES
 Attendance and Participation
 To maintain a rich conversation that we can all cultivate throughout the semester, student
 attendance, timeliness, preparation, and engagement are essential. We understand that
 things come up; as such, you are allowed one absence (excused or unexcused) throughout
 the course of the semester. With each additional absence, we will lower your final grade
 by one letter grade each subsequent time.
 Cell Phones and Email during Class Time
 Please let those in personal and professional life know that you are not available during
 class time. Limit access to personal computing devices only during times in class when we
 are accessing class materials or you are using the device to take notes, participate in class
 instruction and/or learning.
                                            GRADING
 Assignment                                        Percentage            Due Dates
 Attendance/Participation                          25%
 Pick 3 Assignment                                 10%                   2/24
 Statement of Purpose                              15%                   3/9
 Diversity Statement                               10%                   3/23
 Research Presentation                             25%                   4/27
 SMART Goals                                       15%                   5/4
                                          ASSIGNMENT
                                                S
 Attendance/Participation – 25%
 You are expected to attend class and be an active participant in the class. This will include
 participating in conversations, interacting with any guest speakers, etc.
 Presentation – 25%
 Presentations: The presentation will be to give an update on your current research. This
 will consist of a brief literature review, methods section, preliminary results, next steps. If
 there are no preliminary results, you will be expected to create an expected results section.


If preliminary results are not what you expected you will still need to present those and
explain what these results mean
Statement of Purpose – 15%
To prepare you for applying for graduate school in the following Fall, you will write a 2 to
3-page statement of purpose tailored to an institution of your choice. Separately, you will
write a 1 to 2-page diversity statement.
Pick 3 – 10%
In the pick three assignment you will identify three schools that you plan on applying to.
You will create an excel sheet or a word document that states the (1) school (2) faculty
member or members you want to work with (3) what that faculty member or members
research interests are (4) what materials are required with your applications (i.e how many
rec, GRE score, statement of purpose, personal statement, diversity statement, writing
sample ect) (5) Due dates – both priority/fellowship and normal due dates
Diversity Statement – 10%
In addition a statement of purpose, many universities ask that you submit a diversity
statement to show that you are committed to help bring diversity to college campus.
Luckily for you all being a part of McNair already demonstrates that. For this assignment
you are being asked to write a 1-2 page Diversity statement (diversity does not mean just
race, it can be thought too)
SMART Goals – 15%
In this project, you will set an academic or personal health goal for yourself to be completed
during the semester. Biweekly you will provide an update about your progress and any
barriers you have encountered. At the end of the semester, you will submit a reflection your
progress toward your goal. In the report you will apply what you have learned about
motivation, goal setting, procrastination, self-regulation, and theories of behavior change to
critique your performance.


                                    COURSE
                                    OUTLINE
Date                       Course Content                       Assignments Due
                       Brief update on Research
1/27                                                             3 min summary
                           Summer Program
                           Discussion (Both)
                   Learning how to use resources
 2/3
                   Invited talk from UT librarian
                               (Taylor)
        Graduate School in Psychology: Insights for Success
2/10
                           Dr. Mike Parent
                              (Enrique)
                        Life of a Grad Student
2/17
                                (Taylor)
              UNT McNair Conference – NO CLASS
2/24                                                            Pick 3 Assignment
     Life of a Grad Student – Financial Awareness and Literacy
 3/2
                              (Enrique)
        Workday (IRB, Graduate Apps, SOP, Research…)            Statement of Purpose
 3/9
                       Brief Research Update                            Due
                                 (Both)
                     Spring Break – NO CLASS
3/16
     Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Education-Introduction to  Diversity Statement
3/23                      Critical Race Theory
                              (Enrique)
3/30           Life of a Grad Student – Student Panel
                                 (Both)
 4/6                      Research Update
                               (Taylor)
4/13                       SRI Orientation
                         (Dr. James Brown)
4/20     McNair End of Year Event/UGS Research Week
4/27                Final Research Presentations
 5/4                Final Research Presentations


 University Writing Center:
 You are strongly encouraged to use the services offered by the University Writing Center. The
 UWC offers 45-minute, one-on-one consultations with UT students on any piece of writing.
 You may visit up to three times per assignment, and are encouraged to visit within forty-eight
 hours of the due date. The consultants are well trained, and the cost of the service is covered in
 your tuition. You can visit the UWC in either PCL 2.330 or the LCAE offices in SSB 4.400. If
 you wish to make an appointment, you may do so through either uwc.utexas.edu or 471-6222.
 Personal Pronoun Preference:
 Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
 topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
 gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to instructors with the student’s
 legal name. We will gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than what
 appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise us of this preference
 early in the semester so that we may make appropriate changes to our records.
Emergency:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructors in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Information
regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at emergency.utexas.edu.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that provides The University of Texas at Austin’s
faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their concerns about another individual’s
behavior. If you have concerns, please contact the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at
either besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line or 232-5050.
Self-Care:
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric,
consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students’ academic and life goals and enhance
their personal growth and well-being. If you need any services, please visit cmhc.utexas.edu or,
from 8A to 5P, 471-3515. For 24/7 support, please call 471-CALL (2255). The CMHC is located
on the fifth floor of the Student Services Building (SSB)."
 Religious Holidays
 By UT Austin policy, you must notify us of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
 to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
 work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
 opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
 Use of Canvas
 This course requires the use of Canvas, a Web-based course management system with


password- protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu/ to distribute course materials, to
communicate and collaborate online, and to post grades. You can find support in using Canvas
at http://guides.instructure.com/.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-
329- 3986 (video phone). We are not required to provide accommodations without an
official accommodation letter from SSD.
    ▪▪ Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
         3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related
         information: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the
Student Judicial Services web site at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ to access the
official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further
elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty. Please see the following website and
view the video for information on plagiarism. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/plagiarism
