                                                               Intro Bio Summer 2019
         BIO 311C
                 What will I learn?
Molecular and cellular biology are the topics of this
introductory course designed for science majors.       However,
thinking like a scientist is the emphasis of this course.
                                        Ho w do scient ists
                                        think? They acquire knowledge through discovery.          They critically apply the
     Your Instructor
                                        knowledge to form hypotheses and reach conclusions. Scientists communicate
                                        their conclusions to others and use critical feedback to improve their scientific
                                        thinking.
                                        Scientific thinking is a skill that grows with practice and hard work! Like all
                                        skills, it becomes stronger with use. Throughout the semester, you will
                                        discover new knowledge and learn how to apply it to the Bio 311C learning
                                        outcomes.    The learning     outcomes outline the knowledge that you need to
                                        have and the activities that you need to be able to do with your knowledge.
                                        Use them!
Jennifer Fritz, PhD
                                                                      How will I learn?
Send me an email.
                                        A three-stepped approach is the key to successful learning in this class!
Office: BIO 315
                                        Step 1 Knowledge Before the lecture, complete the on-line homework              and
Office Hours: Check Canvas              start the assigned readings with the intention to learn/review basic concepts.
              TA                        Step 2 Application Attend the lecture and discussion section to practice
                                        applying the basic concepts and to learn more challenging material.
                                        Step 3 Reflection After the lecture, complete the readings and study
                                        guides before the start of the next lecture to organize your knowledge
                                        while it is still fresh in your mind.
                                                                     What do I need for this
                                                                                   course?
Dulce Carbajal                                                      •Enrollment in Mastering Biology with
Send Dulce an email                                                 access to Campbell Biology, 11th
                                                                    Edition. **Use the two week free
Office: Check Canvas                                                trial**
Office Hours: Check Canvas                                          •I-clicker+ classroom response system.
                                                                    We will not be using Reef/phone apps
                                                                    for clickers.


                                                How is my grade determined?
                                                  Grade Allocation for Bio 311C
       Course Logistics
Main Lecture (84995)                                        Quizzes
                                                               10%
MTWTHF 10-11:30 in JBG 2.216
                                                  Participation
                                                        10%
Discussion Sections
84995 TTH 12-1 in GDC 2.210
85000 TTH 1-2 in GDC 2.410                                                    Exams
                                                                               80%
** Students should attend their
assigned discussion section BUT
may switch informally in case of
                                               Exams               Participation       Quizzes
work conflicts**
                                                     What if I miss an exam?
                                 If you have a pre-existing exam conflict due to a substantiated medical,
                                 family, scholastic or religious reason you may arrange for an earlier
                                 exam. Look for the ‘exam conflict form’ on Canvas!
         Exam Dates                         **Exam Conflict Form (on Canvas) is Due June 10th***
       • Friday June 14th
                                   Email me immediately if you miss your exam! All missed
       • Monday June 24th                           exams require proof of absence.
       • Wednesday July 3rd
                                 If possible, you should take the exam later that same day. Example: flat
       • Thursday July 11th      tires, traffic delay, minor illness.
                                 If you cannot take an exam, the missed exam grade will be replaced
                                 with the average of the other three exams.
                                 Missed exams without a proof of excuse will earn zero credit for the
                                 exam.


                            Class Points and Course Grade
             Students accumulate class points over the whole semester. Your point total determines
             your course grade:
                                            A: 400-372 (100-93%)          A-: 371-360 (92-90%)
             B+: 359-348 (89-87%)           B: 347-332 (86-83%)           B-: 331-320 (82-80%)
             C+: 319-304 (79-76%)           C: 303-276 (75-69%)           C-: 275-260 (68-65%)
             D+: 259-248 (64-62%)           D: 247-220 (61-55%)            F: <219 (<55%)
                     In fairness to all students the course due dates and grade cut-offs are firm.
                           Please do not request extra opportunities to make up missed work!
                                                                            Points per    Total points  Total Course
                 How do I                         Item       Number
                                                                               item         per item       Points
                                                Midterm
                earn class                       Exams
                                                                  4              80           340           320
                   points?                      Quizzes          10               4            40           360
                                              Participation ~20 lectures          2            40           400
                               Participation: Homework and I-clickers
• Homework (Mastering Biology) should be completed on-line before class to receive credit. Don’t worry if you miss a
  few points here and there…there are more points available than you can earn for the semester!
• A grade of 70% or better on each HW earns full participation credit!
• Remember! You can complete HW at any time, but you’ll only get credit if you complete it with a 70% or better
  before class.
• I-clicker points are earned by participating in class with your i-clicker.    Don’t worry if you forget your clicker
  sometimes! Full participation credit will be awarded for 95% or better attendance.
                                              Hands-On Learning
 Did you miss out on taking AP biology? Are you worried that you haven’t taken biology since 9th grade?
 Hands-On Learning is a weekly session to help you connect deeper with the more difficult content and to practice
 scientific thinking! Look for announcements and sign up during our first week of class!


 Tell me more about…
                          Exams
                                                                                     Canvas
• Exams are constructed using the learning outcomes so
  USE THEM as you review and organize the homework,           • Canvas is our course management system where I
  lectures, study guides, discussion activities, and quizzes.   can communicate with you and vice versa.
• The midterm exams (max 80 pts) will be machine graded       • Check the Canvas homepage for announcements,
  but not all multiple choice.                                  office hours, review session times etc.
• Hey, we’re not always on game! As a courtesy, your          • READ my announcements and emails!
  lowest midterm exam grade will be replaced with the
                                                              • Explore all what is on our Canvas site…there’s a lot
  average grade of all 4 midterm exams.
                                                                of helpful content!
*Note: only students who take all 4 midterms qualify for
exam replacement*
• Exams will be returned, reviewed, and re-collected in the
  discussion after the exam.                                                        Quizzes
                                                                • Lookout for the quiz dates on the lecture
                                                                  schedule!
                                                                • The quiz is always due at 11:59 pm and will be
                                                                  available on Canvas for 1 day prior.
                                                                • Each passing quiz grade (70% or better) earns
                                                                  full quiz credit (4 pts). Each quiz grade less
                  Electronics Policy                              than 70% earns no quiz credit (0 pts).
• Please silence and stow away your cell phone.
                                                                • Students can earn credit for up to 10 of the
• No tablets or computers will be needed during lecture.          Canvas quizzes.
• Students who really need a computer should come               • You are encouraged to work together on the
  discuss it with me!                                             quizzes but DO NOT publish the answers, as that
                                                                  is cheating!
• Remember to bring your i-clicker to every lecture.
                                                                                   SSD only
                                                               • Please submit your SSD letter to me promptly so
                                                                 w e ca n w o r k to g et h e r to m e et yo u r
                                                                 accommodations.
                                                               • Test takers should reserve testing time at the
                                                                 SSD office ASAP for the test dates.


And now for the fine print…
 Scholastic Integrity: “All written work handed in by a student is considered to be their own work, prepared without
unauthorized assistance. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from The University.”
• The following instructions govern the conduct of final examinations as well as other examinations given during the semester:
• Students must be informed that all written work handed in by them is considered to be their own work, prepared without unauthorized assistance.
• Students should be asked to cooperate in maintaining the integrity of examinations and encouraged to inform the instructor, without specifying the
  offenders, when cheating goes on in class.
• Instructors are responsible for advising students of the rules governing examinations and for supervising examinations in their respective classes.
  They, or their representatives, must remain in the examination room and take necessary actions to ensure an orderly examination and minimize the
  temptations and opportunities for cheating.
• Students are expected to (a) remain in the examination room until the test is completed; (b) refrain from talking; and (c) leave all notes and books
  where they are not accessible during the examination unless otherwise directed by the instructor.
• An instructor who suspects academic dishonesty must report the case to the Office of the Dean of Students.
• Students will be required to sign in at each exam. Exams must be taken in blue or black pen. Pencils should be used on the scantron forms.
• Students will be asked to place backpacks, purses and coats at the front of the room and to remove hats, baggy clothes, scarves. Cell phones,
  digital pens and watches, and calculators will not be allowed in the exam.
• Seating will be assigned during the exams. Do not be offended if we ask you to move during the exam as space allows.
Texas Higher Education Board:
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the natural science and technology (Part I or Part II) component of
the university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and empirical and quantitative
skills.
Use of copyrighted class materials:
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, exam keys and homework assignments are
copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result
in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific,
express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic
dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action.                    This includes, among other things, uploading class
materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
General Policies:
 All University policies apply to this course, including (1) the accommodation of disabilities, (2) allowed absence for
religious holidays (see the current General Information catalog, p. 81), and (3) scholastic dishonesty. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
in the course and/or dismissal from the University Extension program or The University. (For relevant definitions, see the
General Information 2002-2003 catalog, Appendix C, p. 180.) For more information, visit Student Judicial Services (SJS)
at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ and Academic Accommodations for Students with Disabilities at http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/
