                         Global Commodities: Asia and the World
                                          Spring 2020
                                     HIS 350L / ANS 361
Class time
Tuesday and Thursday: 1230P - 200P
Location: RLP 0.122
Instructor
Dr. Adam Clulow
Office: GAR 2.202
Email: Adam.Clulow@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesday 2:30-4 and by Appointment in GAR 2.202
THE CLASS
Course Description
This course explores the vital role of commodities in Asian history with a particular focus on
East and Southeast Asia. It examines a range of key commodities from silver to deerskins to
soybeans that were exchanged across Asia and which came to transform the political,
economic and social contours of the region while underpinning the construction of empire.
The focus is on how the spread of commodities created a global economy while reshaping
both sites of production and consumption. By weaving together the stories of different
commodities, this course aims to present a different way to understand the history of early
modern and modern Asia and the development of global capitalism.
Course Goals
By the end of the course, I hope you’ll learn the following:
    1. Identify long-term economic trends and understand the role of trade and commodities
        in shaping Asian history


    2. Gain an understanding of how long-distance commodity exchange served to bind
         together disparate parts of the world to create a global economy
    3. Explore how the exchange of commodities reshaped both sites of production and sites
         of consumption
    4. Trace the role of commodities in creating and supporting empire
    5. Assess the vast inequities between producers and consumers that are built into
         commodity chains
Class Thesis
In this class we will discuss the following five-point thesis. By the end of the class, you will
have to decide which of these points you believe hold true:
    1. The long-distance trade in commodities created the global economy around 1500 and
         underpinned the process of globalization.
    2. The struggle to control the trade in key commodities generated the first global trade
         wars
    3. Commodities built and sustained a diverse set of empires
    4. The trade in commodities massively reshaped both sites of production and sites of
         consumption
    5. Commodity chains have always been and continue to be characterized by vast
         inequities between producers and consumers. This includes both a historical and a
         continued reliance on coerced labor in many different forms.
Flags
Global Cultures, Writing, Independent Inquiry
This course fulfills the requirements for a Global Cultures Flag. At least one third of the
course content requires an in-depth examination of the broader cultural context and
perspectives of one or more non-U.S. communities, countries, or coherent regional groupings
of countries, past or present.
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and
discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade
to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications
objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility,
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
This course also carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing
you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project
related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work
REQUIRED BOOKS


The following books are required:
Pomeranz, Kenneth, and Steven Topik. The World That Trade Created: Society, Culture, and
the World Economy, 1400 to the Present (Armonk, NY and London: M. E. Sharpe, 1999)
This is a general introduction to global trade. It can be purchased at the UT Co-op or on
Kindle. Additional required readings will be available via the Canvas course site. If you have
problems getting hold of any of the readings please let me know as soon as possible.
HARRY RANSOM CENTER CLASSES
We are fortunate to have two classes with Dr Aaron Pratt, the Carl and Lily Pforzheimer
Curator of Early Books and Manuscripts at the Harry Ransom Center, which has a superb
collection of early modern texts and maps including many focused on the war over spices.
This will give you a chance to work firsthand with some of the most famous texts from this
period. Our classes here will focus on the invasion of Banda in 1621 and the Amboina
incident in 1623.
ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING
Attendance, preparation, and engagement (including Seminar Leader Exercise) – 10%
Reading Responses – 10% (5 responses x 2% each)
Amboina Trial and Maritime Asia Classroom Exercise: 10% (split equally)
Commodity History Book or Website Review – 10% (due February 7, week 3)
Commodity Portfolio (worth 60% of overall grade). This consists of four separate
components:
    -   Portfolio Component A: Production and Consumption Overview with ClioVis
        Timeline and Annotated Bibliography – 15% (due March 6, week 7)
    -   Portfolio Component B: Objects podcast with script - 10% (due March 27, week 9)
    -   Portfolio Component C: Draft essay – 10% (due April 10, week 11)
    -   Portfolio Component D: Academic Poster and Final essay – 25% (poster due April
        30, essay due May 8)
Grading Scale
Students’ work will be assessed using the +/- scale:
Grading Scale:
A       95-100          B+     87-89           C+      77-79         D+      67-69
A-      90-94           B      84-86           C       74-76         D       64-66
                        B-     80-83           C-      70-73         D-      60-63
F       0-59
*Failure to turn in an assignment will result in 0 grade points


Attendance, preparation, and engagement
You cannot engage if you do not read or if you do not attend class, so every unexcused
absence after the first two will result in a penalty of three points off the preparation and
engagement grade. Please note, however, that this grade is for preparation and engagement so
perfect attendance without preparation and engagement will result in a poor grade. You
should read the assigned material for each day before coming to class and be ready to join our
discussion about the reading.
Seminar Leader Exercise
You will take responsibility along with another student for one class session. Together, you
should do the following:
    1) Study the readings assigned to the class and the history of the commodity under
        discussion
    2) Prepare Discussion Notes for the class. These should be sent to me 24 hours before
        the class starts. They should answer the following questions: What background do we
        need to know about this commodity? How does this commodity compare to other
        commodities we’ve studied? How does our five-point thesis hold up for this
        commodity? What are 3-4 key discussion questions to guide the class? It’s fine to
        answer these questions with bullet points so don’t worry about writing a short essay.
    3) Bring a (legally traded) commodity to show the class. Introduce the commodity to the
        class including relevant background and information about the current market for
        your commodity
    4) Lead off our discussion for the session with a short presentation that identifies the
        core argument of the readings, suggests some cross-cutting themes, and offers 3-4 key
        discussion questions for the class. You are encouraged to show relevant images or
        maps that support the discussion.
Reading Responses
During this class you will be required to complete FIVE response grids about the secondary
source readings. The blank grid template is posted on Canvas. These grids are designed to
structure your reading and to help you situate individual works in a wider context. The grids
must be submitted in pdf form via the Canvas assignments tab 24 hours before the start of
the class for which the reading is assigned. So if the relevant class is on Tuesday at 12:30pm,
the reading grid is due by Monday at 12:30pm.
To make sure that everyone doesn’t respond to the same readings, we will split the class into
three groups. If you have a preference for one group, please let us know as otherwise we will
be assigning students randomly.
Group A: Do your five reading grids in weeks 1-5
Group B: Do your five reading grids in weeks 6-19
Group C: Do your five reading grids in weeks 10-15
So for example if you’re in Group A, you would pick 5 individual readings across this period
and complete reading grids.


The reading responses are designed to help you with the readings. They are also intended to
stimulate discussion during individual weeks so be prepared to be called upon during class to
contribute during one of your weeks. Keep in mind that the reading responses are a specific
assignment, and this doesn’t mean you should neglect the readings in other weeks.
Reading Response Grid
Student Name:
Reading:
 What kind of work is this? What is the
 main topic?
 What are the main arguments or
 interpretations? What are the key
 elements of those arguments?
 What issues and/or questions does this
 reading raise for you? List at least three
 issues or questions that struck you
 while you were reading
Amboina Trial Exercise – 5%
During this class, we will explore a controversial conspiracy case that forms one of the key
episodes in the war over spices. The 1623 Amboina conspiracy trial has divided observers for
centuries. The Dutch East India Company believed it had uncovered an English plot to seize
control of the spice islands. The English, by contrast, believed they were the victims of a
Dutch plot to eject them from the spice islands using fake allegations of a conspiracy. We
will assess these claims by staging a recreation of the trial. During this exercise, you will
take on one of five roles.
 Role            Number                 Responsibilities
 Legal team      3 for prosecution, 3       • Prepare a briefing on key exhibits
                 for defense                • Interview witnesses during pre-trial
                                               preparation
                                            • Opening statements
                                            • Examination and cross-examination of
                                               witnesses


                                            •   Closing statements
  Researcher     3 for prosecution,         •   Review and analyze evidence
                                            •   Prepare briefing papers for Barristers
                 3 for defense              •   Develop overall strategy
                                            •   Provide additional evidence and suggestions
                                                through the trial via notes
  Witness        2 for prosecution,         •   Research a specific historical character
                 2 for defense, 1           •   Work with either the Prosecution or Defense
                 unattached                 •   Deliver testimony before the court and
                                                undergo questioning
  Judge          3                          •   Prepare for the trial, develop familiarity with
                                                the legal system of the period
                                            •   Keep order in the court, oversee barristers
                                            •   Ask questions of barristers and witnesses
                                            •   Deliver a verdict
                                            •   Prepare a written justification
  Scribe         1                          •   Take detailed notes so we have a clear record
                                            •   Be available for questioning by the judge
Maritime Asia Classroom Exercise – 5%
This is an exercise designed to simulate the complex, multipolar maritime world of East and
Southeast Asia in the second half of the seventeenth century when Asian and European
maritime powers engaged in one of the first global trade wars. It will place students in
different roles as armed maritime powers like the Zheng maritime network or the Dutch East
India Company, continental agrarian powers like the Tokugawa or the Qing or continental
trading powers like Siam or Cambodia. The exercise is designed to simulate what was
arguably the first great Asian trade war.
Here is a basic outline:
Day 1 - The aim for Day 1 is to decide who should be treated as a full and recognized state.
The Dutch East India Company and the Zheng maritime network were hybrid enterprises that
possessed essentially sovereign powers. And yet both struggled to find a place in diplomatic
networks. At the same time, the Zheng and the Qing were locked in a competition for
legitimacy. The Zheng claimed that the Qing were Manchu usurpers with no rights to the
Chinese throne while the Qing argued variously that the Zheng were pirates or should take up
a place as loyal tributary vassals
Stage 1 (before class) – Do the readings, prepare your position
Stage 2 (before class) – Write a diplomatic letter to one of the other parties,
deliver it
Stage 3 (class) – Discuss and deliberate over the letter (10-15 min.)
Stage 4 (class) – Send an embassy to a different party or receive an embassy (10-15 min.)
Stage 5 (class) – First convention. Present your side’s case. Each group should
designate a representative to present its case before the others (15-20 min.)
FIRST VOTE
Stage 6 (class) – NEWS ARRIVES


Stage 7 (class) Send a new embassy (10 min.)
Stage 8 (class) Second convention (15-20 min.)
Day 2 – The goal for Day 2 is to decide who can wage war on the seas by attacking
commodity shipments
The VOC and the Zheng are at war. Both sides want to engage in unrestrained maritime
warfare on the sea-lanes in pursuit of their interests, while receiving legal guarantees and
protection from land-based powers. Cambodia, Siam, and Tokugawa Japan are caught up in
this conflict. The goal of Day 2 is to rule on these questions of offensive maritime warfare
and which ships should be protected.
Day Two
Stage 1 (before class) – Each group does the readings, prepare your position
Stage 2 (before class) – Write a diplomatic letter to one of the other parties, deliver it
Stage 3 (class) – Discuss and deliberate over the letter (10-15 min.)
Stage 4 (class) – Send an embassy to a different party or receive an embassy (10-15 min.)
Stage 5 (class) – First convention. Present your side’s case. Each group should designate a
representative to present its case before the others (15-20 min.)
FIRST VOTE
Stage 6 (class) – NEWS ARRIVES
Stage 7 (class) Send a new embassy (10 min.)
Stage 8 (class) Second convention (15-20 min.)
TOKUGAWA JAPAN, SIAM AND CAMBODIA MUST REACH A CONSENSUS
DECISION ON WHAT KIND OF ACTION SHOULD BE TAKEN
Commodity History Book or Website Review – 10%
You have two options for this exercise. You can either complete a review of a single
commodity history monograph or you can complete a review of a new database called Global
Commodities.
Note: There is a possibility that the university library will not be able to provide us trial
access to the database as it is extremely expensive and we will confirm this in week 1. If that
does happen, then all students will complete a book review.
Book review
You have been asked to review a one volume commodity history. There are dozens of these
focused on every possible commodity and we will develop a list in week 1. Here are a few
examples:
Bill Carter, Boom, Bust, Boom: A Story about Copper, the Metal that Runs the World (2012)
Matthew Hart, Diamond: The History of a Cold-Blooded Love Affair (2002)
Mark Kurlansky, Cod: A Biography of a Fish that Changed the World (1997).


For this review, you are free to free to discuss any commodity history and it does not need to
have a clear connection with Asia. A good review summarizes the main argument as well as
the book’s individual chapters before providing an overall assessment.
Your review should be around 500 words.
Website review
You have been asked to complete a review of Global Commodities, a new and extremely
expensive database developed by Adam Matthew Digital. The database provides a wide
range of resources related to 15 key commodities. Your job is to determine whether the
website is a useful resource for undergraduate students? It may help to structure your
analysis by answering the following questions:
    1. What was your experience of the website? Which sections are useful for students?
        Which sections are not useful? You should be guided by your own user experience
    2. What is your overall assessment? Do you think this is a valuable resource? Do you
        recommend that the UT library system should purchase access to Global
        Commodities? Keep in mind that this is a very expensive database to subscribe to and
        so your task is to decide how useful it actually is.
Your review should be around 500 words.
COMMODITY PORTFOLIO
Over the course of the semester you will focus in via a series of tasks on one global
commodity. The goal is to develop a comprehensive portfolio related to this commodity and
to become an expert on its history. There are four individual tasks in this assignment:
        1. Portfolio Component A: Production and Consumption Overview with ClioVis
            Timeline and Annotated Bibliography – 15% (due March 4, week 7)
        2. Portfolio Component B: Objects podcast with script - 10% (due March 27, week
            9)
        3. Portfolio Component C: Draft essay – 10% (due April 10, week 11)
        4. Portfolio Component D: Academic Poster and final essay – 25% (poster due April
            30, essay due May 8, end of week 15
These individual components are designed to mesh together to make you familiar with
different aspects of your chosen commodity. These component tasks will then feed into a
Poster Presentation and final essay.
The goal here is threefold. First, to develop a comprehensive portfolio related to your chosen
commodity and to become an expert on its historiography, production, consumption, and
wider significance. Second, to conceive and work through an innovative and original research
question that moves beyond existing scholarship to show the wider impact of your chosen
commodity on Asia. Third, to demonstrate the value of a focus of commodities, an approach
that has not been widely used in Asian history, to provide new ways to consider the region
and its history.


While the commodity portfolio is broken up into a number of different steps, they all build on
top of each other. As a result, the workload is designed to be manageable across the
semester. In other words, it seems like a lot at first but keep in mind that each of the
individual steps will help you produce a better essay and poster.
Where do I start?
The first step is to choose a commodity to focus on. You may switch commodities at any
point but it makes much more sense to choose one commodity and focus on it across the
course of the semester. There are dozens of potential commodities to choose from but you
need to pick a commodity that has a significant Asian component and your overall focus
should be here. This means for example that could focus on rubber in Southeast Asia but not
rubber in Africa or you could examine the fur trade as it flowed into China but not the fur
trade between Europe and North America. That said, you can and should of course place your
commodity and its Asian connection in a global frame. In other words, you could examine
Chinese demand for furs and compare this to European demand. As above, the key
requirement is to have an Asian focus.
Some choices for your commodity might include the following but there are many more
commodities that are not on this list so be creative:
1. Ivory
2. Fur
3. Gold
4. Timber
5. Silk
6. Tuna
7. Pepper
8. Indigo
9. Jade
10. Bananas
11. Rice
12. Tin
13. Beef
14. Seaweed
15. Cochineal
16. Diamonds
17. Coal
18. Mushrooms
19. Ginseng
20. Tortoiseshell
You can also choose a commodity like opium, spices etc that we have covered in class but
you need to come up with a different angle from the one we explored in our discussion. This
should not be difficult, but it is important that you don’t duplicate what we have covered in
class.
Component A: Production and Consumption with ClioVis timeline and annotated
bibliography - 15%


The next step for your commodity is to figure out where it was produced and consumed, to
construct a basic timeline and to list some key secondary sources. Many commodities like
gold have very long histories, others like guano boomed for a few decades. In general, it
makes sense to narrow your focus. If you’re dealing with a commodity like copper that has
many different phases of intensive activity you might wish to pick one.
You can approach your commodity across multiple centuries and locations or you can look at
one moment in history (for example spices in Southeast Asia in the seventeenth century).
You can look at any period.
This assignment has three components
First, a short summary of production and consumption. This should be around 500 words and
should answer the following questions:
1. When and how was your commodity produced?
2. When and how was your commodity consumed?
Alongside this, you should build a timeline for your commodity with around 5-10 entries via
ClioVis. This is an innovative program developed in the History department that enables you
to construct interactive timelines. Your ClioVis timeline should include entries documenting
the phase of commodity exchange you’re focused on. For example, for the spice trade you
would include entries like:
1621: Conquest of Banda islands, major producer of nutmeg
1623: Amboyna conspiracy trial sees English expelled from Amboina islands, major
producer of cloves.
Finally, you should submit an annotated bibliography consisting of five relevant books or
journal articles. Use this format.
Flynn, Dennis and Giraldez, Arturo, “Path Dependence, Time Lags and the Birth of
Globalization: a Critique of O’Rourke and Williamson,” European Review of Economic
History 8 (2004): 81-108.
Introduction to the work of two important scholars that have dominated the debate about
global silver markets. Argues that globalization commenced in 1571 with the establishment of
reliable trans-Pacific connections. Suggests that global prices did in fact converge twice in
the early modern period—in 1640 and again in 1750.
Component B: Objects podcast (500 words) 10%
Now that you know what scholars have written about your commodity and how your
commodity was produced and consumed, you should focus in on one object associated with
your commodity. For example, you might focus on a piece of Chinese porcelain from the
Ming period or a Spanish silver coin. You should produce a 3-5 minute podcast describing
the item, its history and its significance in commodity chains. Your goal is to use this object
to tell the history of your commodity.


A good model for this is provided by the BBC’s A History of the World in 100 Objects,
which can be found here:
http://www.britishmuseum.org/explore/a_history_of_the_world.aspx
This assignment has 3 parts: an audio file, an image, and a script.
To prepare an audio file, which is the basis for any podcast, you can use your computer or
phone. We will discuss exactly how to do this in class so don’t worry if you’ve never done it
before. If you want, you can combine your audio file and image.
The easiest place to find an object is in the collection of a major museum such as:
http://www.metmuseum.org/collection
https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en
Portfolio Component C: Draft essay including bullet point outline – 10%
This is your first draft of your research essay including a bullet point outline. It is intended
to be rough so don’t worry too much about polishing. Rather I’m interested in your overall
focus and argument.
The essay should address two broad questions: What was the impact of your commodity
trade? How has this commodity changed the wider area, region or world?
The draft essay is not intended to be perfect. Rather it is designed to generate feedback and
we will meet to discuss it. This feedback will be used to help you improve both your poster
and your final essay.
Component D: Poster Presentation and Essay– 25%
The final stage of your commodity portfolio is to prepare an academic poster and a research
essay. These are complementary outcomes and you should think of them as two different
ways to tell the same story. In other words, you can use text from the essay in the poster and
vice versa.
Both essay and poster address the same broad questions: What was the impact of your
commodity trade? How has this commodity changed the wider area, region or world?
You will be familiar with the standard academic essay. The academic poster may be new to
you. Poster sessions are now common at all major academic conferences
(https://www.historians.org/annual-meeting/future-meetings/submit-a-proposal/poster-
session-general-information) and there is a general recognition that they provide one of the
best ways of introducing your research.
For tips on how to design an effective poster see here:
http://www.historians.org/annual-meeting/resources-and-guides/poster-resources/effective-
poster-presentations


http://guides.nyu.edu/posters
Don’t overload your poster with text. A good poster often has very limited text but combines
this with effective visuals. Be creative and think about how you can get your message across.
Your essay will be graded by me. Your poster will be graded collaboratively with other
members of the class. This means you will be assessed on the way you explain it in class to
fellow students. You will not be required to present your findings but rather to respond to
questions and inquiries from other students as they move from poster to poster in the
exhibition sessions that will happen at the end of the semester.
EXTRA CREDIT
There is one extra credit option for this class worth 10%. If you’re interested in this, please
let me know by Week 12 and it is due by May 15. The extra credit assignment requires you
to write a 1000-word review essay focused on 3 commodity history books. Further
instructions will be provided if you request this option.
NOTES
•   Please Note: I reserve the right to change this schedule and amend readings as necessary
•   All make up exams will be held at the official History Department make up time: Friday
    afternoons at 2 pm in Garrison Hall. Make up exams will only be given with approval of
    the instructor. You must have approval before the exam for a make up or document a
    verified emergency to request a make up after the exam. No other make up times will be
    offered.
•   You are very welcome to email me at any time at Adam.Clulow@austin.utexas.edu and I
    will respond as quickly as I can.
•   My office hours: Beyond the required meetings, I encourage you to stop by during my
    office hours in GAR 2.202 to discuss issues and topics that are of particular interest to
    you. I also strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211
    or The University Writing Center in The Learning Commons at the PCL
    http://uwc.utexas.edu/ or 512.471.6222 to make an appointment. Both locations offer
    free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment
    or on a drop-in basis. They work with students from every department on campus, for
    both academic and non-academic writing. Their services are not just for writing with
    "problems." Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful
    writing project. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The
    assistance they provide is intended to foster independence. Each student determines how
    to use the consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to help you work on your
    writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your work.
•   All assignments must be submitted on Canvas. I do not accept submissions of
    assignments by e-mail except under exceptional circumstances and as specified in this
    syllabus for particular assignments
•   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations and a letter
    documenting such needs from the office of Services for Students with Disabilities area of
    the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement:
    http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/contact-us/; e-mail: ssd@austin.utexas.edu; tel: 512-
    471-6259 voice or Videophone 512-410-6644. Please be aware that accommodations


    adjustments will not become effective until I have a hard copy of your accommodations
    letter from the office of the Services for Students with Disabilities.
•   Students are expected to uphold irreproachable standards of academic integrity. Any form
    of academic dishonesty (cheating, plagiarism etc) will result in a grade of 0. See the
    website of the Office of the Dean of Students for academic honesty policies at UT. See
    www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs.
•   In accordance with the Campus Concealed Carry legislation, all guns must be concealed
    at all times. If the instructor or a student sees a gun in class, the UT police will be called
    immediately per the UT implementation policy for the statute.
•   BCAL: If you have concerns about the behavior or well-being of another member of the
    campus community, call BCAL at 512-232-5050.
•   Do take a look at the History department’s terrific website Not Even Past which offers
    short articles and reviews on topics of interest to history students and anyone interested in
    history in general. See www.notevenpast.org
SCHEDULE OF CLASSES, ASSIGNMENTS AND READINGS
WEEK ONE
January 21
Introduction: Commodities and Global Trade
This class we will explore the nature of commodities plus those commodities that flow into
popular products that we all consume. Bring a laptop or tablet if you have one as we will be
doing research in class.
Start reading Pomeranz, Kenneth, and Steven Topik. The World That Trade Created: Society,
Culture, and the World Economy, 1400 to the Present (Armonk, NY and London: M. E.
Sharpe, 1999). This is the best short introduction to the global economy across the period
we’ll study. If you can, read it before the semester starts as it will give you a good overview.
January 23: Silver
Potosi, Manila and the Birth of World Trade
This class we will examine Spanish silver production and the establishment of Manila.
Required Readings
Antonio Vázquez de Espinosa, Compendium and Description of the West Indies, 1620's.
“Pieces of Eight” in Neil MacGregor, A history of the world in 100 objects (London: Viking,
2011), 517-22
Required readings but choose one of the following
Kris Lane, Potosí: The Silver City that Changed the World (University of California Press
272), 1-19; 67-84
OR


Dennis O. Flynn and Arturo Giraldez. “Born with a ‘Silver Spoon’: The Origin of World
Trade in 1571.” Journal of World History 6.2 (1995): 201-21.
WEEK TWO
January 28: Silver
China and the Silver Economy
This week we will trace demand in China
Required Readings
Look at the resources here: http://afe.easia.columbia.edu/chinawh/web/s5/s5_4.html
“Ming Banknote” in Neil MacGregor, A history of the world in 100 objects (London: Viking,
2011), 517-22
Required readings but choose one
Flynn, Dennis O., and Arturo Giráldez, “Cycles of Silver: Global Economic Unity through
the Mid- Eighteenth Century,” Journal of World History 13.2 (2002): 391-427.
OR
Wan Ming, “The Monetization of Silver in China: Ming China and Its Global Interactions,”
in China’s Development from a Global Perspective (Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2017),
pp. 274-296.
January 30: Spices
The Race
This week we will discuss the first assignment (Book or website review) so please decide
what you plan to write on. We will also discuss demand for spices in Europe and the Dutch
East India Company’s push into Southeast Asia with a focus on treaties concluded in
Southeast Asia. Over the next few weeks, we will focus on two controversial episodes, the
Invasion of Banda in 1621 and the Amboina trial in 1623, that stand at the center of the war
over spices.
Required readings
Amitav Ghosh. What Nutmeg Can Tell Us About Nafta, New York Times, Dec. 30, 2016
Hanna, William. Indonesian Banda: Colonialism and its Aftermath in the Nutmeg Islands.
(Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues, 1978), 7-24
Adam Clulow, Amboina, 1623: Conspiracy and Fear on the Edge of Empire (Columbia
University Press, 2019), 27-38
WEEK THREE


February 4: Spices
The Spice Islands in the Global Imagination (HRC)
Class to be held in the Harry Ransom Center, Denius Seminar Room. We will examine some
of the following texts:
    - Kraus Map 6,
        https://hrc.contentdm.oclc.org/digital/collection/p15878coll9/id/71/rec/1
    - An answere to the Hollanders declaration (1622)
    - Purchas his Pilgrimes
Required Readings
The Hollanders declaration of the affaires of the East Indies. Or A true relation of that which
passed in the Ilands of Banda, in the East Indies: in the yeare of our Lord God, 1621. and
before. Faithfully translated according to the Dutch copie Printed at Amsterdam [i.e. London:
By E. Allde], 1622.
Hochstrasser, Julie Berger, “The Conquest of Spice and the Dutch Colonial Imaginary. Seen
and Unseen in the Visual Culture of Trade,” pp. 169-186, in Schiebinger, Londa and Claudia
Swan (eds.), Colonial Botany: Science, Commerce, and Politics (Pennsylvania University
Press, 2005)
February 6: Spices
Conflict and Genocide in the Spice Islands
This class we will consider whether the 1621 invasion of the Banda islands should be
considered an act of corporate genocide.
Required Readings
Kelly, Michael. Prosecuting Corporations for Genocide (New York: Oxford University
Press, 2016), 1-26
“The Drama of Banda” Jur van Goor, Jan Pieterszoon Coen, 1587–1629: Koopman-Koning
in Azië. Amsterdam: Boom Publishers, 2015.
During class, we will also start preparing for the Amboina trial exercise which will take place
in week 4.
Assignment
February 7 – due by 5pm
Commodity History Book or Website Review
WEEK FOUR
February 11: Spices
Conspiracy and Murder on the Spice Islands
This week we will stage the Amboyna Classroom Exercise. The key resource for this is:


https://amboyna.org/
Required Readings
W. Ph. Coolhaas, “Notes and Comments on the so-called Amboina Massacre”, in M. A. P.
Meilink-Roelofsz, M. E. van Opstall, and G. J. Schutte, eds., Dutch Authors on Asian
History: A Selection of Dutch Historiography on the Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie
(Dordrecht: Foris, 1988), 198-240
February 13: Spices
The long aftermath of Amboyna (HRC)
Class to be held in the Harry Ransom Center
Required Reading
Milton, Anthony. “Marketing a Massacre: Amboyna, the East India Company and the Public
Sphere in Early Stuart England.” In The Politics of the Public Sphere in Early Modern
England, ed. Steve Pincus and Peter Lake, 168–90. Manchester: Manchester University
Press, 2007
Optional Reading
Adam Clulow, Amboina, 1623: Conspiracy and Fear on the Edge of Empire (Columbia
University Press, 2019), 151-73
WEEK FIVE
February 18: Deerskins
Taiwan and the Great Deerskin Boom
This week we will consider how the vast demand for skins in Japan sparked the rapid
depletion of deer herds in Taiwan.
Required readings but choose one of the following
Koo, Hui-wen, “Deer Hunting and Preserving the Commons in Dutch Colonial Taiwan,”
Journal of Interdisciplinary History 42.2 (2011): 185-203.
OR
Tonio Andrade, Pirates, Pelts, and Promises: The Sino-Dutch Colony of Seventeenth-Century
Taiwan and the Aboriginal Village of Favorolang, The Journal of Asian Studies 64, no. 2
(May 2005): 295–321.
We will devote part of the class to preparing for the first part of the maritime exercise.
February 20: Deerskins
Maritime Exercise A


The aim for Day 1 is to decide who should be treated as a full and recognized state. The
Dutch East India Company and the Zheng maritime network were hybrid enterprises that
possessed essentially sovereign powers. And yet both struggled to find a place in diplomatic
networks. At the same time, the Zheng and the Qing were locked in a competition for
legitimacy. The Zheng claimed that the Qing were Manchu usurpers with no rights to the
Chinese throne while the Qing argued variously that the Zheng were pirates or should take up
a place as loyal tributary vassals
Required Readings
Tonio Andrade, “Beyond Guns, Germs and Steel: European Expansion and Maritime Asia,
1400–1750,” Journal of Early Modern History 14 (2010): 165–86
WEEK SIX
February 25: Deerskins
Trade Wars, the VOC and the Zheng
This class we will consider the rise of the Zheng maritime network and the trade war that
developed between the Dutch East India Company and the Zheng.
Required Readings
Adam Clulow and Xing Hang, “Between the Company and Koxinga: Territorial Waters,
Trade and War over Deerskins”, in Lauren Benton and Nathan Perl-Rosenthal, eds. A World
at Sea: Maritime Practices in Global History, 1500-1900 (University of Pennsylvania Press)
We will devote part of this session to preparing for the next stage of the maritime exercise.
February 27: Deerskins
Maritime Exercise B
The VOC and the Zheng are at war. Both sides want to engage in unrestrained maritime
warfare on the sea-lanes in pursuit of their interests, while receiving legal guarantees and
protection from land-based powers. Cambodia, Siam, and Tokugawa Japan are caught up in
this conflict. The goal of Day 2 is to rule on these questions of offensive maritime warfare
and which ships should be protected.
Required Readings
Laver, Michael, “Skins in the Game: The Dutch East India Company, Deerskins, and the
Japan Trade,” World History Bulletin 28:2. Fall (2012): 13-16.
WEEK SEVEN
March 3: Porcelain
The long history
This class we will focus on production in China and how Chinese porcelain conquered the
world


Required Readings
Robert Finlay, ‘The Pilgrim Art: The Culture of Porcelain in World History’ Journal of
World History 9, 2 (1998), pp. 141-187 (especially 165-176)
Collecting guide: 10 things you need to know about Chinese ceramics
https://www.christies.com/features/Chinese-Ceramics-Collecting-Guide-7224-1.aspx
March 5: Porcelain
Import, imitation and production
This week we will consider how imports of Chinese porcelain sparked changes in Britain.
Required Readings
Maxine Berg, “In Pursuit of Luxury: Global History and British Consumer Goods in the
Eighteenth Century”, Past & Present, No. 182 (2004), pp. 85-142
Assignment
March 6
Portfolio Component A: Production and Consumption Overview with ClioVis Timeline and
annotated bibliography – 15%
WEEK EIGHT
March 10: Cotton and Textiles
Trading in India
Explore this resource:
http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/i/indian-textiles-introduction/
Required Readings
Giorgio Riello, Cotton: The Fabric that Made the Modern World (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2013), 87-109
March 12: Cotton and Textiles
Global dimensions
Required Readings
Giorgio Riello, Cotton: The Fabric that Made the Modern World (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2013), 110-134, 160-86
March 16-21 spring break
WEEK NINE


March 24: Essay and Poster planning
There will be no class on Tuesday March 24. Instead, we will meet individually to discuss
your plans for your posters/research essays. There will be a sign-up sheet for individual
appointments across multiple days and I’ll make every effort to accommodate your schedule.
March 26: Tea
Trade with China and British Consumption
Take a look at this online resource:
https://visualizingcultures.mit.edu/rise_fall_canton_01/cw_essay02.html
Required Readings
“The Tea Trade with China” and “The British Way of Tea”, in Ellis, Markman, et al. Empire
of Tea: The Asian Leaf That Conquered the World, Reaktion Books, Limited, 2015), 53-72;
141-62
Assignment
March 27
Portfolio Component B: Objects podcast with script
WEEK TEN
March 31: Opium
The Imperial Drug
Required Readings
Trocki, Carl. “In Compassion to Mankind”, Opium, empire and the global political economy:
A study of the Asian opium trade, 1750 –1950, Asia’s transformations (London and New
York: Routledge, 1999), 58-87
April 2: Opium
The ‘Hundred Years of Humiliation’
Required Readings
Trocki, Carl. Opium, empire and the global political economy: A study of the Asian opium
trade, 1750 –1950, Asia’s transformations (London and New York: Routledge, 1999), 88-
101
James Hevia, “Opium, Empire, and Modern History”. China Review International 10.2
(2003): 307–326
Peter Perdue, The First Opium War,
https://visualizingcultures.mit.edu/opium_wars_01/ow1_essay06.html
WEEK ELEVEN


April 7: Whaling
Last class, we considered how the opium trade played a key role in forcing China open to
trade. This class we will consider the development of the whaling industry and its role in
forcing open Japan.
Required Readings
Eric Jay Dolin, Leviathan: The History of Whaling in America. (New York: W. W. Norton,
2007)
Explore the online resource:
https://whalinghistory.org
This is a massive collection of whaling resources. Spend some time here and see what you
can dig up.
April 9: Guano
This class we will be looking at sites of guano production in the Americas. Our focus is on
Chinese migrants brought in to work in mining operations as part of the so-called “coolie”
trade. We will also briefly touch on Nauru and mining operations there.
Take a look at the resources here:
https://americanhistory.si.edu/norie-atlas/guano-trade
Required Readings
Edward Melillo, “The First Green Revolution: Debt Peonage and the Making of the Nitrogen
Fertilizer Trade, 1840–1930”, American Historical Review 117(4):1028-1060, especially first
20 pages
Philip Shenon, “A Pacific Island Nation Is Stripped of Everything,” New York Times,
December 10, 1995
Stewart, Chinese Bondage in Peru: A History of the Chinese Coolie in Peru, 1849–1874
(Durham, N.C., 1951), 33-46
Assignment
April 10
Portfolio Component C: Draft essay
WEEK TWELVE
April 14: The Coconut Kingdom


So far we have considered large-scale commodity exchange. This class we will narrow the
focus to consider the tiny Cocos-Keeling Islands where a single European family, the
Clunies-Ross family, ruled over a commodities kingdom that endured until the 1980s.
Required Readings
Kenneth Chan, “Cocos (Keeling) Islands: The Political Evolution of a small island territory
in the Indian Ocean”, Pacific Islands Development Program, 1-7
Articles of Agreement, 1837 Labor contract, in R.A. Brockman “Captives on Cocos: the
origins and evolution of the plantation community of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands” (Ph. M.
thesis, Murdoch University, 1981
Report of the United Nations Visiting Mission to the Cocos (Keeling) islands, 1974; in
Report of the Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, Parliamentary
Paper No 183: United Nations Involvement with Australia's Territories (1975), 153-60
April 16: Coffee
This class we will consider coffee production and demand with a particular focus on Dutch
colonies on Java.
Required Readings
Steven Topik, The World Coffee Market in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries, from
Colonial to National Regimes, LSE Working Paper No. 04/04
W. G. Clarence-Smith, “The Impact of Forced Coffee Cultivation on Java, 1805–1917,”.
Indonesia Circle 64 (1994): 241-64
WEEK THIRTEEN
April 21: Soybeans
Required Readings
David Wolff, “Bean There: Toward a Soy-Based History of Northeast Asia”, The South
Atlantic Quarterly, Volume 99, Number 1, Winter 2000
Louise Young. Japan’s Total Empire: Manchuria and the Culture of Wartime Imperialism
(University of California Press, 1998), 21-52
April 23: Poster and Essay review session
There will be no class on Thursday April 23. Instead, we will meet individually to discuss
your plans for your posters and research essays. This is a chance to work through my
feedback and think about how to prepare the best possible final essay. There will be a sign-up
sheet for individual appointments across multiple days and I’ll make every effort to
accommodate your schedule.


WEEK FOURTEEN
April 28: Rare Earths
The Future of Commodity Conflict?
Required Readings
David Uren, “Rare earths: Is there a case for government intervention?” United States Studies
Centre at the University of Sydney, October 2019
April 30: Poster presentations
All posters due today either as hard copy if you’re exhibiting on April 30 or as a jpeg if
you’re scheduled for May 5. This week the first half of the class will exhibit and explain
their posters. There will be 10 or 11 posters on display. Each student who is not exhibiting
should visit each poster individually (time permitting). You will be required to complete an
assessment sheet for each poster you visit and these will feed into the overall grade.
Exhibitors will explain their poster and findings as if this was a poster session in an academic
conference.
WEEK FIFTEEN
May 5: Poster presentations
This week the second half of the class will exhibit their posters.
May 7
Concluding discussion
Assignment
May 8
Submit your final essay
