                                       Drugs in Our Society
            PHM F310K (Unique #87900) and PHM F350K (Unique #87910)
                              Course Syllabus – Summer 2019
Instructor:
Sharon Rush, R.Ph.
Office: PHR 2.222F
Telephone: 232-3463
Fax: 471-3756
Email: sharon.rush@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: By appointment
                             COURSE SUMMARY AND FORMAT
The purpose of this course is to enhance student knowledge of the use of pharmaceuticals, the
drug distribution process and the regulatory control of pharmaceuticals so they can become
better consumers and buyers of pharmaceutical products. Topics in this course include
information on pharmaceutical development and regulation; drug distribution systems; various
categories of pharmaceuticals; and related updates on new legislation and products.
Hopefully, this information will provide you with a lifetime foundation for better health.
The class may utilize other faculty depending upon the course content and instructor expertise.
The principal instructor of the class is Professor Rush. If there are problems, questions,
concerns, and/or suggestions, please direct them to Professor Rush.
Students enrolled in this course have either enrolled in PHM F310K or PHM F350K. The PHM
F350K course has the significant writing component which meets the University’s writing
requirement. Students enrolled in PHM F350K are upper division students and will be
attending the same lectures and doing the same assignments as those students enrolled in
PHM F310K. Both F310K and F350K students will have writing assignments; however, PHM
F350K students will have a more intensive final writing assignment than the F310K students.
More information follows on the writing component.
           Unique #                         Meeting Time                    Room Number
87900 – PHM F310K                     MTWTF 1pm to 2:30pm                     PHR 2.116
87910 – PHM F350K                     MTWTF 1pm to 2:30pm                     PHR 2.116


                                    COURSE OBJECTIVES
1. Students will obtain information to enhance their understanding of prescription and non-
    prescription medications so that they can become more-informed consumers of those
    products.
2. Students will obtain a basic understanding of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration drug
    approval process.
3. Students will obtain a better understanding and appreciation that all prescription and over-
    the-counter drug products have risks along with benefits.
4. Students will obtain basic knowledge of over-the-counter products and what symptoms
    they treat.
                                  STUDENT EVALUATIONS
PHM F310K
Total grade is composed of class attendance, two assignments and two short 3-4 page essay
papers.
 Class attendance is mandatory. Attendance = 20%
 Two assignments counting 20% each = 40% total
 Paper I = 20%
 Paper II = 20%
PHM F350K
Total grade is composed of class attendance, two assignments and two essay papers (one short
3-4 page and one long 9-10 page). This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are
designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you
can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and
receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your
peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board.
 Class attendance is mandatory. Attendance = 20%
 Two assignments counting 15% each = 30% total
 Paper I = 20%
 Paper II = 30%


Grading Scale
The grading scale for this class is the following:
        90-100% = A
        80-89% = B
        70-79% = C
        60-69% = D
        59 and below = F
                                         COURSE POLICIES
The following course policies and procedures were developed with two guiding principles in
mind: (1) to create an appropriate learning environment for students; and (2) to maintain
academic integrity for the course and the university. Students need to know what is expected
and know their responsibilities from the beginning of the course. Hopefully, this will eliminate
or reduce problems regarding teaching, student conduct, course policies and procedures.
Therefore, it is very important that you read and understand the following information.
You are students at an elite university and this course is being offered and taught by
instructors from a professional pharmacy program. All the instructors expect courteous and
professional behavior from students. Likewise, the instructors pledge to conduct the course
in a professional manner.
Attendance and Class Decorum
     You will be REQUIRED to attend ALL scheduled class meetings and arrive on time.
    Attendance will be taken during each class time. Arriving late disturbs fellow students and
    the instructor. You are responsible for ALL material covered in class and ALL
    announcements made in your absence. Since attendance accounts for 20% of your total
    grade, failure to show up for class may result in substantial lowering of your final grade. If
    you are unable to attend class due to an illness or emergency, please contact Professor
    Rush as soon as possible. Proof or documentation of the absence may be required. An
    additional assignment may be given to the student for partial make-up for the missed class
    time.
     Please respect your fellow students and the instructors. Excessive talking, distractions and
    noise can be troublesome for students and instructors. Many times instructors are not
    aware of noise or distractions, thus if you have trouble hearing the lectures because of
    distractions around you please inform Professor Rush or the instructor.
     Please let the instructor know immediately of any problem(s) which is preventing you from
    performing satisfactorily in this class.
     Computers in the classroom are encouraged to access necessary information to complete
    class exercises and discussion questions. Other uses are not allowed.
     Cell phone use is not allowed in class.


     All assignments will be due by 11:59pm on the date indicated on the course syllabus. All
    assignments will be submitted on Canvas as Word documents to allow for feedback directly
    on the document. Assignments not turned in by that time will be considered late. A
    penalty of 10% of total points possible will be assessed for late assignments.
      Religious holidays – University policy respects religious holidays. If you need to miss any
    required activities, discussion sections or exams for the observance of a religious holy day,
    please inform Professor Rush in writing as far in advance as possible so arrangements can
    be made to complete the required component.
Academic Integrity
 “Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties including failure of the course involved and dismissal from the University. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, fellow students, and the integrity of the University and the
College of Pharmacy, policies on scholastic dishonesty are strictly enforced."
Please refer to the Student Judicial Services website (http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/)
for the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
Academic Accommodations
“The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (471-4641 TTY).”
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking time to relax. This will help you achieve
your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You
are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of
the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than
later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life
events, or feeling anything like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek
support. You can find more information at the following website:
https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Campus Carry
Students should familiarize themselves with the information provided by the University
regarding the implementation of campus carry legislation. Information sheets can be found at
http://campuscarry.utexas.edu/information.
Q Drop policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you will need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you


are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
                            WRITING COMPONENT GUIDELINES
Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center (UWC), FAC
211, 471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free,
individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a
drop-in basis. Any undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance
with any writing project. The consultants there work with students from every department on
campus, for both academic and non-academic writing. Whether you are writing a lab report, a
resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants will
be happy to work with you. Their services are not just for writing that has "problems." Getting
feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project.
Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they
provide is intended to foster independence. Each student determines how to use the
consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that
preserve the integrity of your work.
   F310K students will have two short 3-4 page required writing assignments. Each paper will
    have specific guidelines and a grading rubric for students to follow. The first paper will be
    peer-reviewed during class and time will be allowed for the student to make changes before
    turning in the final paper for grading.
   F350K students will have one short 3-4 page essay plus a longer 9-10 page writing
    assignment at the end of the semester. Each paper will have specific guidelines and a
    grading rubric for students to follow. The first paper will be peer-reviewed during class and
    time will be allowed for the student to make changes before turning in the final paper for
    grading. The second paper will be reviewed by the instructor and time will be allowed for
    the student to make changes before turning in the final paper for grading.
   Final versions of each paper are due by 11:59pm on the dates indicated on the course
    schedule. All papers will be submitted on Canvas as Word documents to allow for feedback
    directly on the document. Papers not turned in by that time will be considered late. A
    penalty will be assessed for late papers.
   The University considers plagiarism (presenting someone else’s work as your own) to be a
    form of scholastic dishonesty. Whenever a student quotes another person’s work, whether
    published or unpublished, that source must be acknowledged. Even if paraphrased, credit
    should be given to the person who stated the idea being used.
   Topics: The topics for each writing assignment along with specific details and grading
    rubrics will be posted on Canvas on the Assignments page.
   References format:
        We will be utilizing the American Psychological Association (APA) documentation
           style. Please refer to the following link from the Writing Center:
           http://uwc.utexas.edu/handouts/
        Access dates are required for all URLs.
        References need to be single-spaced with one space between references.
        References need to be from the year 2000 and up.


                                        TIMELINE
 NOTE: Schedule is subject to change without advance notice. All required assignments must
                       be submitted by 11:59pm on the assigned day.
           Topic                                    Instructor              Assignment
                                                                            Due Dates
June 6       Introduction and assignments          Prof Rush
             Essay Writing Guide
             Essay #1 Instructions
June 7       Website resources and article         Prof Rush
              analysis
            Medication Adherence review
              and exercise instructions
June 10     Types of Drugs and Drug                Prof Rush               Start
              Regulation                                                    Medication
                                                                            Adherence
                                                                            Exercise
June 11     Drug Industry and the Drug             Prof Rush               View Intro to
              Approval Process                                              Pharmacology
                                                                            video
June 12     Peer review of Essay I                 Group work              Bring Essay I
            Drug Development Exercise                                      draft to class
June 13     Drug Development Exercise              Group Work
June 14     Drug Development Exercise
June 17     Drug Development                       Prof Rush               Essay I Due –
              Presentations                                                 310K & 350K
            Essay #2 Instructions
June 18     Netflix – “The Bleeding Edge” –                                Drug
              NOTE: Will need to stay an                                    Development
              extra 10-15 minutes                                           Exercise Due
June 19     Discussion Day - Drug
              Development and “The
              Bleeding Edge”
June 20    NO CLASS – Work on essay
June 21     IRB and Human Studies                  Dr. Jim Wilson
June 24     Substance Use Disorders                Prof Rush
            Mental Health


June 25  Opioid Crisis                           Medication
                                                  Adherence
                                                  Exercise due
June 26  Legal Marijuana
June 27  Discussion Day – Medication   Prof Rush Rough draft of
          Adherence                               Essay II Due –
                                                  310K & 350K
June 28  2019 Texas Legislature laws   Prof Rush
July 1   Counterfeit Drugs             Prof Rush
July 2   Vaccines                      Prof Rush
July 3   Dosage Forms                            View Dosage
                                                  Forms
                                                  modules
                                                  before coming
                                                  to class
July 4   NO CLASS – work on essay
July 5   NO CLASS – work on essay
July 8   Visit to Forty Acres Pharmacy           Review Self-
                                                  care modules
                                                  before
                                                  scheduled
                                                  visit
July 9   Visit to Forty Acres Pharmacy
July 10  Visit to Forty Acres Pharmacy
July 11  Discussion Day – class review           Essay II Due –
         Course evaluation                       310K & 350K
